[Version incorporating the schedule of minor modifications submitted with the plan (as indicated by 
tracked changes in this version] 
Solihull Local Plan –  
Draft Submission Plan 
A Plan for People and Places; 
Where Wellbeing and the Environment Matter 
October 2020   
  
  
2 
   
 
  
 
 3 
3 Contents  
Foreword  ................................................................................................................................ ..... 4  
Introduction  ................................................................................................................................ . 5 
Our Borough  ................................................................................................................................ . 8 
Challenges  .................................................................................................................................. 12 
Vision  ......................................................................................................................................... 23 
Spatial Strategy  ........................................................................................................................... 26 
Policy Chapters  
Sustainable Economic Growth  ..................................................................................................... 31 
Providing Homes for All  ............................................................................................................... 56 
Improving Accessibility & Encouraging Sustainable Travel  ............................................................. 83 
Protecting and Enhancing our Environment  .................................................................................. 92 
Promoting Quality of Place  ........................................................................................................ 129  
Health & Supporting Local Communities  .................................................................................... 143  
Delivery & Monitoring  ............................................................................................................... 157  
Settlement Chapters  
Balsall Common  ........................................................................................................................ 165  
Blythe  ...................................................................................................................................... 180  
Hampton- in-Arden  .................................................................................................................... 190  
Hockley Heath  .......................................................................................................................... 196  
Knowle, Dorridge & Bentley Heath  .............................................................................................  200  
Meriden  ................................................................................................................................... 210  
North of the Borough  ................................................................................................................ 215  
Solihull Town Centre & Mature Suburbs  ..................................................................................... 219  
UK Central Hub  ......................................................................................................................... 225  
Appendices  
Abbreviations  ........................................................................................................................... 237  
Monitoring Indicators ................................................................................................................ 239  
Schedule of Solihull Local Plan (2013) Policies to be Retained  ...................................................... 243  
Schedule of Solihull Gypsy & Traveller DPD (2014) Policies to be Retained  ................................... 244  
Schedule of Allocations  ............................................................................................................. 245  
Schedule of Policies  ................................................................................................................... 246  
    
  
  
4 
 Foreword 
 Welcome to the Council’s Local Plan.  This is one of the most important strategies that the 1.
Council produces.  It influences so many aspects of our lives – where we live, where we 
work, how we get there; and of course how we ensure that Solihull remains the special place 
that it is. 
 It wouldn’t be a local plan if it didn’t have difficult decisions to make – and the most 2.
contentious is usually around the scale and distribution of new growth.  The clear message 
from Government is that we must significantly boost the supply of homes for all our 
communities.  We cannot keep escaping the issue; and, to maintain control of our destiny 
and deliver a net zero carbon future we have to deliver this plan.  We share the sadness of 
the loss of Green Belt land but we have no option. 
 Most recognise that this new growth is needed to ensure we have places to live and jobs that 3.
we can access.  Unfortunately, brownfield land alone won’t provide the solution and, 
reluctantly, we must release some Green Belt land.  However we have looked to minimise 
this and in doing so ensured the continued integrity of the significant Green Belt that 
remains. 
 But it is not just about the numbers, we need quality and diverse housing that can be 4.
assimilated into, and support, our existing communities.  We are using concept masterplans 
for the major allocations which set out from the start where we want to see development 
coming forward, and where the opportunities are for ‘green and blue infrastructure’ which 
provide the green lungs and open spaces that are vitally important.  The plans also show 
where significant new tree planting can take place and identify where important infrastructure 
is to be provided as part of the development. 
 Opportunity has been taken to ensure the plan captures our aspirations around the climate 5.
change agenda.  It is an opportunity to incorporate our Climate Change declaration into a 
statutory plan.   Climate Change is crosscutting across so many areas; this has shaped our 
thinking about a whole range of issues, from where development takes place; to how 
biodiversity can be protected and enhanced; and how to make progress towards our 
ambitions to be zero carbon by 2041. 
 The arrival of HS2 in the Borough, with the first station outside of Lon don being only 38 6.
minutes away from the capital, represents a unique opportunity for us, and we must ensure a 
proper planning framework is in place so we can maximise on its benefits. 
 What we have now is what we would describe as a plan for people and places; where 7.
wellbeing and the environment matter . 
 
 
Councillor Ian Courts, Leader of the Council 
Councillor Andy Mackiewicz, Cabinet Member Climate Change, Planning & Housing 
   
  
 
 5 
5 Introduction 
 At the heart of planning is the need to plan positively for sustainable development. One of 8.
the principal ways this is achieved is by having a local plan to guide the development of an 
area. Having a local plan is key to delivering sustainable development that reflects the vision 
and aspirations of local communities. The aim is that local authorities should positively seek 
opportunities, through their local plan, to meet the development needs of their area. The 
Council’s local plan addresses the spatial implications of economic, social and environmental 
change that is happening to the Borough, both now and in the future. 
 The current local plan, the “Solihull Local Plan” (SLP), was adopted in December 2013 and 9.
covers the period 2011 to 2028. Although it is a recently adopted plan, and is up- to-date in 
many respects, there are three reasons that have triggered the need for an early review of it.  
The first is to deal with the legal challenge to the 2013 plan; secondly to accommodate 
Solihull’s own housing needs, as well as helping to address the housing shortfall occurring in 
the wider Housing Market Area (HMA); and finally to provide a proper planning framework 
that recognises the arrival of HS2 in the Borough – in particular the first station outside of 
London which is to be constructed on land opposite the NEC. 
 The latter is particularly important as it provides a unique opportunity for the Borough to 10.
capitalise on maximising the potential HS2 has, and recognising the part it has in 
contributing towards creating one of the most connected places in the country.  A place 
where international air travel, high speed rail, and conventional rail all come together at a 
location well served by the national motorway network and local connections. 
 Two thirds of the Borough is located in the Green Belt, and this includes the strategically 11.
important Meriden Gap that separates Solihull and the Birmingham conurbation from the city 
of Coventry.  This plan seeks to protect this important feature that makes Solihull special 
whilst accommodating, in a managed way, the growth that is needed. 
 
 
 
  
  
  
6 
 Climate Change 
 Although the reasons noted above triggered the need to review the plan, it is also clear that 12.
a new plan provides an ideal opportunity to ensure the Council’s approach to planning 
matches its ambitions in responding to the climate change challenge.  In recognition of the 
gravity of the climate change emergency the Council adopted a ‘Climate Change 
Declaration’ in October 2019.  Action on many fronts is needed to address this challenge and 
through this plan the Council will set, in a statutory framework, those aspects of the 
declaration’s actions that can be addressed through the planning system.  As the declaration 
states “there needs to be a just transition for our residents and for business, taking them with 
us, so as to protect employment and avoid adverse effects on our people, our economy and 
our communities.” 
Covid-19 
 This introduction would not be complete without reference to the Covid-19 crisis of 2020.  Its 13.
effects have been devastating and the long term effects of it are still not clear.  But what is 
clear is that the Borough must create the right conditions for the recovery and having an 
adopted plan in place will play a key part in this. 
How Could it Affect Me? 
 The local plan as a whole sets out the future spatial strategy for the Borough and includes 14.
the allocation of sites to promote development. It also identifies land where development 
would be inappropriate because of its impact on, for instance, environmental or historic 
assets; and it also incorporates a strategy for enhancing the natural, built and historic 
environment. 
What will happen if we don’t identify enough land for 
new development? 
 National planning policy is that the supply of land for housing should be significantly boosted, 15.
and without an adequate supply of land for new dwellings, access to the homes that we all 
need becomes ever more difficult.  Equally, land for commercial needs has to be managed to 
ensure that both existing businesses can flourish whilst also providing an opportunity to 
attract new business into the Borough.  Of course, we also need to recognise the special 
place that Solihull is, and this plan seeks to ensure that the right balance is achieved 
between providing land for new development and protecting what makes Solihull special. 
 If the Council does not have an appropriate plan in place, it will be unable to demonstrate a 16.
‘5 year land supply’ and this could mean that policies in the 2013 plan would be considered 
out-of-date and lead to less influence over the impact, including through inappropriate 
design, that some developments may have.  This increases the Borough’s vulnerability to 
speculative development proposals, and would lead to development and growth taking place 
in an unplanned manner, placing additional pressure on infrastructure without guaranteeing 
or planning positively for measures that can mitigate the impacts.   In addition, the Secretary 
of State could intervene in the Council’s plan making powers thus taking away local choice 
about where development should be accommodated. 
Background 
 This plan has been developed through a series of stages which started with a scope, issues 17.
and options consultation in November 2015; and further consultations on draft versions of a 
plan in November 2016 and January 2019.  These earlier stages, and the evidence base  
  
 
 7 
7 prepared to support this plan, can be found on the Council’s website at 
www.solihull.gov.uk/lpr.  
Relationship to Other Plans 
 This plan largely replaces the Solihull Local Plan (Dec 2013), and most of its policies will no 18.
longer carry any weight.  The only exceptions are the site allocations from the 2013 plan 
which remain to be b rought forward.  These are referenced in the policy/settlement chapters. 
 The Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocations Development Plan Document (DPD) was adopted 19.
in December 2014 and co-existed with the SLP. Alongside Policy P6, this DPD will continue 
to be used to provide a framework for determining relevant applications under this plan. 
 There are now three neighbourhood development plans that have been ‘made’ . Whilst they 20.
were prepared under the provisions of the 2013 Local Plan, they will remain part of the 
development plan for the Borough where there is no conflict with the strategic policies of this 
plan., and they formed part of the development plan for the Borough before this plan was 
adopted.   Others that come forward will need to reflect the strategic policies of this plan. 
 The Council places great importance on neighbourhood plans and recognises the substantial 21.
efforts that communities have made in bringing forward plans.  In the context that this plan 
provides a number of policies that include Borough wide standards or expectations, there 
may be occasions when existing neighbourhood plans (particularly if they are up to date and 
reflect current evidence) provide a more appropriate local expression of a standard or 
expectation that should be taken into account and given due weight. 
 The local authority will continue to work with neighbourhood groups and parish councils to 22.
support the ongoing delivery of new neighbourhood plans and the update of existing plans 
as appropriate and in accordance with national guidance.  
Plan Period 
 This plan covers the period from 2020 to 2036.  22.23.
 
    
  
  
8 
 Our Borough 
Overview of the Borough 
 Solihull Metropolitan Borough is located on the southern edge of the West Midlands 23.24.
conurbation, between Birmingham and the Black Country to the west and Coventry to the 
east.  It is bound to the north by the rural area of North Warwickshire and to the south, by 
rural Bromsgrove, Stratford and Warwick. The Borough is renowned for its key economic 
assets and strategic transport infrastructure both of regional and national significance; its 
attractive environment and quality of life; aspirational housing and excellent schools.  All of 
which mean that Solihull is a desirable place in which to live, work and invest.  Together, 
these elements combine to establish Solihull’s character of ‘town in country’ living up to the 
Borough’s motto: “Urbs in Rure”. 
 Solihull is part of the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership 24.25.
(GBSLEP), a partnership led by key businesses and local authorities to drive sustainable 
growth and job creation.  Solihull is also a constituent member of the West Midlands 
Combined Authority (WMCA).  The Combined Authority has a Strategic Economic Plan 
(SEP) which sets out how devolved powers and resources will be used to deliver a stronger 
West Midlands with a focus on skills, innovation, transport and inward investment. 
Development at Birmingham Airport and the arrival of HS2, will help make Solihull and the 
West Midlands region a world class business location. 
 Solihull is at the heart of the national rail and motorway network with direct rail services to 25.26.
London, Birmingham and the north along the West Coast and Chiltern Mainlines and has 
excellent access to other regions in the UK through the M42, which links the Borough to the 
M6 at the northern boundary of the Borough and the M40 to the south. This strategic 
transport infrastructure, together with Birmingham Airport, has ensured the Borough is the 
principal national and international gateway to the GBSLEP area and the wider West 
Midlands area. 
Historical Development 
 The development of Solihull was highly influenced by the arrival of the railway stations and 26.27.
the 20th Century expansion of Birmingham south-eastwards. The area now known as 
Solihull Borough was predominantly rural with small historic towns and villages of medieval 
origin or earlier at Solihull, Meriden, Berkswell, Barston, Hampton- in-Arden, Knowle and 
Bickenhill until the end of the 19th Century, when Birmingham began to expand into rural 
Olton, with houses overlooking Olton Mere. Shirley originally developed from a scattered 
heathland settlement serving the road from Birmingham to Winchester via Oxford. 
Development of the Grand Union and Stratford-Upon-Avon canals and the railways also 
occurred during the Georgian and early Victorian periods, respectively. 
 The Rural Area once formed part of a huge area of wood pasture and ancient farm lands 27.28.
known as Arden and evidence of previous woodland, commons and heaths are often shown 
in local place names. There were also a number of manor houses and halls associated with 
large parks situated within the Rural Area, for example, parkland associated with Berkswell 
Hall was once part of a medieval deer park. Much of the woodland has now been cleared 
and the landscape character is predominantly agricultural, characterised by a variety of 
fieldscapes from older, irregular piecemeal enclosure to larger planned enclosure and very 
large post-war fields. 
 Large settlement expansion from Birmingham into Solihull occurred between 1900 and 1955, 28.29.
particularly during the inter-war period. This resulted in the development of semi-detached 
housing estates at Lyndon, Olton, Elmdon and Shirley stretching towards Solihull and, to a  
  
 
 9 
9 lesser degree, at Castle Bromwich. Detached housing development was more predominant 
around Solihull. Small settlement expansion also occurred in the Rural Area at Hampton- in-
Arden, Marston Green, Hockley Heath, Meriden and on part of Balsall Common. During the 
inter-war period, large industrial areas relating to the automotive industry developed, such as 
the Land Rover motor works and the early example of a research and development campus 
at Shirley, latterly owned by TRW. Birmingham Airport was also developed at this time, 
opening in 1939 as a municipal airport. 
 After 1945, there was a huge wave of predominantly terraced and multi-storey residential 29.30.
development in the north-west part of the Borough from Castle Bromwich southwards. 
Residential development at Kingshurst was followed in the 1960s by overspill development 
from Birmingham into Smiths Wood and Chelmsley Wood. At the same time, Dorridge 
expanded from a small settlement that was focussed around Dorridge railway station. 
Development at Shirley, Olton, Lyndon and Elmdon towards Solihull continued and by 1955, 
thus closing the gap between Solihull and Birmingham. 
 Since the mid - 20th Century, most residential development has occurred at Monkspath and 30.31.
Hillfield, Balsall Common, Cheswick Green, Meriden, Knowle and Dorridge, and most 
recently, since the late 1990s, at Dickens Heath. Most large scale commercial development 
occurred at the National Exhibition Centre in the 1970s, Birmingham Business Park since the 
late 1980s, Blythe Valley Park since the late 1990s, and more recently, the Touchwood 
Shopping Centre in Solihull Town Centre. 
The Borough Now 
 The regional and national impact and role of Solihull’s strategic economic assets is 31.32.
significant. Solihull’s economy produces goods and services valued at £7.5 (bn) (GVA) and 
supports around 109,000 jobs.1 With an estimated 61.5% of the Borough’s workforce 
commuting in2, it plays a vital role in the regional economy and labour market. 
 The strength and dynamism of the Solihull economy is illustrated by a range of measure, 32.33.
including: 
 At £49,328 Solihull GDP per head was 53% higher than the UK average and 82% 
higher than that of the West Midlands region in 2018. Solihull has the 9th highest GDP 
per head out of 179 economic areas in the UK and the 2nd highest outside of London 
and the South East (smaller only than Edinburgh)3 
 Over the five year period 2013-2018 GVA in Solihull increased by a total of 53% (£3.4 
billion) more than double the UK average (20%)4 
 At £77,095 GVA per filled job in Solihull was 37% higher than the UK average 
(£56,387) in 20185. Solihull has the 8th highest GVA per job out of 179 economic 
areas in the UK and the 2nd highest outside of London and the South East6 
 GVA per job in Solihull increased by £16,765 in nominal terms in the five years 2013 
to 2018. At 28% this is much higher than the UK (12%) and West Midlands (15%) 
averages and the 6th highest out of 179 economic areas in the UK7 
                                                           
1 Experian data, 2020 
2 ONS, Census 2011 
3 ONS: Regional Economic Activity by GDP (Balanced) 1998 to 2018 
4 ONS: Regional Economic Activity by GDP (Balanced) 1998 to 2018 
5 ONS: Sub-regional labour productivity by UK NUTS2 and NUTS3 sub-regions 2018 
6 ONS: Sub regional productivity 2018 
7 ONS: Sub regional productivity 2 018   
  
  
10 
  Employment density in Solihull is 582 per 1,000 population in 2018, 22% higher than 
the Great Britain average (477 per 1,000). By this measure, Solihull is one of the 20 
largest labour markets outside of London and the South East8 
 Total employment in Solihull increased in seven out of nine years through to 2018 
and by an annual average of 3.1% per year over this period (+3,300 jobs per year). 
This is three times the annual average increase recorded across Great Britain 
(+1.0%) and the West Midlands (+1.0%) for that period9 
 In 2018 62% of all Solihull based employment were in Knowledge Intensive sectors a 
much higher proportion than the GB (54%) or West Midlands (52%) averages10 
 Over this nine period 2010-2018 Solihull has the one of the fastest growing labour 
markets in Great Britain. The average annual increase in total employment in Solihull 
(3.1%) over this period is the 6th highest out of 206 upper tier Local Authorities in 
Great Britain, with the borough ranked top outside of London on this measure11 
 The number of business enterprises per head in Solihull is lower than the UK 
average12, as are the number of business start-ups13. However, the number of high-
growth firms per head is above the UK average14 and the growth in the number of 
firms with a turnover of over £5 million per annum is also high15  
 46% of businesses started in Solihull in 2013 were still active five years later in 2018. 
This five year survival rate is higher than both the UK (42%) and West Midlands 
(43%) averages16 
 At £32,970 the median annual wage of full-time jobs based in Solihull in 2019 was 
9% higher than the UK average and 16% above the average for the West Midlands17. 
 Around two thirds of Solihull’s 17,800 hectares is countryside and designated Green Belt, 33.34.
which separates the West Midlands conurbation from surrounding settlements. The vital 
strategic gap between Birmingham/Solihull and Coventry is known as the Meriden Gap. This 
area is predominantly rural, characterised by a series of settlements, historic villages, 
hamlets, scattered farmsteads and dwellings set within attractive countryside.   
 These factors combine to make Solihull a highly sought after living environment and, as a 34.35.
result, house prices and land values across most of the Borough are substantially above the 
regional average. 
 The Borough has a number of distinct areas and these are described in the settlement 35.36.
chapters. 
  
                                                           
8 ONS: Business Register and Employment Survey 2018 
9 ONS: Business Register and Employment Survey 2018 
10 ONS: Business Register and Employment Survey 2018 
11 ONS: Business Register and Employment Survey 2018 
12 ONS: UK Business Counts 
13 ONS: Business Demography, UK 
14 Local Resilience and the Covid-19 Economic Crisis - City Redi blogpost by Tasos Kitsos 2 April 2020 
15 ONS: UK Business Counts 
16 ONS: Business Demography, UK 
17 ONS: Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings Workplace Analysis 2019  
  
 
 11 
11  The illustration below is a spatial portrait of the Borough. 36.37.
 
  
  
  
  
12 
 Challenges 
 To help shape the policies in the local plan it is helpful to identify the challenges the Borough 37.38.
faces and what the objectives should be in addressing these challenges.  This helps to 
ensure that the plans policies are justified and that they will play a part in meeting these 
objectives. 
 Whilst the challenges identified in the Issues and Options consultation were based on the 38.39.
2013 SLP, the subsequent consultations have enabled these challenges to be shaped and 
updated through this process to ensure they are up- to-date and appropriate.   The challenges 
are not set out in any priority order. 
A. Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change  
B.  Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA (Housing Market Area) wide 
shortfall . 
C.  Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D.  Securing sustainable economic growth 
E.  Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F.  Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
G.  To maintain a supply of Gypsy and Traveller sites and pitches. 
H.  Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
I.  Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
J.  Improving health and well being 
K.  Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L.  Improving water quality and flood risk 
M.  Maximising the economic and social benefits of the High Speed 2 rail link and 
Interchange 
N.  Mitigating the impacts of High Speed 2 and the growth associated with the 
Interchange area 
O. Providing infrastructure and securing developer contributions .  
Challenge A – Mitigating and adapting to Climate 
Change 
 To reduce the higher than average greenhouse gas emissions. 
 Low potential for wind and biomass. 
 To reduce the high level of emissions from transport. 
 Traffic growth generated from new housing and employment growth across the 
Borough . 
 Rise in emissions from increased flights and passenger travel to and from 
Birmingham Airport .  
  
 
 13 
13  Risk to health of older people and those in fuel poverty in poorly insulated homes. 
 Risk of increased surface water flooding in urban areas. 
 Urban heating and adverse impact on air quality. 
 Retrofitting of existing buildings. 
 Increased risk of disease . 
 Impact on biodiversity conservation and landscape character. 
Objectives 
 To address the Council’s Climate Change declaration of October 2019 . 
 Reduce the Borough’s net carbon emissions, and make a full contribution to the 
national, sub-regional and local targets for reduction – including to be at net-zero 
emissions by 2041.  
 Provision of low carbon infrastructure (Green Gas, local Power networks, EV 
charging) . 
 Promote decentralised energy and heating networks within the Mature Suburbs and 
North Solihull area, and the generation of energy from on-site renewable sources.  
 Support the implementation of ‘Solihull Connected’ and increase mode shift to public 
transport and active travel by ensuring that new development is located in areas of 
high accessibility or potential high accessibility.  
 Implement measures, such as integrated green infrastructure, to improve resilience of 
existing and new developments to the impacts of climate change.  
 Implement measures to improve the alternatives to car travel. 
 Promote public transport access to Birmingham International station and low carbon 
surface movement strategy to the Airport . 
Challenge B - Meeting housing needs across the 
Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the 
HMA wide shortfall 
 Meeting the Borough’s housing needs without adversely affecting the quality of its 
environment and its attractiveness for businesses and residents. 
 Accommodating some of the HMA wide housing shortfall without adversely affecting 
the quality of its environment and its attractiveness for businesses and residents . 
 Ensuring a supply of housing is available throughout the plan period, especially in the 
early period.  
 A shortage of affordable housing, particularly for rent and first time buyers, in all 
areas of the Borough but especially the Mature Suburbs and the Rural Areas of the 
Borough. 
 A need to widen the housing offer to ensure the provision of an appropriate range  of 
market housing and encourage affordable routes to  home ownership. 
 A need for a range of affordable housing for older people and for people with 
learning, physical and sensory disabilities and mental health needs.   
  
  
14 
  A need to address legal obligations for self and custom house building. 
 Consider intervention in the market to provide more affordable housing .  
Objectives 
 To ensure that the full objectively assessed housing need for the Borough is met for 
the plan period consistent with the achievement of sustainable development and the 
other objectives of the Plan.  
 To ensure that provision is made for an appropriate proportion of the HMA shortfall in 
new housing land consistent with the achievement of sustainable development and 
the other objectives of the Plan. 
 To help newly forming households and young people to get on the housing ladder 
through the development of more open market ‘starter homes’ and shared ownership. 
 Maximise the provision of affordable housing; ensuring the provision of an 
appropriate mix, type and tenure of housing on sites in a range of locations which 
meet the needs of Solihull residents, particularly needs for affordable housing, 
including social rented, low cost home ownership and supported housing, on a 
Borough wide basis. 
 Maximise the supply of affordable housing including delivering more affordable 
housing through windfall development and prioritising locations for development that 
will best contribute to building sustainable, linked, mixed use and balanced 
communities. 
 Widen the range of options for older people and for people with learning, physical and 
sensory disabilities and mental health needs through the provision of accommodation 
which is designed to meet these diverse needs. 
 To provide opportunities for self and custom build as signalled through Solihull’s Self 
and Custom House Building Register. 
Challenge C - Sustaining the attractiveness of the 
Borough for people who live, work, visit and invest 
in Solihull 
Accommodating additional development, whilst: 
 Continuing to improve the quality of the environment in the North Solihull area and in 
areas of deprivation in the Mature Suburbs; 
 Conserving the qualities of the Mature Suburbs, rural settlements and characteristics 
of the wider rural area that make those places attractive areas to live; 
 Delivering the necessary infrastructure to promote sustainability of settlements ; 
 Ensuring there is sufficient amenity space and opportunities for secure children’s 
play;  
 Providing healthy places which include opportunities for cycling and walking ; 
 Ensuring that residential and other amenities are protected. 
 To ensure that development maintains and enhances the Borough’s sense of place 
so that people will visit and invest in Solihull. 
 Maintain Solihull’s role in providing a green lung for the wider area.  
  
 
 15 
15 Objectives 
 Ensure high quality design and 
development which integrates with its 
surroundings and creates safer, 
inclusive, adaptable and sustainable 
places which make a positive 
contribution to the Borough’s sense of 
place, attractiveness and to people’s 
quality of life. 
 Conserve and enhance the qualities of 
the built, natural and historic 
environment that contribute to 
character and local distinctiveness 
and the attractiveness of the mature 
residential suburbs and the rural area. 
 Ensure development does not have 
an adverse impact on residential and 
other amenities, and where that 
impact is unavoidable, to incorporate 
satisfactory mitigation. 
 Promote the sustainability of the rural 
areas through infrastructure 
investment, including broadband. 
 Widen the range of options for older 
people and those with disabilities 
through provision of accommodation 
which is designed to meet these 
diverse needs. 
 Provide cycle ways and wildlife to 
provide sustainable connectivity 
between communities, transport hubs 
and public open spaces. 
 Enhance the Borough’s cultural & visitor attractions. 
 Maximise the potential of the 2022 Commonwealth Games to encourage visitors to 
Solihull . 
Challenge D - Securing sustainable and inclusive 
economic growth 
Key Economic Assets 
 Maintaining Solihull’s important regional and sub-regional role. 
 Meeting aspirations of key businesses to enable them to maintain competitiveness 
(Birmingham Airport, National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham Business Park, Blythe 
Valley Park, Jaguar Land Rover) whilst contributing to sustainable development. 
 Retaining and developing a high skilled workforce. 
 Provide a range of housing to attract inward investment . 
  
  
  
16 
  Provide a natural landscape that is attractive for relocation of business . 
 Impact of congestion on motorways, the strategic highway network and rail from 
additional growth/housing. 
 Impact of pressure for development on the quality of the environment. 
 Need to provide opportunities around workplaces for healthy and active lifestyles. 
 Need for high speed digital connectivity to enhance competitiveness.  
 Need to ensure that the “urbs in rure” is preserved in Solihull to drive inward 
investment into the West Midlands. 
Solihull Town Centre 
 Widening the range of uses and activities to maintain and enhance attractiveness 
whilst providing for a greater range of needs. 
 Impact of congestion. 
 Maintaining the attractiveness of the Town Centre’s historic core and parkland 
setting. 
 Allow for restructuring post COVID and the new economic landscape . 
Shirley Town Centre 
 Pressure from out of centre retail development. 
 Poor quality shopping environment. 
 Impact of high level of through traffic and congestion. 
 Allow for restructure post COVID . 
Chelmsley Wood Town Centre 
 Dated in appearance and in need of environmental improvements. 
 Broader diversity of uses needed to improve attraction to shoppers. 
 Maintain its local importance. 
 Allow for restructure post COVID . 
Objectives 
 Maximise the capacity and benefits of the recently extended runway at Birmingham 
airport, including through enhancing the passenger experience. 
 Support the continued success of other key economic and employment assets such 
as National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham and Blythe Valley Business Parks and 
Jaguar Land Rover whilst maintaining the quality of the environment and managing 
congestion. 
 Support smaller businesses and employers in the Borough. 
 Support the continued success of Solihull Town Centre whilst maintaining the quality 
of its environment and managing congestion. 
 Encourage investment into Shirley and Chelmsley Wood Town Centres to improve 
competitiveness and the shopping environment and support long - term sustainability. 
 Revitalising town and local centres to meet the emerging challenges of Post COVID 
Britain, including their role as destinations for retail and leisure.  
  
 
 17 
17 Challenge E - Protecting key gaps between urban 
areas and settlements 
 Maintaining the integrity of the Green Belt and the Borough’s attractive rural setting 
that helps to attract investment, in the context of the significant pressures on 
agriculture and for development to meet the housing requirements for Solihull 
including the local and wider Housing Market Area needs. 
Objectives 
 Maintain the Green Belt and improve the network of green infrastructure in Solihull, to 
prevent unrestricted expansion of the major urban area, to safeguard the key gaps 
between settlements such as the Meriden Gap and the countrysi de. 
 Ensure that the countryside is managed so as to deliver a range of benefits including 
the growing of food and energy products, create an attractive rural setting and 
improved public access and recreational opportunities. 
Challenge F – Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
North Solihull  
 Significant levels of deprivation with higher levels of crime, fear of crime and 
worklessness than the Borough average. 
 Poor public transport links with the south of the Borough, employment areas and poor 
access by walking and cycling to local services and facilities and economic assets. 
 Inadequate supply of business premises, particularly space for small and medium 
size enterprises. 
 Skills / qualifications gap and low educational attainment. 
 Poor quality urban environment (including main retail centre), green space and public 
realm, lack of variety of tenures, lack of market and affordable housing. 
 Poor health, significantly lower life expectancy with a significant gap between the best 
and the worst wards in the Borough. 
Other areas of the Borough 
 Pockets of deprivation in the Mature Suburbs and Rural Area: low incomes, 
unemployment and poor health in parts of Bickenhill, Elmdon, Lyndon, Olton and 
Shirley. 
 Problems of access to housing and local services, particularly in some rural areas. 
 Increasing obesity Borough wide, of particular concern amongst children. 
 Pockets of anti-social behaviour crime around the Borough. 
Objective 
 Close the gap of inequality between the most and least affluent wards in Solihull, 
particularly reducing the inequalities that exist between North Solihull and the rest of 
the Borough. 
Challenge G - Maintaining a supply of Gypsy and 
Traveller sites and pitches   
  
  
18 
  The need to maintain an appropriate level of supply of authorised Gypsy and 
Traveller sites and pitches in Solihull. 
 Avoiding the establishment of unauthorised developments and encampments. 
Objective 
 To ensure adequate provision of authorised pitches to meet the identified 
accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers in the Borough. 
 Reduce the number of unauthorised developments and encampments and enable 
Gypsies and Travellers to access the services and facilities to meet their needs, 
whilst respecting the interests of the settled community. 
Challenge H - Increasing accessibility and 
encouraging sustainable travel 
 Difficulties of access to services, facilities and employment leading to social 
exclusion, in the North Solihull area and for young and elderly in rural areas. 
 High car use in the Mature Suburbs and often this is the only form of available 
transport in rural parts of the Borough. 
 Ensuring that expected levels of population growth as well as delivery of HS2 and UK 
Central do not compound existing levels of peak hour congestion on the principal 
road network . 
 Public transport journey times and poor reliability can discourage modal-shift.  
 Poor pedestrian and cycle connectivity between communities and retail and 
employment centres. 
 Physical, behavioural and perceptual barriers to more sustainable forms of transport, 
most notably cycling and bus. 
 Poor north-south public transport links. 
 Poor cross-Borough transport links to key destinations such as Birmingham Airport 
and lack of direct public transport link to University of Warwick . 
 Managing transport demand and access to Solihull Town Centre . 
 High number of journeys to school and college by private car .  
 A new approach is needed to access to Solihull central business district. 
 More journeys to school and college taken by sustainable modes of travel. 
 More developments in areas with good public transport access and of sufficient 
density to support the long - term viability of public transport provision. 
Objective 
 Improve accessibility and ease of movement for all users to services, facilities, jobs 
and green infrastructure, including the rural area. 
 Reduce the need to travel. 
 Manage transport demand and reduce car reliance. 
 Enable and increase the modal share of all forms of sustainable transport, including 
the ability to use different modes (e .g. train & cycle) for one journey.  
  
 
 19 
19  De-couple economic growth and increase in car use. 
 Concentrate development in areas with high existing, or potential for improved public 
transport access, and of critical mass to support the long - term viability of public 
transport provision.  
 Increase pedestrian and cycling connectivity across the Borough.  
 Increase the amount of EV charging points . 
Challenge I - Providing sufficient waste management 
facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
 Providing sufficient waste management facilities to meet an equivalent tonnage to the 
waste arising in the Borough. 
 To encourage developers to have a waste strategy and the construction to minimise 
the carbon impact.  
 Providing for sand and gravel production to meet national and local targets, in the 
context of limited resources elsewhere in the sub-region. 
 Objectives 
 To promote the management of waste arising in the Borough further up the waste 
hierarchy and its treatment as a resource to be used wherever possible. 
 To address the identified needs for waste management in the Borough. 
 To provide for primary sand and gravel resources within the Borough to meet 
Solihull’s contribution to the requirement identified in the West Midlands Metropolitan 
Area Local Aggregates Assessment, including the maintenance of a minimum 7 year 
landbank, whilst ensuring that provision is made to encourage the use of secondary 
and recycled aggregates, that sand and gravel resources are safeguarded from 
possible sterilisation by non-mineral development, and that environmental, restoration 
and aftercare criteria are met. 
Challenge J - Improving health and wellbeing for 
everyone 
 Significant health inequalities in the Borough, particularly between North Solihull and 
the rest of the Borough. 
 Incidence of unhealthy lifestyles and behaviours, particularly in young people; an 
ageing older population, and the need to improve the physical and mental health and 
wellbeing of those who visit, work and live in Solihull, in accordance with the Health 
and Wellbeing Strategy. 
Objective 
 Promote development that contributes to a healthy and safe population by providing 
for opportunities to enable people to pursue an active lifestyle, increase participation 
in physical activity including play, sport and recreation and make healthier choices. 
 Meet local housing and employment needs whilst facilitating the provision of 
appropriate health care services to create healthier safer communities.   
  
  
20 
  Ensure development promotes positive outcomes for physical and mental health and 
wellbeing through its location, layout and design, inclusion of appropriate levels of 
open space, sporting facilities, safe cycling routes and the protection and 
improvement of air quality. 
Challenge K - Protecting and enhancing our natural 
assets 
 Decline in the quantity, quality and connectivity of biodiversity and ecological 
networks across the Borough, including sites of national importance such as the 
River Blythe, loss of sites of local importance, and fragmentation of habitats.  
 Degrading of the historic Arden landscape character in parts of the Borough. 
 Managing the growth agenda so that ecosystem services provided by natural assets 
are not harmed and thus undermine the Borough’s capacity for growth. 
 Facilitating the planting of 250,000 trees by 2030 . 
Objectives 
 Increase and enhance Solihull’s natural environment . 
Promote an ecosystem approach to biodiversity conservation aimed at:  
 Halting and reversing decline and loss by conserving, enhancing and increasing the 
cover and connectivity of biodiversity and habitats of value. Contributing to local and 
sub-regional initiatives to improve the natural environment, such as Nature Recovery 
Networks and the Natural Capital Investment Strategy ; 
 Integrate green infrastructure and biodiversity net gain within development and avert 
fragmentation with the wider ecological network ; 
 Reviewing and updating biodiversity information and the network of local wildlife and 
geological sites ;.  
 Addressing gaps in the strategic ecological network to support wildlife and green 
infrastructure ;.  
 Promote a landscape scale approach to protecting and restoring the landscape of the 
Borough and its characteristic features.  
Challenge L – Improving water quality and flood risk 
 Poor or moderate quality of the Borough’s main water bodies, the Rivers Blythe and 
Cole and their tributaries, and increasing risk of flooding associated with new 
development. 
Objectives 
 To contribute towards improving the quality of the water environment by ensuring that 
the Plan’s policies and land allocations help to protect and improve the quality of the 
main water bodies in the Borough. 
 To minimise the risk of flooding by avoiding development in high risk areas wherever 
possible, by applying the flood risk sequential test reducing flows to rivers by 
restricting surface water discharge rates during periods of high intensity rainfall, and 
ensuring that new development is designed so as to minimise surface water flooding 
risks.  
  
 
 21 
21 Challenge M - Maximising the economic and social 
benefits of the High Speed 2 rail link and the UKC 
Hub Area 
 Securing amendment to the HS2 proposal for a Parkway style interchange station 
with surface car parking, which could undermine efforts to maximise the economic 
and social benefits of the rail link. 
 Creating a sense of place and arrival via a well-connected and integrated 
interchange, public realm and development opportunities that help support the HS2 
Growth Strategy aspirations for employment, skills, environment and infrastructure.  
 Ensuring appropriate infrastructure is in place that allows the Interchange to be well 
connected to the nearby key economic assets, including Birmingham Airport, the 
NEC, local universities and the wider Hub area so that they (and others) can take 
advantage of the opportunity provided by HS2. 
 
Objectives 
 To provide an appropriate planning framework so as to ensure that the potential 
economic and social benefits of growth enabled by the HS2 rail link and interchange 
station are delivered. 
 That the Hub becomes globally renowned as the best connected business, leisure 
and entertainment destination in Europe and a major driver of the UK economy.  
 Creation of a sense of place that draws upon a modern interpretation of ‘garden 
village’ principles.  
 Ensuring that the HS2 Interchange prioritises access by bus, cycle, Metro, SPRINT 
bus rapid transit network, or the Coventry Ultra-Light Rail system rather than the 
private car. 
 Promote cross-boundary connectivity to HS2 from the wider sub-region and key 
destinations to maximise opportunities for the Midlands Engine for Growth and 
reduce the need to travel by car.  
  
  
  
  
22 
 Challenge N - Mitigating the impacts of High Speed 2 
and the growth associated with the UKC Hub area 
 Impact of construction works on the HS2 rail link and interchange station on the 
environment, communities and transport network, and subsequently during the 
operational phase. 
 Significant infrastructure requirements associated with the rail link and interchange. 
 Impact of the associated economic and housing growth on the Borough’s transport 
network, communities, environment and its Green Belt. 
Objectives 
 To maximise the opportunities of HS2 . 
 Develop a strategy to mitigate the impacts of increased road traffic to/from 
Birmingham Interchange including public transport provision, junction schemes and 
environmental measures required. 
 To make efficient use of land at the Interchange site by utilising decked car park 
options in lieu of extensive surface level parking. 
Challenge O – Providing infrastructure and securing 
developer contributions  
 Providing sufficient and appropriate physical, social and green infrastructure to 
support inclusive growth for new and existing communities . 
Objectives 
 Set out strategic and local infrastructure needs in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
 Work with stakeholders and partners in infrastructure delivery, including Transport for 
West Midlands, the CCG and NHS Estates, utility providers, statutory bodies and 
neighbouring authorities. 
 Allocate funding from developer contributions in the annual Infrastructure Funding 
Statement to enable timely delivery of infrastructure to support development and 
growth objectives. 
   
  
 
 23 
23 Vision 
Council Plan (2020 to 2025) 
 The Council Plan (July 2020) sets out the Council’s direction in the five year period to 2025. 39.40.
It is a basis for engagement with Solihull residents and businesses and is therefore a good 
starting point to develop a vision that can be used to shape the local plan.  The Council Plan 
vision is one: 
‘Where everyone has an equal chance to be healthier, happier, safer and more 
prosperous through growth that cre ates opportunities for all’.  
 The Plan has been developed in the context of the Solihull Health and Wellbeing Strategy 40.41.
and the Covid-19 Economic Recovery Plan. 
 The basis of the Plan is that economic development, environmental sustainability and health 41.42.
and well-being must move forward together so that sustainable inclusive economic growth 
and opportunity for all can be realised.  
 The Plan identifies five building blocks of inclusive economic growth: 42.43.
 Building a vibrant economy (including social economy) , 
 Promoting and delivering social value 
 Enabling communities to thrive 
 Actioning the Council’s climate change declaration 
 Improving skills and access to good work . 
 Everything that the Council does aims to contribute to one or more of these. The Council 43.44.
Plan identifies a number of priorities and component activities to be done by 2025.   The 
local plan makes a contribution (at least in part) to the following priorities .: 
Economy 
 Revitalis eing our towns and local centres 
  UK Central (UKC) and maximising the opportunities of HS2 
  Increase the supply of housing, especially affordable and social housing 
 The outcomes from this will be that town and local centres have stable or growing 44.45.
economies, people, business and the environment benefit from UKC and HS2, including 
increased access to good work, and there is more affordable and environmentally 
sustainable housing. 
Environment 
 Enhance Solihull’s natural environment 
 Improve Solihull’s air quality 
 Reduce Solihull’s net carbon emissions 
 The outcomes from these activities will include an enhanced, well connected natural 45.46.
environment, more people walking, cycling and using public transport, improvement in air 
quality with clear progress toward achieving net zero carbon – the Council by 2030 and the 
Borough by 2041. 
People and Communities   
  
  
24 
   Take action to improve life chances in our most disadvantaged communities 
  Enable communities to thrive 
  Sustainable, quality, affordable provision for adults & children with complex needs. 
 Achieving this priority will see increases in residents with significant disadvantages moving 46.47.
into employment, education or training, and stronger, more connected, resourceful 
communities finding solutions to local problems. 
 The Local Plan is one major tool that can be used to enable the Council Plan vision to be 47.48.
achieved, in doing so the vision for the local plan should complement and build upon (in a 
land use planning context) the Council Plan vision.  This is what is described in the following 
paragraphs. 
Borough Vision - Overview 
By 2036, Solihull will have built on its distinct reputation as an attractive and aspirational 
place to live, learn, invest, work and play.  
It will have taken advantage of the unique opportunity to maximise the economic and social 
benefi ts of the High Speed 2 rail link and interchange both for the Borough and wider area; 
reflecting the Borough’s location at the heart of the national rail and motorway network.  In 
particular the opportunity will have been taken to ensure that the HS2 Inter change is well 
integrated intoto the Borough’s green infrastructure and key economic assets, including 
Birmingham Airport, the NEC and JLR to ensure they, and others, can capitalise on this 
potential  as part of the important contribution from the UK Centra l Hub. . 
The Borough will play a part in meeting, in a sustainable manner, the needs of its housing 
market area so that its residents have access to a range and choice of quality 
accommodation.  
The Borough will retain its sense of identity, both in its urba n and rural area (including 
protection of the Green Belt which contains the strategically important Meriden Gap); and the 
quality of the environment that make it a special place.  
This vision will be underpinned by ensuring all relevant activities are under pinned and fully 
integrated with measures to tackle the Climate Change emergency ,; recognising that this 
has a cross - cutting dimension that extends across economic, social and environmental 
objectives.  
Achieving this vision will contribute towards the abi lity for everyone to have an equal chance 
to be healthier, happier, safer and prosperous, through growth that creates opportunities for 
all. 
Borough Vision in Detail 
 It will be a Borough that continues to be economically successful and a driver for sustainable 48.49.
growth within the West Midlands; where the potential for sustainable inclusive economic 
growth within the UK Central area is unlocked and the ambitions for the economic assets 
contained within it are fully realised, without undermining the qualities that make the Borough 
attractive to people and investment. Essential infrastructure will be delivered to facilitate and 
underpin sustainable economic growth and the Borough will be a more accessible and 
integrated place where walking, cycling and public transport are more attractive and 
convenient alternatives to travel than by car.  
  
 
 25 
25  Solihull will be a fairer and more equal Borough where all existing and future generations live 49.50.
healthier lifestyles, make healthier choices and have equal opportunities to a better range of 
high quality and affordable housing, education, jobs and an attractive, safe environment. We 
will have responded to and reduced the Borough’s local housing need through the provision 
of a greater range and type of affordable and market housing; and Solihull’s Gypsy and 
Traveller community will have been provided for. All local communities will have greater 
involvement in shaping their areas and neighbourhoods, helping to sustain the longevity of 
rural settlements through the Neighbourhood Plan process. 
 
 The Borough will continue to be ‘Urbs in Rure’, realising its ambitions for sustainable 50.51.
economic growth without compromising the quality of its environment, protecting the integrity 
of the Green Belt and retaining the strategic Meriden Gap between the Birmingham 
Conurbation and Coventry. The Borough’s high quality Mature Suburbs, distinctive rural 
settlements, villages and wider Rural Area, its historic and natural environment and green 
infrastructure network will be protected and enhanced. The quality of the housing, public 
realm and green space will have been maintained and improved across the Borough.  New 
development shall have taken the opportunity to provide additional open space that links into 
the Borough’s green infrastructure to ensure the Borough’s ‘Urbs in Rure’ character is 
maintained and enhanced. 
 The Council recognises the gravity of the climate change emergency and in October 2019 51.52.
made a Declaration of Intent to collaborate with, and support the WMCA in delivering the 
West Midlands target of net-zero emissions by 2041. The Council has also set a target to 
become a net carbon zero Council by 2030.  
 In tackling climate change, the Borough will have significantly reduced its carbon emissions, 52.53.
realised its potential to deliver renewable and low carbon energy schemes and created 
development which has minimised, and is resilient to the future, impacts of climate change. 
 Solihull will have reduced the amount of waste produced in the Borough through increased 53.54.
recycling and re-use, eliminated the gap between the amount of waste arising and the 
capacity of its facilities and continued to provide an adequate supply of sand and gravel to 
help meet local development needs. 
 This Borough - wide vision will have local area perspectives as explained in the settlement 54.55.
chapters. 
  
  
  
  
26 
 Spatial Strategy 
Introduction 
 Solihull has an enviable record of promoting and delivering growth in a way which enhances 55.56.
the Borough whilst at the same time not undermining the characteristics that make it special 
and attractive to investment.  The spatial strategy will continue to manage growth and protect 
these characteristics. 
 The 2013 Local Plan incorporated a spatial strategy that was based on a housing target that 56.57.
reflected the emerging requirements from the revisions to the Regional Spatial Strategy.  
This was a target that was ‘constrained’ and wasn’t meeting the Borough’s own needs.  
Furthermore, it didn’t accommodate any of the shortfall that was beginning to occur across 
the housing market area.  This plan seeks to do so by not only accommodating the 
Borough’s own needs, but also in making a meaningful contribution towards accommodating 
some of the shortfall from the housing market area. 
 At the time the 2013 plan was being prepared, the plans for HS2 had not reached an 57.58.
advanced stage.  That plan acknowledged that the high speed rail link could play a key role 
in the future growth of the Borough, but at the time it would have been wrong to assume its 
development.  Since then the HS2 Act has received consent, and following the issuing of the 
‘Notice to Proceed’ in April 2020, construction has now started on the project. 
 The arrival of the high speed link will have a profound effect on the Borough and this local 58.59.
plan review must address how its benefits can be maximised.  This is in the context of the 
unique opportunity that is available to do so; with the interchange being located at the heart 
of the Boroughs key economic assets and transport infrastructure. 
 The two factors outlined above represent a significant shift from the starting point of the 2013 59.60.
plan and requires the spatial strategy to be looked at afresh.  This is in the context that to 
deliver the level of growth envisaged, will require significant releases of land from the Green 
Belt.  Solihull is not alone in having to accommodate development within the Green Belt - 
there are examples within the same housing market area where this has already occurred, 
and others are expected to follow. Nevertheless Solihull puts great value in the Green Belt 
and only sacrifices Green Belt if there is no other option. 
 The Strategy seeks to develop the potential of each part of the Borough to contribute to the 60.61.
growth agenda through a place making approach aimed at enhancing Solihull as a place 
where people aspire to live, learn, invest, work and play; whilst recognising and protecting 
character and local distinctiveness. This includes realising the potential of the UK Central 
Area to drive growth and recognising the needs and growth potential of all communities in 
the Borough.  Opportunities for development to meet these needs will be balanced with the 
importance of protecting the Mature Suburbs and the open countryside within the Solihull 
Green Belt. 
Developing the Spatial Strategy 
  The Scope, Issues and Options consultation indicated that whilst many elements of the 61.62.
spatial strategy in the Local Plan 2013 remained relevant, the Review is being undertaken in 
a different strategic context and needs to accommodate a substantial increase in the level of 
growth to be accommodated. A significant number of representations considered that the 
2013 spatial strategy was no longer appropriate, as it needed to be amended to reflect the 
increased emphasis on economic and housing growth.  Whilst this is accepted, it would not 
be right to suggest that accommodating growth at all costs is an appropriate response.  
Rather the balance between these potentially competing demands needs a shift towards  
  
 
 27 
27 accommodating additional growth – in a managed fashion; and provided an appropriate 
balance is maintained (by ensuring a sustainable pattern of development is achieved), this 
would be an acceptable approach. 
  The Scope, Issues and Options consultation set out 7 broad options for accommodating 62.63.
growth as follows : 
  Growth Option A – High Frequency Public Transport Corridors & Hubs  
  Growth Option B – Solihull Town Centre 
  Growth Option C – North Solihull/Chelmsley Wood 
  Growth Option D – Shirley Town Centre & the A34 Corridor  
  Growth Option E – The UK Central Hub Area & HS2  
  Growth Option F – Limited Expansion of Rural Villages/Settlements 
  Growth Option G – New Settlements, Large Scale Urban Extensions or Significant 
Expansion of Rural Villages/Settlements 
Spatial Strategy 
 Ideally, seeking to accommodate development needs close to where they arise is a sensible 63.64.
starting position and given that around 75% of the Borough’s population live within the urban 
areas, then these areas should be the initial focus for accommodating development.  This 
approach would support potential developments that fall within options A to D described 
above which are within the urban area.   Appropriate development opportunities under these 
options are therefore preferred. 
 There is extremely limited land available that could contribute towards options A to D and 64.65.
therefore the Council has had to look at options E, F & G (which will require land to be 
released from the Green Belt).  In doing so it has sought strike a balance between 
concentrating development in a relatively small number of locations and dispersing 
development over a greater number of locations – a ‘balanced dispersal’ approach. 
 The strategy also seeks to focus significant developments in locations that are, or can be 65.66.
made, accessible and sustainable.  These locations will typically be on the edge of the urban 
area or within the rural settlements that have a greater range of services.   This will be 
achieved by focussing development in the following locations: 
  Located adjacent to the urban edge/a highly accessible settlement o r; 
  Located adjacent to a settlement that although it may be less accessible, it has a 
wide range of local services (including a secondary school)18 or; 
  Development that would be a proportionate addition adjacent to an existing 
settlement that although is less accessible still has a limited range of services 
available within it (including a primary school)19. 
 This approach will have the following advantages: 66.67.
  Concentration could support the UK Central masterplan and HS2 growth strategy, 
and the investment priorities in ‘Solihull Connected’; 
  Focussing on urban areas and sustainable urban extensions provides the best 
opportunity for achieving accessibility and delivering public transport improvements; 
                                                           
18 This includes Balsall Common and Knowle/Dorridge/Bentley Heath 
19 This includes Hampton- in-Arden, Hockley Heath and Meriden   
  
  
28 
   Larger scale developments offer the opportunity for significant infrastructure 
improvements; 
  Provision for some smaller sites will assist the early delivery of housing during the 
Plan period and support existing services;  
  A totally dispersed pattern of growth would be unlikely to deliver the scale of growth 
required and be more likely to result in adverse impacts associated with piecemeal 
development which would affect a greater area. 
 This approach would thus discourage development that is: 67.68.
  Isolated from any settlement; 
  A disproportionate addition to a settlement that only has a limited range of facilities; 
  Occurs in relatively less accessible locations; 
Site Selection 
 Complementary to the spatial strategy is the approach to site selection.  This is explained in 68.69.
more detail in the topic paper.  ButHowever,  the principles of it are essentially that when 
assessing individual sites,  that  a higher priority is given to brownfield opportunities in the 
urban area/settlements and the least priority is given to isolated greenfield sites in highly 
performing areas of the Green Belt. 
 By applying the spatial strategy and the site selection methodology, results in development 69.70.
opportunities coming forward across a range of the options that were identified as follows: 
 Growth Option E (The UK Central Hub Area & HS2): 
  Land to the east of the NEC – the HS2 Interchange site 
 Growth Option F – Limited Expansion of Rural Villages/Settlements: 
  Land to the east of Hampton- in-Arden 
  Land to the west of Meriden 
 Land to the south west of Hockley Heath  
 Land north, south and south east of Balsall Common 
 Land to the north east of Knowle 
 Land east of Catherine- de-Barnes 
 Growth Option G – Large Scale Urban Extensions: 
  Land to the north east of Damson Parkway 
  Land south of Shirley (south of Dog Kennel Lane) 
 Land south of Shirley (Whitlocks End Farm) 
  Land east of Solihull (between Grand Union Canal and Hampton Lane) 
 Growth Option G –Significant Expansion of Rural Villages/Settlements: 
  Land west of Dickens Heath 
  Land south of Knowle 
  Land east of Balsall Common 
   
  
 
 29 
29  The spatial strategy is illustrated in the following diagram: 70.71.
  
  
  
  
30 
 Policy Chapters 
   
  
 
 31 
31 Sustainable Economic Growth 
Introduction 
 Solihull has one of the most productive economies in the Midlands. The presence of its key 71.72.
economic assets combined with Solihull’s central location on the national motorway and rail 
networks and the quality of its environment, have been key to its success in attracting 
investment, particularly in high value- added sectors that include automotive manufacturing, 
ICT, business and professional services, creative industries and construction.   The 
attractiveness of the Borough to businesses and investors is set to take a significant leap 
forward with the arrival of the high speed rail link and the Interchange station that is to be 
accommodated in the Borough.  
UK Central Solihull 
 The UK Central Solihull proposals present a unique opportunity on a nationally significant 72.73.
scale to bring forward major growth.  This will contribute to wider strategic ambitions and in 
doing so make a substantial contribution to the economic growth aims of not just the Council, 
but also both the WMCA and the GBSLEP.  The UK Central Solihull area, including The 
Hub, where key economic assets are located, also encompasses the proposed High Speed 
2 Interchange railway station within the triangle of land bounded by the A45, A452 and the 
M42, known as Arden Cross.  
 
 The UKC Masterplan (June 2013) highlights the opportunity as follows:  73.74.
“At the heart of the proposition is the notion that, by capitalising on one of the 
strongest economic bases in the country today, the area has the potential to 
underpin a national economic resurgence. By targeting investment in local 
infrastructure and committing to deliver an expanded Airport and proposed HS2 
station, the benefits for the area and the UK are not only startlingly significant but 
also very exciting at a time when the country is moving out of one of the worst 
economic cycles in modern history.”  
  
  
  
32 
  The GBSLEP’s HS2 Growth Strategy (July 2015) also outlined how to fully maximise the 74.75.
benefits of one of the largest infrastructure projects in Europe – including the need to take 
advantage of the opportunity for development around the interchange station to create a: 
“high value, mixed activity economic growth hub in a highly accessible, well serviced 
and concentrated urban environment.  Through taking an innovative and modern 
approach to ‘garden city’ principles that are fit for the current and future era, the 
development of ‘lifestyle districts’ in and around the Interchange Station will embrace 
a range of mixed uses; sustainability techniques; the very best infrastructure; and 
accessibility.”  
 Now that the area’s potential has been recognised, it is important that every opportunity is 75.76.
taken to ensure that the vision is realised and delivery gets underway.  To help achieve this 
an appropriate planning framework is needed that can encourage, guide and facilitate 
development to take place in a managed and coordinated manner.  The approach of this 
Local Plan Review recognises that delivery of the area’s potential will take place over many 
years and it must remain flexible to ensure that no future opportunities are lost. 
 Delivery isn’t just about having an appropriate planning framework in place, and it’s in this 76.77.
context that in 2016 the Council established the UK Central Urban Growth Company (UGC) 
to lead the delivery of the project.    
 The UGC has brought together the key stakeholders from The Hub area to develop a 77.78.
Framework Plan (2018) that illustrates the key components and growth aspirations of the 
partners ,; together with an indication of the infrastructure needed to support delivery of the 
project.   The Hub Growth and Infrastructure Plan (2019) sets out the vision for the UK 
Central Solihull Hub Area: 
‘The opportunity at the Hub is unlike any other in the U K; it benefits from a 
combination of factors that no other national proposal, either in place or planned, 
can compete with. It is unrivalled in terms of the scale of the development proposals, 
the infrastructure investment, the proximity to major conurbati ons’  
 Arden Cross Limited, the delivery vehicle formed by the consortium of landowners for Site 78.79.
UK1 (HS2 Interchange triangle) , has produced a masterplan setting out an overall vision for 
the site and a set of comprehensive development principles to coordinate delivery of the site. 
is developing a masterplan to set out the various components of the site and the 
development principles which will shape delivery.  
 It is clear from what has already been described that the Hub area embraces a unique 79.80.
concentration of economic assets and potential which holds out the prospect of making a 
significant contribution to the Government’s aims for job creation and growth. What is 
needed as part of this plan is a policy approach that allows these assets to flourish whilst 
providing a framework to ensure that the resulting developments provide a well integrated 
sense of place, with easy access through the area, and is supported by appropriate 
infrastructure.  The focus of the policy is to ensure these existing, new and expanded assets 
work together as part of a whole.  This will ensure that the ‘whole is greater than the sum of 
the parts’. 
Policy P1 UK Central Solihull Hub Area  
1. UK Central Solihull incorporates Blythe Valley Park, North Solihull, Solihull Town 
Centre a nd the Hub Area including the High Speed 2 Interchange Station at Arden 
Cross. The Hub Area offers the greatest potential for growth in the Borough and 
includes a major , strategic mixed - use site at Arden Cross which will deliver 
significant employment and  residential development, both during and beyond the  
  
 
 33 
33 Plan period ; and will make a significant contribution to the wider West Midlands 
economy . 
2. The Hub Area, indicated on the Policies Map, embraces Birmingham Airport, the 
National Exhibition Centre (NEC) , Birmingham Business Park and Jaguar Land 
Rover, each of which are key economic assets in their own right. This Plan seeks to 
support the future aspirations of the key economic assets in a holistic, well connected 
way, and to bring forward  development of  the area surrounding the HS2 Interchange 
Station at Arden Cross.   
3. Development proposals within the Hub will be expected to demonstrate how they 
achieve the following key objectives :  
 i. Contribute towards sustainable and inclusive economic growth, th e continued 
 success of the key economic assets, and Solihull’s attractiveness to  
 investment in high value added activities, including low carbon technologies 
 and services;  
 ii. Maximise connectivity within and beyond the site through integrated  
 movement and transport networks  (including sustainable and active modes of 
 travel) , capitalising on the infrastructure advantages of the location with its 
 major new transport hub;  and Ccontribute to and co -ordinate transport,  
 energy, power and digital infrastructure provision;  
 iii. Do not impede the provision of infrastructure necessary to support  
 development elsewhere in the Hub Area, or otherwise prevent or hinder  
 development occurring in other parts of the Hub Area;   
  iv. Encourages the use of modes of travel other than the private car;  
 v. Deliver a high quality,  strategic green and blue infrastructure network across 
 the Hub area to enhance natural assets;  
 vi. Create distinct and unique places with a strong sense of identity,   
 incorporating high quality design and innovation for development and the  
 public realm, whilst maximising the efficient use of land;  
  vii. Support inclusive economic growth by suppor ting employment and supply 
   chain opportunities that benefit businesses and residents across the Borough , 
   and by supporting  vibrant and sustainable communities, with an emphasis on 
   health and wellbeing , including those working, living in and visit ing the Hub 
   Area; and  
 viii. Encompasses sustainability principles , minimising the use of natural  
  resources   and incorporating maximising low (zero) carbon and 
renewable energy     principles.  
4.  In addition to the above, the Council will also take into account the following:  
Arden Cross  
  i. The Council will support and encourage the development of the Arden Cross 
   land as an exemplary international station, with new public realm that  
   contributes to the creation of a sense of place suppor ting the potential for    
  
  
34 
    commercial, residential and other opportunities, that will be well integrated 
   into the surrounding environment, seamlessly linking to Birmingham Airport 
   and the NEC in a well -coordinated way.  
  ii. The Council will support  proposals that include  passenger facilities,  offices, 
   and residential,      together with associated 
ancillary uses (including retail,     leisure and hotel   
  developments of an appropriate scale).  
  iii. Land bounded by the M42, A452 and A45, as show n as Site UK1 on the  
   Policies Map, will be released from the Green Belt to accommodate new  
   development that will capitalise on the unique opportunity presented by the 
   UK Central Solihull Hub Area.  The exceptional circumstances justifying the 
   removal of the land from the Green Belt are set out in the justification to this 
   policy.  
  iv. It will be expected that proposals for development of the area will be  
      promoted in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, 
taking account of the    phasing set out in the Hub Growth and 
Infrastructure Framework  Plan (2018) and Arden Cross      Masterplan  
(2020) , or future updates. . 
National Exhibition Centre (NEC)  
  v. To enable the NEC to meet its future aspirations and to drive economic and 
   employmen t growth, the Council will enable a broad range of developments to 
   enhance the visitor offer, diversify facilities and increase international  
   competitiveness.  
  vi. Development the Council will support and encourage will include that needed 
   for operational purposes , such as new or refurbished exhibition halls,
    transport    facilities and other development needed 
to enable the NEC to     enhance its i   international 
competitiveness.  
  vii. The Council will also support a broad range of ancillary and complementary 
   facilities needed to enhance visitor experience and support operational  
   needs. These will include hotels, administrative offices, warehouses, catering, 
   meeting space, appr opriate leisure and entertainment facilities and other  
   supporting development, provided it is justified in terms of scale, its support 
   for the NEC as a whole , and is appropriately located within the NEC.  
  viii. The Council will also support proposa ls that contribute towards wider place 
   making objectives , including commercial and residential development and 
    other business uses.  This will particularly be the case in 
circumstances     where it can be demonstrated that more efficient 
use can be made of the     NEC site, or where appropriate 
compensatory provisions can be made     elsewhere (including the 
use of decked parking).  
Birmingham Airport  
  ix. The Council will support and encourage further development needed for  
   operational purposes , such as passenger and freight facilities, terminals,   
  
 
 35 
35    transport facilities and other development that supports operational needs, or 
   which allows the capacity of the extended runway to be maximised.  
  x. The Council will also support a broad range o f ancillary and complementary 
   facilities including hotels, administrative offices , car parks and other  
   appropriate facilities needed to serve the needs of air travellers using the  
   Airport. Proposals should be justified in terms of scale and in terms of  
   supporting the Airport function , and be appropriately located so as not to  
   detract from Airport function.  
  xi. Where justified, development for Airport - related uses beyond t he Airport  
   boundary will be permitted, providing that it accords with other policies in the 
   Plan, including Green Belt policy. This will include opportunities within the 
   allocated employment site (UK2) . 
Jaguar Land Rover (JLR)  and Site UK2  
  xii. The Council will support JLR to compete and further its success in the global 
   vehicles industry. To achieve this, the JLR site will need to continue to evolve 
   and where necessary expand, with the only realistic opportunity for significant 
   expansi on being to the north east.  
  xiii. The Council will support and encourage the development of JLR within its 
   boundary defined in this Local Plan.  This will include a broad range of  
   development needed to maintain or enhance the function of JLR as a  major 
   manufacturer of vehicles.  
  xiv. Site UK2 on the Policies Map, will be released from the Green Belt to  
   accommodate employment development,  as set out in site Policy UK2,   
    including that required for JLR     operational needs 
or to enable JLR component    suppliers, needed to directly   
 support JLR operational needs, to be located    close to the plant. The 
    exceptional circumstances justifying the removal of the   
 land from the Green    BBelt are set out  in the justification to this policy.  
  xv. It will be expected that proposals for the development of Site UK2 will be  
   promoted in a comprehensive and coordinated manner that can make  
   provision for a phased approach, if required.  
Birmingham Business Park  
  xvi. The Council will support and encourage the development of Birmingham  
   Business Park within its boundary defined in this Local Plan to support its role 
   as a prime employment location and enhance its important role as a high  
   quality, managed business park.  
  xvii. Development will be supported that includes offices, light industrial, general 
   industrial and warehousing uses. The Council will expect development to  
   progress in a well-planned  way that will maintain the attractiveness of the  
   business park to investors , and that will protect and enhance the environment 
   including the natural environment.  
  xviii. The Council will also support a broad range of ancillary or complementary 
   uses needed to enhance the attraction of the business park to occupiers.    
  
  
36 
    These could include hotels  and commercial/business/service uses  of a scale 
   that does not compete with existing or planned facilities outside of   
   Birmingham Business Park.  
Justification 
 The policy reflects the Government’s commitment, as set out in the NPPF, to securing 80.81.
sustainable economic growth in order to create jobs and prosperity, building on the area’s 
strengths and meeting the challenges of global competition and a low carbon future.  
 Solihull benefits from having a prosperous and productive economy, with its advantageous 81.82.
location at the hub of the national motorway and High Speed Rail networks, international 
connectivity via Birmingham Airport, and the presence of a number of key economic assets 
that contribute to employment and wealth creation for the Borough and rRegion. The arrival 
of the High Speed 2 rail link within the Plan period, and the development of the Interchange 
Station east of the NEC present a unique opportunity for growth to be boosted through 
development within the UK Central Solihull Area.  
 The policy sets out the key objectives that development will be expected to contribute 82.83.
towards, including sustainable and inclusive economic growth. Growth that is inclusive 
should demonstrate that the benefits will accrue to all by building on the strengths of 
communities, ensuring that wealth is more evenly spread and enabling everyone to 
contribute and participate.  
UK Central Solihull Hub Area 
 UK Central Solihull encompasses the main growth areas in the Borough; Blythe Valley  83.84.
Business  Park, North Solihull, the Solihull Town Centre, and the UK Central Solihull Hub 
Area. This policy focusses on the UK Central Solihull Hub Area, which, as a result of the 
High Speed 2 rail Interchange Station, offers the greatest potential for economic growth in 
the Borough, and recognises the added value that co-ordinating growth aspirations can 
bring.   
 The establishment of the Urban Growth Company has been a key factor assisting in the 84.85.
delivery of the development potential of the area.  The Hub Growth and Infrastructure Plan 
(2018) sets out a vision for the development of a globally renowned business, leisure and 
entertainment destination providing opportunities to live, work and play as well as a major 
economic driver for the Borough.  The objectives in the HGIP have informed the key 
objectives in this policy.  
 The Hub Framework Plan (2018) shows how sustained growth will be delivered up to 2047. 85.86.
It predicts up to 77,500 jobs in total over that period, with over 130,000sqm of office 
floorspace, 225,000sqm of industrial floorspace, 90,000sqm of retail and leisure floorspace 
and 18,000sqm of hotel floorspace by 2033. Up to 4,000 new homes could be provided up to 
2047, with about 1,000 delivered by 2033. The Hub Framework Plan also identifies potential 
for additional growth in an international quarter south of the mainline station, which could 
deliver 123,000sqm of offices and further retail, leisure and hotel development by 2033. The 
Hub Framework Plan is a non-statutory plan whichplan, which  will be updated from time to 
time in response to changing circumstances.  The need for flexibility is important given the 
time period development is expected to come forward in the area – i.e. from 2018 to beyond 
the plan period.  
 The Urban Growth Company published its Hub Growth and Infrastructure Vision (2019)20 86.87.
setting out the vision to create Europe’s best-connected destination for business, leisure and 
                                                           
20 As a replacement to the 2018 Hub Growth & Infrastructure Plan.  
  
 
 37 
37 living and a new outstanding gateway to the UK. It update ds the level of residential 
development expected in the Hub Area as a whole to up to 5,000 new homes. 
 The Council will expect those promoting development via planning applications to 87.88.
demonstrate, in greater detail, how the criteria in Policy P1 have been met, and to use 
guidance in the Hub Framework Plan.   It will also seek to pursue an SPD that will help guide 
development. 
 It is recognised that given the time span for development to be undertaken, and the 88.89.
uncertainties about what may take place in the later years, there needs to be an increased 
emphasis on monitoring what does come forward, and what the implications are for the plan.   
 For purposes relating to housing land supply it has been assumed that across the whole 89.90.
UKC Solihull Hub Area there will be 2,740 dwellings coming forward in the plan period.   This 
will be 2,240 at the NEC and 500 at Arden Cross based on the NEC masterplan (2018) and 
the emerging Arden Cross masterplan (2020). 
 Adjacent to the Airport and the NEC is the rail interchange site that serves Birmingham 90.91.
International Station.  The APM connecting the HS2 Interchange Station and Birmingham 
Airport passes through the site and will form an important connection as work continues on 
redesigning Birmingham International Station into a multi-modal transport exchange 
providing seamless connections to the new HS2 Interchange Station, Birmingham Airport 
and the NEC.   The Council consider that the site should be protected for its important 
transport interchange purpose but ancillary or complementary facilities for Interchange, 
Airport or NEC purposes should be allowed provided they are justified and do not prejudice 
the use of the site for commuter parking serving the railway station as an interchange.  
Development of any land within the site that can be clearly demonstrated as surplus to any 
of these requirements will be allowed provided that it does not conflict with other policies of 
this local plan or policies of the National Planning Policy Framework. 
 
Arden Cross 
  
  
  
38 
  The Arden Cross proposals focus on the HS2 iInterchange sStation and the triangle of land 91.92.
east of the NEC bounded by the A45, A452 and M42 (some 140ha in area) and present an 
important and unique opportunity to maximise economic and social benefits. The High 
Speed 2 rail line bisects the site from north to south, and the Company’s proposals for the 
Interchange show a Parkway-style station. As well as the station, the proposals include an 
Automated People Mover connecting to the NEC, Airport and mainline station, a bus station 
and surface car parking for 7,400 vehicles. The HS2 Base Scheme would urbanise a 
substantial proportion of the site, significantly impacting on its contribution to the purposes of 
including land in the Green Belt. It would fail to realise the potential of the substantial 
economic and social benefits associated with growth around the transport hub, contrary to 
Government policy.  
92. The prospectus for a Garden City Approach (2014) envisaged a well-planned and vibrant 
new place.  Development was to be guided by strong urban design principles and provision 
for strong connectivity.  
 A Masterplan for the Arden Cross area has been produced (2020), which demonstrates that 93.
by utilising multi-storey car parking, the site can make a significant contribution to economic 
growth. The vision features a number of urban quarters, comprising a residential community 
with up to 3,000 new homes, an innovation district for employment and higher education, a 
transportation hub plaza incorporating leisure, retail and cultural attractions with office 
accommodation, together with a key movement corridor, a parkland area based on the 
Holywell Brook, based on sustainable transport principles.   Providing decked car parking 
(rather than extensive surface level parking) to serve HS2 (and other uses) is key to this 
vision and will ensure efficient use of land which is being removed from the Green Belt. 
 The Arden Cross proposals require land to be taken from the Green Belt. The exceptional 94.
circumstances to justify this approach are as follows: 
 The proposals are vitally important to the aim of maximising the economic growth and 
job creation potential of the Hub Area that is of national significance and will meet the 
NPPF aim to proactively promote economic growth;  
 The need to capitalise on the arrival of the High Speed 2 rail link by maximising the 
substantial national infrastructure investment at this location; 
 Stimulus to local, regional and national growth to assist with rebalancing the UK 
economy, accommodating growth for the wider Greater Birmingham & Solihull LEP 
area and the wider West Midlands; 
 Significant socio-economic advantages, including additional housing to meet local 
and wider housing needs, the generation of high skilled jobs, increased GVA output 
and the agglomeration affect at the key economic assets that make up the Hub area;  
 Improved access to employment from North Solihull, an area of persistently high 
unemployment;  
 The multiple locational advantages of the area with its unrivalled transport facilities 
make this one of the most sustainable locations for growth in the Borough; 
 The land is lower performing in the Solihull Strategic Green Belt Assessment (2016);   
  
 
 39 
39  The importance of maximising the efficient use of the Arden Cross land that would 
not have been possible if the land were not removed from the Green Belt and the 
base case parkway station developed instead21;  
 The proposals are site specific in that they rely on the development of HS2 and its 
interchange station that will be built in the Green Belt and will address the needs of 
key economic assets that are of crucial significance to the local and regional 
economy; 
 There are no similar opportunities for growth on this scale outside the Green Belt; 
and  
 The land will be bounded by main roads that provide strong defensible Green Belt 
boundaries and minimises the impact on the Meriden Gap.  
 There are therefore exceptional circumstances for releasing Site UK1 UK Central/HS2 95.
defined in this plan from the Green Belt. 
Birmingham Airport 
 The UK Aviation Policy Framework (2013) and the Future of UK Aviation: Making the best 96.
use of existing runways (2018) place a renewed emphasis on making the best use of airport 
runways and airport capacity. The Airport Master Plan (2018) forecasts that passenger 
related air transport movement will grow substantially over the plan period (2018 throughput 
13m passengers/year, 2033 throughput 18m passengers/year). The Master Plan also sets 
out a higher growth scenario for up to 24m passengers/year, and either scenario can be 
delivered off a single runway, in line with Government policy. Forecasts for airport activity 
and its continuing development indicate a strong market for new investment as evidenced by 
the extension to the main runway that was completed in 2014. 
 In order to enable the Airport to meet its aspirations a variety of operational development will 97.
be required as well as ancillary and complementary developments to serve the needs of 
travelling passengers. Appropriate types of development are described in Policy P1. 
 
 As a result of the forecast need for additional aircraft stands within the Plan period, there is 98.
likely to be a need for more land for ancillary facilities as set out in the policy beyond the 
Airport area.  The local plan has been prepared to ensure it can respond to this if, and when, 
                                                           
21 The parkway station is the design in the HS2 Bill, but through a change control process, an alternative design for the 
rail and station infrastructure is being pursued that would allow the wider, none rail related, development to be 
accommodated in line with the visions and strategies set out. 
  
  
  
40 
 necessary.  In the meantimemeantime,  the Council believes it is appropriate that the airport 
should be supported to maximise the capacity and capability of the existing extended 
runway, by accommodating such ancillary facilities within Site UK2. 
National Exhibition Centre 
 The role of the National Exhibition Centre has evolved since opening in 1976. The NEC is 99.
now acknowledged as a venue for major exhibitions, events, tourism and leisure and an 
important driver of the visitor economy. In order for the NEC to remain competitive in a 
market where key competitors are international it will need to respond to changing markets 
and expectation and provide an improved offer. The NEC aspires to maintain its competitive 
position in the market for hosting major events but also intends to widen its product offer to 
encompass a wide range of major leisure and entertainment uses. The NEC aims to fulfil its 
ambitions by: 
 Maximising commercial opportunities of current footfall through enhanced activities to 
increase dwell time at the NEC site; 
 Creating new footfall by introducing new facilities as an attractor to the NEC; 
 Providing a more compelling sense of arrival to the Region; 
 Increasing reputation and brand of the NEC and the Region through partnerships; 
 Providing a site that has appeal across ages, cultures and social types. 
 This will require new investment to refurbish or replace halls, create new floorspace and 100.
meet new challenges in meeting visitor expectations and on site experiences including 
improved visitor management, upgraded choice in its food offer and greater opportunities for 
relaxation and entertainment. 
 The NEC Master Plan (2018) sets out the aspiration for residential and leisure development, 101.
with the potential to accommodate up to 2,500 apartments with ancillary community uses, on 
land released from surface car parking. The Council will support the more efficient use of 
land within the NEC boundary, and the potential for a wider range of uses to complement 
growth at Arden Cross.    
 There is therefore a need for flexibility to enable a broad range of development that will 102.
support operational needs but also a need for ancillary and complementary supporting 
facilities together with provision for sustainable transport and links to employment 
opportunities. 
 Developments at the NEC will play a key part in the place-making role that is expected 103.
across the Hub Area, especially given its position between the Airport and Arden Cross. 
Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) 
 The Council will continue to support the further development and modernisation of the 104.
vehicles plant in order to enable its continued success in the competitive global vehicles 
market. JLR is constrained in terms of its ability to expand by its location within the main 
urban area. To reflect this and having regard to the vital importance of JLR to the region’s 
economy and to job creation, Policy P1 includes proposals to remove land at Damson 
Parkway from the Green Belt to support this aim. In addition to meeting JLR needs, this land 
will provide for local employment opportunities to meet the needs identified in Policy P3, as 
well as for potential ancillary requirements for Birmingham Airport. 
 The land indicated to be removed from the Green Belt includes land on the south eastern 105.
side of Damson Parkway/Old Damson Lane.  Given its location it may be attractive to 
businesses and investments which support the automotive and motorsport industries. Part of  
  
 
 41 
41 this land has also been identified as an option for a relocated Household Waste and 
Recycling Centre and Council Depot. Further justification for this proposal is included in 
Policy P12. 
 The exceptional circumstances to justify this approach are as follows: 106.
 Jaguar Land Rover is a major international business and one of the largest 
employers in the West Midlands, whose continued growth and success are of vital 
importance to the local and regional economy, and to the aspirations in the UK 
Central Masterplan. Failure to provide for future growth and expansion would put the 
Company at a competitive disadvantage with its motor manufacturing rivals and 
jeopardise the significant potential for new employment; 
 The Lode Lane plant is severely constrained by surrounding residential areas, 
Elmdon Park and local nature reserves, and the only realistic option for expansion 
and redevelopment is to the east on Green Belt land; 
 There is no suitable alternative that meets the Company’s need for contiguous growth 
to consolidate a single comprehensive site; 
 The need for sites in close proximity to the Lode Lane plant to provide opportunities 
for key supply chain businesses to locate so as to minimise the potential impact of 
transport delays; 
 A significant part of the site already has planning permission for use as a despatch 
facility and logistics operations centre which was justified with very special 
circumstances; 
 The land performs only moderately in the Solihull Strategic Green Belt Assessment 
(2016); 
 The need for additional employment land to meet local needs as set out in the 
HEDNA (2020), and the lack of suitable alternatives outside the Green Belt; 
 The need for an expanded Household Waste and Recycling Centre (HWRC) as the 
current facility is inadequate to meet current and future needs, as evidenced in the 
Waste Needs Assessment (2018) and the Assessment of land for the potential 
relocation of a HWRC and Depot (2019), and for a replacement Depot to enable the 
delivery of housing at Site SO2;   
 The creation of a logical and defensible boundary to the Green Belt beyond Damson 
Parkway/Old Damson Lane that acknowledges the development that has taken place 
in the area and the area of land taken out of the Green Belt to accommodate the 
gypsy and traveller site22. 
 A concept masterplan will be developed for this allocation, Site UK2. In delivering 107.
development on the site, the Concept Masterplan will need to take into account the Castle 
Hill Meadows Local Wildlife site and other constraints which will affect the developable area.  
Birmingham Business Park 
 Most of the remaining area of the business park and its extension is committed to 108.
development through detailed planning consents. To supplement the land offer of the 
business park and potentially accelerate the delivery of new employment opportunities and 
enable stronger links to North Solihull, especially by public transport, a 9.0 hectare site at the 
south west corner of the business park was allocated in the SLP.  A buffer zone of green 
space was retained between the business park and the residential development along 
                                                           
22 Through the Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocations Plan.   
  
  
42 
 Coleshill Road and Blackfirs Lane. This buffer, together with that existing to the north west of 
the business park, is to be positively managed and enhanced. This would facilitate public 
transport access to the site from North Solihull via a new bus link into the business park from 
Blackfirs Lane that would also link to the National Exhibition Centre. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change  
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Improving water quality and flood risk 
M Maximising the economic and social benefits of the High Speed 2 rail link and 
Interchange 
N Mitigating the impacts of High Speed 2 and the growth associated with the 
Interchange area 
Policy P1A Blythe Valley Business Park  
1. The Council will support and encourage the development of Blythe Valley Business 
Park within its boundary defined in this Local Plan to support its role as a mixed - use 
development , including as a prime employment location (to enhance its important 
role as a high quality, managed business park) and residential community.  
Development that will be supported and encouraged is as follows:  
2. Business development comprising of offices, i ndustrial and warehousing.  The 
Council will expect development to progress in a well - planned way , that will maintain 
the attractiveness of the Business Park to investors and that will protect and enhance 
the environment , including the natural environment.  
3. The Council will also support a broad range of supporting , ancillary or 
complementary uses needed to enhance the attraction of the business park to 
occupiers. These could include hotels, health and fitness, leisure, childcare facilities 
and local facil ities of a scale that does not compete with existing or planned facilities 
outside  of the business park , particularly designated town centres as appropriate . 
4. At Blythe Valley Business Park , the Council will support and encourage the delivery 
of additional  employment floor  space by improving the attractiveness of the park to 
investors through an improved range of amenities, supported by well planned 
residential development that will create an overall sense of place and a more 
sustainable location.   
  
 
 43 
43 5. The Council will expect new facilities, including the residential element of Blythe 
Valley Park, to be developed within the context of a masterplan to demonstrate how 
integration would be achieved between existing and planned facilities , and with the 
network o f villages that lie nearby and that the business park looks outwards as well 
as inwards in terms of connectivity to facilities beyond the business park , and how 
any new facilities could be provided in a way that benefits the wider area including 
nearby com munities.  
Justification 
 Blythe Valley Business Park did not begin to be developed until the late 1990s  and has a 109.
different character to Birmingham Business Park in terms of its architecture and occupiers. It 
has attracted large buildings for corporate occupiers though more recently has catered for 
smaller scale uses whilst retaining its commitment to distinctive high quality design. 
 The Business Park has an area of land of some 27ha remaining to be developed. The  110.
Business Park has aspirations to increase vitality and provide a greater sense of place by 
broadening the business use offer and enabling a range of supporting facilities that will help 
to make the business park attractive to investors and occupiers and making the business 
park more sustainable.  
 This was recognised in the SLP whichSLP, which  included a substantial residential allocation 111.
at the park that was expected to deliver some 600 dwellings.  This was intended to help to 
reinvigorate the park by helping to support a broader range of on-site facilities, supporting 
the vitality of the park and accelerating job delivery. It would also provide the opportunity to 
develop a real sense of place and improved public transport facilities to villages in the area, 
better links to the main urban area of Solihull, improved pedestrian and cycle links and 
increased accessibility for local communities.  Through the efficient use of land the Council 
will expect employment development to be brought forward sufficient to reflect the primary 
purpose of the site as a business park. 
 To pursue the SLP allocation a vision document was prepared by the then new site owners 112.
(IM Properties) and submitted to the Council in 2015.  This was endorsed by the Council as 
a vision shared by the authority for the future development of the park.  Planning permission 
was then granted in July 2018 for up to 750 dwellings, 98,950sqm of BI/B2/B8, up to 250 
housing care facility, plus ancillary town centre/leisure/hotel facilities.   Subsequent reserved 
matters approvals have been granted and development is under construction. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change  
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
J Improving health and well being 
Policy P2 Maintain Strong, Competi tive Town Centres  
Solihull Town Centre    
  
  
44 
 1. Solihull Town Centre will be developed and sustained as a place of quality and 
distinction. It will provide the civic heart of the Borough and the principal focus of 
commercial activity and public transport. It will be shaped and managed to ensure 
continued economic growth and success. The extent of Solihull Town Centre is 
defined on the P olicies  Map.  
2. The character and quality of the town will be protected and enhanced through the 
promotion and careful control  of new development.  
3. The town centre masterplan establishes a number of principles:  
  i. The desire to diversify Solihull Town Centre through the introduction of new 
   commercial and residential uses to attract more people throughout the day 
   and to meet the changing demands of town centres. To create a broader  
   mixture of land uses, across different areas of the town centre, which blend 
   together and create a positive and distinct identity , whilst ensuring that the 
   existing character o f Solihull is preserved and strengthened.  
  ii. The desire to strengthen connectivity by providing improved routes for  
   pedestrians, cyclists and public transport that are high quality, legible and  
   safe. This includes the need to strengthen the ‘“place” ’ element of the 
transport    network in Solihull town centre , including those areas where 
the needs of     pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users are to 
be prioritised.  
  iii. The need to develop a multi -modal Integrated Transport Hub at th e site of the 
   current train station in Solihull. The new Integrated Hub will provide  
   accessible, modern facilities which can accommodate forecast ed growth in 
    passenger numbers, and enable effective integration with public 
transport,    and investments in walking, cycling, key highway s junctions 
and SPRINT.     The new integrated transport hub should create a 
strong sense of  arrival and    place, and enable commercial, leisure and 
residential development in the     Town Centre to come forward.  
  iv. The need to ensure that the provision of parking in the town centre meets the 
   needs of retailers and businesses, whilst not acting as a constraint to  
   development or mod ale shift.  
  v. The need to mark the town’s gateways through the creation of unique  
   landmark buildings, and to create well designed street s with attractive , active 
   frontages , which encourage vibrant and active street life , and create  
   characterful and well defined spaces and routes.  
  vi. The value of good urban design an d green infrastructure for the town centre, 
   and the importance of creating a legible, distinctive, flexible, attractive, safe 
and    and  inclusive public realm throughout the town centre.  
  vii. Opportunity sites which might accommodate significant add itional growth and 
   improvements to the connectivity of the town centre.  
4. Development proposals that fulfil the principles listed above will be supported.  
5. All new development will be expected to make a reasonable and proportionate 
contribution to t he cost of providing and maintaining necessary town centre  
  
 
 45 
45 infrastructure, including walking and cycling access, public transport, the public 
realm , and on key highway links and& junctions within , and&  serving , the town 
centre.  
6. Demand for , and provision of , public and private parking will be considered within the 
context of a parking strategy , which sets out the requirements for parking provision in 
the town centre.  
7. A range of opportunity sites will be identified under this policy.  
Shirley Town Centre  
8. Shirley Town Centre will be developed and sustained as a focus of commercial 
activity and&  services for the local community. It will be shaped and managed to 
secure its regeneration and economic success ,; whilst recognising the need to cr eate 
an environment that will also be attractive to residential uses.  
9. The extent of Shirley Town Centre is defined on the P olicies  Map. The boundary 
focuses commercial activity south of the junction between Stratford Road and 
Haslucks Green Road , and in developments  west of Stratford Road.  
10. Retail activity will be focused within the town centre boundary and will be required to f
front onto Stratford Road or the public  realm between Stratford Road and the Park. 
No substantial retail development will be granted planning permission elsewhere 
within the centre.  
11. All new development should be sensitive to local character and enhance the public 
realm.  
12. Where appropriat e, the opportunity shall be taken to promote public realm 
improvements, which shall be undertaken in a coordinated manner.  
Chelmsley Wood Town Centre  
13. Chelmsley Wood Town Centre will be developed and sustained as a focus of 
commercial activity, services  and public transport. It will be shaped and managed to 
secure its regeneration and economic growth , and to provide a focus for the local 
community and an identity of which it can be proud.  
14. The extent of the Town Centre is defined on the P olicies  Map a nd retail activity will 
be focused within it.  
15. New development on the edge of the Town Centre will be encouraged to assist 
regeneration of both the Town Centre and the wider area of North Solihull , to ensure 
its long term long-term sustainability. New de velopment will encourage a diverse 
range of uses to better meet local needs and adapt to changing retail markets. It will 
also be encouraged to better link the Town Centre to Meriden Park and Cole Valley; 
and enhance the public realm in , and around , the ce ntre.  
Main Town Centre Uses Elsewhere  
16. The Plan seeks to ensure the vitality of its town centres as the heart of their 
communities. Proposals for main town centre uses will be expected to locate in 
Solihull Town Centre and/or Shirley and Chelmsley Wood  town centres. Proposals   
  
  
46 
 for main town centre uses elsewhere, that do not accord with the policies and 
proposals of this local plan, will be considered in the light of the requirements of the 
National Planning Policy Framework.  This will have full regard t o sequential 
assessments and impact assessments as appropriate.  
Justification  
Solihull Town Centre 
 Solihull Town Centre is strategically important in the West Midlands and the principal focus 113.
of community, civic and business activity in the Borough. It is of crucial importance to the 
economic and social wellbeing of Solihull and to the achievement of a sustainable pattern of 
development. 
 The National Planning Policy Framework promotes the vitality and viability of town centres 114.
as important locations for sustainable economic growth and in creating sustainable patterns 
of development that enables ease of access by a variety of transport modes, particularly 
public transport. It also recognises the important role that residential development has in 
supporting the vitality of centres.  
 The existing Land Use Plan shows how the town centre is predominantly arranged around 115.
large single use areas. Future development should deliver complementary mixed land uses, 
which can deliver multiple benefits including greater promotion of walking and cycling, 
enhanced vitality and development of an area’s unique identity. 
 In order to strengthen the role of the centre and enhance its appearance, it is important to 116.
make appropriate planned provision for development needs over the period of the Local 
Plan, building on opportunities to improve access, the public realm and the range and quality 
of services that it offers so that it will be sustained as a place of quality and distinction. 
 Residential - The introduction of new residential uses in the heart of the town centre 
will support existing commercial and leisure uses, whilst also providing additional 
activity and vibrancy outside normal shopping and working hours.  
 Retail – In order to maintain the current success of the High Street, there is a need to 
keep the retail circuit contained, and therefore an opportunity site should only be 
developed as retail, leisure, food and beverage if the site has a quality that can 
present something unique to the town centre and relates well to the circuit.  Primary 
retail frontages where retailing activity will be expected to be the main street level use 
are largely in line with the current extent of the town centre:  
 High Street No’s 1-161 and 12-134  
 Poplar Way, Mill Lane and Drury Lane 10-58 and 5- 45 
 Warwick Road No 700 
 Mell Square and Touchwood. 
 Office – Opportunity sites have been identified which intensify the provision of office 
accommodation around Homer Road and Princes Way, which have excellent access to 
the town centre amenities and the train station, such accessibility being increasingly 
important to corporate occupiers. 
 Evening Econom y – in order to complement and support the residential and office offer, 
and to ensure active usage of the town centre across the day and night, the uses that 
support the evening economy should be sought in particularly in the Heart of Solihull 
area. Uses such as arts, culture, independent cinema, pop up events, live music, and 
competitive socialising (such as bowling, escape rooms, crazy golf) should be  
  
 
 47 
47 accommodated, and where appropriate these can also assist attracting visitors to the 
town during the day.  
 In 2016 SMBC commissioned the development of a Town Centre Masterplan which would 117.
provide a blueprint for future investment and development which maximises the opportunities 
for Solihull Town Centre, and capitalises on its existing assets and sets out a clear vision for 
Solihull as ‘a thriving, premier town centre and a vibrant destination at the forefront of 
visionary design, sustainability and innovation.   
 The masterplan has been informed by the findings and proposals of a number of previou s 118.
and concurrently run studies. 
 The evidence base that supports the masterplan has been informed by discussions and 119.
engagement with a wide range of town centre stakeholders through one on one, and group 
workshop sessions. The proposals of the draft masterplan were presented for public 
consultation during August and September 2016, and the responses helped inform the 
development of the final preferred masterplan. 
 The masterplan is in the process of being updated and is expected to be published by the 120.
end of the year.  The update is intended to reflect a number of things: changes to proposed 
or actual development on a number of sites including the former Magistrates Court, 
Monkspath Hall Road, Touchwood II and Eastgate;, the location of the train station; progress 
on the Climate Change Prospectus; transport and movement strategy and plans; and current 
market advice and economic performance of the town centre. 
 The Masterplan has helped shape the proposals of the town centre policy. The centre is 121.
contained within clearly defined boundaries, the Chiltern railway and Prince’s Way to the 
south-west, Blossomfield Road, Lode Lane to the north-west, Warwick Road to the north, 
New Road and Churchill Road to the east.  
 Near the centre, to the west, is Solihull railway station and to the south and east Tudor 122.
Grange and Malvern Parks respectively. The High street is an important principal pedestrian 
route through the centre providing pedestrian links to the modern Touchwood shopping mall 
on the south side and to the older Mell Square precinct to the North. It also links the Poplar 
Road bus interchange area in the direction of the railway station with St Alphege Church and 
the attractive historic core along the High Street. 
 The Town Centre is an appropriate location for a broad range of town centre uses including 123.
retail, leisure and entertainment facilities, appropriate sport and recreation uses, offices, arts, 
culture and tourism and residential. It is important that opportunities for development improve 
the centre, adding to vitality and vibrancy and to diversify the centre beyond traditional retail 
uses, whilst retaining or enhancing important characteristics.  
 High quality urban design will therefore be expected to ensure that development will protect 124.
the character of the Centre’s historic heritage, improve public realm and improve pedestrian 
movement around the centre, for example, to improve links to the Centre’s parks and provide 
improved articulation between Touchwood and nearby open spaces and improve the 
pedestrian link between Mell Square and the Warwick Road Morrison’s store which has poor 
public realm. Design principles that developers will be expected to follow are identified in the 
policy.   
 The timing of development will maintain a balance of activity throughout the centre over the 125.
Plan period and to ensure continued success either side of the High Street and to fit with 
provision of new infrastructure, including public transport improvements and traffic 
management measures. The area to the south of the High Street has been the focus of 
activity in more recent times, with the development of Touchwood, Waitrose store and the 
recently opened Aldi store. HoweverHowever,  parts of the Centre are becoming outdated in   
  
  
48 
 appearance and would benefit from new development to modernise it and increase its 
attraction as a destination.  
 The Illustrative Town Centre Masterplan highlights a number of opportunity sites where 126.
development has the potential to come forward within the period of the local plan and 
beyond. The sites represent the opportunity to improve the attractiveness of the Centre as a 
place of quality and distinction reflecting strong urban design principles.  
 The 2016 Masterplan was used to inform the Draft Local Plan (2016) which indicated that 127.
new development in the town centre could deliver: 
 Up to 11,700 sq m of commercial and leisure development 
 Up to 74,620 sq m of new office development 
 1,400 new homes in the town centre, with potential for over 100 additional homes on 
land near the train station. 
 The Draft Local Plan then went on to identify which of the 1,500 new homes could 128.
reasonably be expected to be delivered in the plan period, and by identifying particular 
opportunity sites concluded that 861 homes would be deliverable in the plan period .,  
 The emerging masterplan revision is expected to include a schedule of updated opportunity 129.
sites which will be informed by a market review carried out in 2016 by Cushman and 
Wakefield, and by subsequent economic appraisal and market analysis undertaken in 2020 
by Amion.  This is indicating: 
 There is latent demand for office space in the town centre, especially for ‘headquarter 
style’ offices characterised by large floorplates which efficiently serve the operational 
requirements of the occupier 
 There is continued market interest in apartment buildings with well-located 
apartments comfortably achieving values , which would make the provision of one 
floor of basement parking viable, which has the potential to impact on achievable 
development densities. 
 The retail function of the town centre should be strengthened through the introduction 
and addition of complementary town centre uses in appropriate places with new 
office and residential development playing an important role in increasing visits and 
use of the town centre as a whole.  
 The emerging work is indicating that the level of residential development that can be 130.
accommodated in the town centre is expected to at least match that assumed in the Draft 
Local Plan, if not exceed it.  For the purposes of the land supply in this plan, the same figure 
used in 2016 will be used.  When the revised masterplan has been approved, the opportunity 
will be taken to update the land supply at that time. 
 The level and type of development that will be identified for each site will be developed as an 131.
urban design response in the first instance, and then tested through an iterative review 
whichreview, which  considered the capacity, deliverability and viability of each site. The 
emerging evidence base for the revised masterplan is indicating  that in broad terms the 
sites being considered could support the level of residential development indicated in mixed 
and standalone developments, and that there would be capacity for the retail and office 
development.  
  
 
 49 
49  A diverse evening 132.
economy can help shape 
the attraction of the Town 
Centre as a place that is 
vibrant and inclusive. The 
Council will encourage, 
through the development 
management process, a 
broad age spectrum of 
residents into the centre to 
enjoy a wide variety of 
leisure and entertainment 
facilities. 
 The scale of the 133.
changes envisaged for 
Solihull Town Centre will 
inevitably take some time to realise and will be realised gradually throughout the life of the 
plan, and beyond. The timescales within which the opportunity sites are delivered will be 
influenced by a range of factors, including land ownership, predicted longevity of existing 
uses and market conditions. Sites already in public ownership or currently being considered 
for development are likely to come forward in the short term, and will need to be supported 
by upgrades to the public realm and connectivity. This will help to create a setting for 
investment in large scale developments in the medium to long term, on sites outside public 
ownership or with more complex land assembly requirements.  There is also the opportunity 
to bring forward developments in support of Policy P9 (Mitigating and Adapting to Climate 
Change), particularly through district energy and/or heat networks. 
Shirley Town Centre  
 Shirley Town Centre is the Borough’s second largest shopping centre and an important 134.
centre for commercial activity and services to a broad local catchment. The Centre faces 
competition from nearby out of centre retailing in the A34 corridor and from increased offer in 
Solihull Town Centre. It is a long, linear centre arranged either side of the A34, with a 
number of foodstores anchoring mini-clusters. It has a variety of convenience and 
comparison goods retailers and continues to maintain its vitality and viability.  
 The Centre lacked a substantial retail core that will help to provide a ‘heart’ for the Centre 135.
that could strengthen its competitive position. To remedy this weakness a mixed use scheme 
(known as Parkgate) anchored by a food-based superstore, and including a variety of 
comparison retail units designed to meet modern retailer requirements and residential 
accommodation, was developed and is now trading. The scheme also improves links to 
Shirley Park as an important local amenity that improves the attractiveness of the Centre to 
shoppers.  
 Nationally, the traditional high street faces numerous strategic challenges, including the 136.
growth of on-line retailing in particular and post COVID home working. Consequently, there 
is a need for town centres to reinvent themselves as places to visit, with attractive public 
realm, open spaces and core retail offer supported by a mix of civic and leisure facilities.. An 
Economic Plan for Shirley is being refreshed, supported by the Greater Birmingham and 
Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership to support the economic development and recovery of 
the centre. . This includes considerations of future investment in Shirley ,, and plans to 
maximise the centre as a ‘destination’ to support a buoyant day and night time economy.    
 Additionally, a project to address improvements to connectivity, accessibility and congestion 137.
is being undertaken as part of the UK Central development programme, assessing the A34 
corridor as a key transport route.  
  
  
  
50 
  The A34 Stratford Road is a strategic and busy radial route linking the M42 via Shirley to 138.
Birmingham with access points to Solihull town centre and Blythe Valley Business Park. The 
route is included in the West Midlands Key Route Network (KRN) and DfT’s Major Road 
Network (MRN). It currently experiences significant congestion at some locations 
whichlocations, which  is likely to be exacerbated as a result of future development.  
 The key objectives for the project are: 139.
 Improve journey reliability through improved public transport and active travel 
infrastructure and smarter choices engagement. 
 Addressing safety for all users including improved facilities for pedestrians and 
cyclists and addressing accident hotspots. 
 Improve conditions for pedestrians including tackling severance and improving the 
public realm through community engagement. 
 Support economic recovery by improving the efficiency of the highway network 
through a range of interventions and technology improvements. 
Chelmsley Wood Town Centre 
 Chelmsley Wood Town Centre is the main centre for North Solihull and is an important 140.
centre of commercial activity and services and for its public transport accessibility. The main 
part is a purpose built precinct that opened in 1971 to serve the Birmingham overspill estates 
that are now part of North Solihull. The performance of the Centre deteriorated between 
1998 and 2006 but then improved following increased investment in and management of the 
Centre. The Centre is anchored by a recently constructed food-based superstore that is part 
of other improvements that have included a new library, housing/social services offices, bus 
interchange and public realm improvements. Further limited comparison retail development 
is also included. New development can bring opportunities to strengthen the role of the 
Centre in serving the community by improving links to North Solihull and to nearby open 
spaces; and emerging work indicates opportunity for the town centre to accommodate 
residential development and an assumption is made that at least 100 dwellings will be 
delivered in the plan period. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change  
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
Policy P3 Provision of Land for General Business and Premises  
1. To encourage sustainable economic growth and provide a broad range of 
employment opportunities , the Council will plan for a continuing supply of 
employment land.  The table below  identifies the strategic sites that comprise the 
Council’s supply of main employment land for this purpose, adopting a plan , monitor  
  
 
 51 
51 and manage approach to avoid over allocating land that may lead to unnecessary 
loss of Green Belt.  
2. The Council will sup port the allocated sites for purposes set out in the table.  Small -
scale supporting facilities may be allowed where needed to specifically enhance or 
complement business use in the particular business locality and are compatible with 
sustainable developmen t principles.  
3. To ensure that an adequate supply of land remains available for employment 
purposes, sites will be protected for their allocated purposes.  Non -allocated 
employment sites will also be protected for employment use ((offices, industrial and 
warehousing)  and, where appropriate, waste management).  Alternative uses may be 
allowed where the following criteria are met:  
  i. The site is relatively isolated from other business premises or is out of place 
   in the context of other neighbouring uses , such as residential; or  
  ii. It is clearly demonstrated that there is no longer a need to retain the site for 
   its intended business class purpose; or  
  iii. In the case of vacant premises, there is no longer a reasonable prospect of 
   attracting bus iness development in market terms;  
  iv. The alternative use will support sustainable development principles and will 
   directly support employment locally;   
  v. There is no conflict with other policies of the Local Plan or National Planning 
   Policy.   
4. The Council will encourage the retention of small and medium sized enterprises, and 
the creation of new ones, both in urban and rural areas as a key economic driver and 
to help facilitate growth in a broad variety of locations, including North Solihul l as a 
priority, subject to the following criteria:  
  i. Form, use and scale are appropriate to the character of the particular  
   location.  
  ii. There is no significant harm to the local environment, including landscape 
   quality and character.  
  iii. Proposals for home -working are compatible with the character of the local 
   environment and are consistent with the amenity policies of the Local Plan 
   and any made Neighbourhood Plan . 
  iv. The land or premises are not in the Green Belt , or are compliant with Green 
   Belt policy.  
  v. In the case of development in rural areas, it is consistent with the Council’s 
   countryside policies and those in any made Neighbourhood Plan , and does 
   not undermine the quality and character of the na tural environment.  
5. The Council will expect development proposals on business sites to include the 
necessary infrastructure to accommodate high capacity digital communication.    
  
  
52 
 6. In order to encourage sustainable access to business developments and reduc e the 
need to travel, applicants for planning permission for business use will be expected 
to demonstrate the anticipated level of employment that will be generated and how 
this will be of benefit to meet local employment needs.  
7. Employment development w ill not be allowed where it : 
  i. sSterilises natural resources or key sites needed to secure sustainable  
   development, particularly in regard to provision for distributed heat and  
   energy networks , or 
  ii. Where it would have an unacceptable impact  on the amenity of neighbouring 
   uses by way of noise, odour, vibration or significant visual intrusion.  
   
  
 
 53 
53 Justification 
 The Borough is home to a number of business sites of more local significance of varying age 141.
and quality.  These are important for local employment opportunities to provide a broad 
range of business accommodation in terms of type and size and a number of them have land 
that remains to be developed. Other older, non-allocated sites, such as Cranmore Industrial 
Estate, Boulton Road and Elmdon Trading Estate, provide some further opportunities 
through redevelopment of older outmoded premises. 
 Evidence in the Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 2020 indicates 142.
that there is a need for around 147,000 sq m of employment floorspace to meet local needs 
for the Plan period to 2036.  For offices existing supply including vacancies balances the 
need, but for industrial use and warehousing there is a shortfall of around 26,300 square 
metres (thus requiring between 5.2 ha – 6.6 ha of land23).          
 The table below includes existing allocations to be carried forward from the SLP and New 143.
allocation.   Although these new allocations have already been identified under  Policy P1, 
they are included here for completeness. 
Site Available 
Allocated Area  
(ha24) Readily 
Available 
Allocated Area  
(ha) Preferred Use 
Classes25 
Existing Allocations  
Blythe Valley Park Between 59,000 
and 99,000 sq 
m26 2.0 B1, B2 & B8  
Fore, Stratford Road (adj M42)  2.0 2.0 B1 
Chep/Higginson, Bickenhill 
Lane, Bickenhill  4.0 0 B1, B2, B8  
Land north of Clock 
Interchange, Coventry Road  2.0 1.0 B1 
Birmingham Business Park  2.4 2.4 B1, B2 & B8  
New Allocations  
Land at HS2 Interchange 
(UK1)  c140   See Policy P1 & 
UK1 
Land at Damson Parkway 
(UK2)  C94  See Policy P1 & 
UK2 
 Allocated provision comprises land remaining to be developed on existing employment 144.
sites. The evidence base supports the approach of using existing allocations with a broad 
                                                           
23 Using a floorspace to land ratio of 0.4 to 0.5.  
24 Unless indicated otherwise 
25 As set out in the Solihull Local Plan which predated the changes to the Use Classes Order 
26 From current planning permission as part of the mixed use scheme.   
  
  
54 
 range of employment uses where possible so that there is less reliance on the B1 use 
class. This is supported by market trends that show a preference for town centres as office 
locations. 
 The above table also includes two allocations (Sites UK1 and UK2) which will necessitate 145.
land to be removed from the Green Belt.  The justification for Policy P1 provides the 
exceptional circumstances for this approach. Whilst Site UK2 is partly intended to provide for 
JLR needs, much of this has already been committed in the form of the despatch area and 
logistics operations centre, approved under very special circumstances. The emerging 
concept masterplan shows a number of phases remaining for development, which can meet 
wider local employment needs, the need for a replacement Household Waste and Recycling 
Centre and Depot, as well as providing for any remaining JLR or Airport needs. This will 
provide flexibility in the provision of land to meet employment needs, avoid the necessity to 
allocate further Green Belt for development, and will be subject to the plan-monitor-manage 
approach. Evidence indicates that Site UK1 is likely to have a role to play in meeting local 
employment needs, especially later in the Plan period. 
 
 In addition to the allocated employment sites, Solihull has a number of employment sites 146.
where opportunities to recycle employment land may come forward. For example, 
substantial recycling of land has already occurred in older premises at Cranmore Industrial 
Estate, Shirley to create new offices and modern industrial/warehouse units and similar 
opportunities may come forward elsewhere, such as within Elmdon Trading Estate (near the 
Airport). 
 For the purposes of the Local Plan employment uses are business class uses and 147.
appropriate waste management facilities. Planning applications for waste management 
facilities will be considered in the context of effects on local environment and amenity both 
 
  
 
 55 
55 within the employment site and its broader surroundings and the nature of waste 
management operation, for example, the extent that it takes place within the confines of a 
building, the amenity and traffic or transport effects on the road network and effects on 
pollution. 
 Solihull does  not have substantial amounts of previously developed land that would be 148.
suitable or available for employment purposes. It is therefore important to protect the limited 
supply of employment land and premises from alternative uses, including types of 
economic development that would be more appropriate in a town centre environment. 
 The policy sets out the particular circumstances when alternative development may be 149.
accepted. These include, for example, small isolated premises in predominantly residential 
surroundings that render the premises out of context and better able to support sustainable 
development principles in an alternative use. 
 Mixed business uses may be enabled on employment sites where this will help to support 150.
sustainable development principles. Business class uses should predominate. Other uses 
of an ancillary nature may be enabled provided they are small scale in the context of the 
mixed use development and justified in terms of supporting the business function of the 
mixed use development and do not conflict with National Planning Policy, particularly in 
regard to its aims of supporting sustainable economic development and growth and 
supporting town centres.  
 Small and medium sized enterprises will be encouraged in all areas of the Borough, 151.
including rural areas, North Solihull and within established business sites, through 
redevelopment and creation of other opportunities for the development of small business 
space, provided they meet the criteria in the Policy that seek to protect the environment, 
local amenity and the Green Belt. 
 Digital connectivity and high capacity communication networks are key to commercial  152.
success in the 21st Century. Solihull is committed to increasing digital capacity across the 
Borough to help in remaining competitive, attracting inward investment, reducing  
inequalities and remaining a leading centre of enterprise. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change  
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
    
  
  
56 
 Providing Homes for All  
Introduction 
 Good housing is essential for social, environmental and economic wellbeing. A broad range 153.
of housing of different types, sizes, values and tenures are required to meet needs , and 
create and maintain mixed and balanced communities. A well-functioning housing market is 
essential for Solihull to meet its full potential as an area which is a good place to live and for 
its future economic success.   
 Solihull provides some of the best housing in the West Midlands, with values consistently 154.
above the regional average. It is a strong attractor of households, given its location, 
connectivity, local environment, excellent schools and the strength of the local economy and 
employment opportunities.  
 More housing is needed because of population and household growth. Population is 155.
projected to increase by around 23,369 from 217,047 in 2020 to 240,417 in 2036, an 
increase of 10.8% . The number of households is projected to increase by 13.8% over the 
period 20 20 to 2036 from 91,059 to 103,595. 
 Meeting housing need does not just mean building additional housing. It is important that the 156.
right type of housing is delivered.  
 65% of household growth in the period to 2036 is projected to be households aged 65 and 157.
over and single households. It is projected that by 2036 46% of all households will be single 
people or couples aged 65 and over. 
 Affordable housing need is exceptionally high as Solihull has one of the most severe 158.
affordability problems in the West Midlands Region. Mean and median house prices in 
Solihull are significantly higher in comparison to regional and national figures. Solihull’s 
median price of £275,000 is £85,000 higher than the West Midlands region. Median house 
prices in Solihull stand at 8.42 times the median earnings of those working in the Borough. 
The shortage of affordable housing is particularly acute in the Mature Suburbs and Rural 
areas of the Borough. 
 There is therefore a need for more market and affordable housing, and also for more 159.
specialist and supported housing. There is a need for more housing that  can provide 
opportunities for households to ‘downsize’, thereby releasing family housing for resale and 
re-letting. 
 There is a Borough wide shortage of homes which are affordable. The local Borough need is 160.
for both smaller and family-sized affordable rented housing and intermediate tenure homes. 
There is also a need for more smaller and lower cost market housing.  It is important that 
housing of the right type is delivered to meet these needs and the Council will seek to 
achieve this through use of a range of approaches, including advice to developers through 
the ‘Meeting Housing Needs’ Supplementary Planning Document and how it brings forward 
and disposes of its own land. 
 The provision of new homes must therefore address the needs of all types of household, 161.
including families, single people, older and disabled people and those who want to build their 
own home. New homes should be affordable by those who are seeking a first home and 
those who wish to move home. There must be increased provision of affordable housing 
both for rent and intermediate tenure to meet the growing needs of households which cannot 
afford market housing. 
 The Council aims to ensure that everyone has the opportunity of access to a decent and 162.
safe home within a quality living environment, by:  
  
 
 57 
57  identifying deliverable housing land supply for fifteen years from the date the Plan will 
be adopted and ensuring that at least a five-year supply of housing land is available 
for development; 
 prioritising locations for development that will best contribute to building well 
connected sustainable and  balanced communities; 
 ensuring the provision of an appropriate mix, type and tenure of housing on sites in a 
range of locations which meet the needs of all Solihull’s residents, particularly needs 
for social rented  housing, affordable home ownership, and housing for older and 
disabled people, on a Borough wide basis; 
 promoting opportunities for self and custom build.  
Policy P4 – Meeting Housing Needs  
 This policy is set out in 5 parts: 163.
 P4A – Affordable Housing 
 P4B – Rural Exceptions 
 P4C – Market Housing 
 P4D – Self Build and Custom Housing 
 P4E – Housing for Older and Disabled People 
Policy P4 A Meeting Housing Needs  – Affordable Housing  
1. The Council will require developers of allocated and windfall sites to make a 
contribution to affordable housing on residential sites of major development, where 
10 or more homes will be provided, or the site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more to 
meet the  housing needs of the Borough.  Affordable housing includes social rented, 
affordable rented, intermediate tenure and Starter Homes, which is available at below 
market price or rent , and which is affordable to households whose needs are not met 
by the mark et. 
2. The Borough definition of ‘affordable’ will be informed by work with the WMCA and 
build upon the definitions in national guidance. It will be set out in a Meeting Housing 
Needs Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) , which will be updated periodicall y 
to ensure it remains up  –to- date and can respond to the introduction of new tenures 
quickly and effectively if required .  
3. Contributions will be expected to be made in the form of 40% affordable dwelling 
units on all development sites that meet the th reshold, but will take into account:  
  i. Site size;   
  ii. Accessibility to local services and facilities and access to public transport;   
  iii. The economics of provision, including particular costs that may threaten the 
   viability of the site;   
  iv. Whether the provision of affordable housing would prejudice the realisation of 
   other planning objectives that need to be given priority in the development of 
   the site;     
  
  
58 
   v. The need to secure a range of house types and sizes in the locality in help ing 
   to achieve socially balanced and mixed communities; and  
  vi. Vacant Building Credit . 
4. Where on -site provision is not feasible or viable there will be a financial contribution 
towards the provision of affordable housing that would not otherwise be  provided, 
elsewhere within the Borough.  The approach to calculating commuted sums is set 
out in the ‘Meeting Housing Needs’ Supplementary Planning Document.   
5. The extent of affordable housing that should be provided in relation to developments 
that eit her re- use existing buildings or include the demolition of existing buildings will 
be assessed according to the 'vacant building credit'.  The approach to calculating 
the vacant building credit is set out in the ‘Meeting Housing Needs’ Supplementary 
Planni ng Document.  
6. On-site provision and off - site contributions should be calculated based on a tenure 
split of 65% social rent , with 35% prov ided as shared ownership.  
7. The social rented should be provided as follows, but will take into account site 
circumstances:  
 i. 30% one bedroom maisonettes/apartments (2 person home)  
  ii. 35% two bedroom houses (4 person home)  
  iii. 25% three bedroom houses (5 person home)  
  iv. 10% four bedroom houses (6 person home)  
8. The shared ownership should be provide d as follows, but will take into account site 
circumstances:  
 i. 15% one bedroom maisonettes/apartments  
 ii. 40% two bedroom houses/apartments  
  iii. 40% three bedroom houses  
  iv. 5% four bedroom houses  
9. Specific site s circumstances are defined as town  centre development, which may 
result in a different mix of type and size being delivered.  
10. The availability of a rented home at time of need and that meets a household’s size 
mean that social rent is most needed to meet homeless and housing needs in a 
timely way.  Affordable rent will only be supported if the rent is provided at target rent.  
11. Where the economics of provision of affordable housing, including particular costs 
that may threaten the viability of the site, the applicant is required to sub mit a viability 
assessment at the time of planning application submission.  The Council will instruct 
a qualified valuer to examine the submitted viability assessment.  The cost of the 
Council’s qualified valuer will be met by the applicant.   
  
 
 59 
59 12. The mechanisms and criteria for the delivery of Policy P4 A will be set out in the 
Meeting Housing Needs Supplementary Planning Document.  
13. Further detail and guidance for delivery of Policy P4 A will be set out in the Meeting 
Housing Needs Supplementary Planning D ocument  
Justification 
 The requirement for the provision of affordable housing is justified on the basis that Solihull 164.
has a high level of unmet housing need, as evidenced in the Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA). This is supported by official data produced by 
MHCLG and local Borough wide data on housing need.  
 The HEDNA identified a need for 57827 affordable homes per annum. The scale of need 165.
means that the Council is justified in seeking to secure as much affordable housing as 
viability allows.   
 The consequences of unmet housing need are significant. These can include homelessness, 166.
households in temporary or unsuitable accommodation for longer periods of time and 
overcrowding .  Insufficient affordable housing will also act as an impediment to economic 
growth where companies experience problems in workforce recruitment and retention. 
 The level of need for affordable housing is therefore high in relation to the level of new 167.
provision.  Provision of affordable homes is however limited by the proportion of 
development that takes place, and will continue to take place, on sites below the national 
affordable housing threshold. The site size threshold below which there is no requirement to 
provide affordable housing will result in many sites which could reasonably have provided 
affordable homes being fully developed only with market housing. 
 The affordable housing threshold adopted in the 2013 Solihull Local Plan was 0.2 hectares 168.
or 3 or more net dwellings. This threshold did not discourage development of small sites or 
the replacement of individual homes at the end of their lifespan, and the Council considered 
that it was appropriate to Solihull’s local circumstances 
 The new threshold is dictated by changes to National Planning Policy Guidance and is 169.
consistent with this. Setting the threshold of major development, where 10 or more homes 
will be provided, or the site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more to meet the housing needs 
of the Borough, is justified on the basis that housing developments at and above this level 
should contribute to meeting the need for affordable housing. 
 Since the adoption of a 40% affordable housing target (Policy H4 in the Solihull UDP, 170.
February 2006 and Policy P4 in the Solihull Local Plan, December 2013), a wide range of 
privately led residential developments have made provision at this level. The implementation 
of the policy has had due regard to the suitability of each site and its capacity to provide 
affordable homes. The Authority Monitoring Report highlights the delivery and contribution 
this policy makes towards meeting the borough’s affordable housing need.  It is therefore 
considered appropriate to the Borough’s local circumstances. 
 Policy 4A is set on a Borough wide basis. This reflects the fact that needs cannot always be 171.
met where they arise, so use has to be made of the development opportunities that become 
available. Therefore any development may need to provide for needs arising in another part 
of the Borough. The only exception to this may be on rural ‘exceptions’ sites where housing 
may be reserved for those with a local connection. 
                                                           
27 This reduces to 224 if households already in accommodation are excluded.   
  
  
60 
  The policy applies to all development in the ‘C3’ use class.  The policy will also apply to ‘C2’ 172.
development that provides individual self-contained units that can be counted as part of the 
Borough’s overall housing supply. 
 The Council recognises that provision of affordable housing will result in a cost to developers 173.
and so the implementation of this policy requires a reasonable and flexible approach, 
reflecting individual site characteristics. Where there are factors that could threaten the 
viability of developments as a result of site specific constraints or circumstances these will be 
considered in negotiations. However, the overall target is that 40% of all new housing built in 
the Borough will be affordable housing. 
 Consultation responses to the 2016 Draft Local Plan supported this policy approach. The 174.
Council is justified in adopting its definition of affordability because it provides clear guidance 
to developers on what is required. The definition will be based on Borough data on incomes 
and house prices, subject to monitoring and review. 
 The Council is justified in defining the tenure of ‘affordable’ homes on the basis that a spread 175.
of tenure options is required to satisfy needs and aspirations of households.  
 Most households in housing need are only able to afford to rent below market level, so the 176.
provision of homes at social rent or affordable rent is the most important aspect of affordable 
housing provision. In view of the greater cost to land value of rented provision, the ability to 
require a proportion of any affordable provision to be for rent is essential. The objective will 
be to maximise housing provision for those in most need whilst producing balanced 
communities and to secure a level and mix of provision which is viable and practicable to the 
developer. 
 The Council also wishes to promote affordable routes to home ownership. This will mainly be 177.
for shared ownership but will include discounted market products as may be required by 
legislation and planning guidance at the time of determination. The policy therefore provides 
a range of affordable housing provision. 
 National Planning Policy Framework defines Entry Level Exception sites as sites that are 178.
suitable for first time buyers (or those looking to rent their first home).  The Council will 
support these in accordance with the latest National Planning Policy Framework and 
Planning Policy Guidance at the time of decision making. 
 National Planning Policy Framework defines Build to Rent as purpose built housing that is 179.
typically 100% rented out. Schemes typically offer longer tenancy agreements of three years 
or more, and will typically be professionally managed stock in single ownership and 
management contro l. The Council will support these in accordance with the latest National 
Planning Policy Framework and Planning Policy Guidance at the time of decision making. 
 The Council is justified in requiring the on-site provision of affordable housing wherever 180.
feasible in order to maximise the provision of affordable homes on sites of all values. It is 
recognised that the provision of affordable housing in some parts of the Borough can present 
challenges to developers because of existing use values. These are often in parts of the 
Borough where affordable homes are in particularly short supply so insistence on on-site 
provision is justified to ensure that homes are provided in these locations. 
 This policy is consistent with the Government’s policy that where local authorities have 181.
identified that affordable housing is required they should set policies for meeting this need on 
site, unless off-site provision or a financial contribution of broadly equivalent value can be 
robustly justified and the agreed approach contributes to the objective of creating mixed and 
balanced communities. 
 The policy in this plan does not cover matters relating to how affordable dwellings will be 182.
allocated for occupation. Eligibility and priority is governed by the Councils Housing 
Allocation Scheme. This is a statutory policy required under the Housing Act 1996.  However  
  
 
 61 
61 where Neighbourhood Plans include a policy relating to the occupation of affordable housing 
(through for instance a priority being given to those with a strong local connection), then due 
consideration should be given to the neighbourhood plan.   
Policy P4B – Meeting Housing Needs – Rural Exceptions  
1. The provision of affordable housing developments on Green Belt land to meet the 
local needs of households in that Parish or neighbourhood will be supported in 
circumstances where:  
  i. The development proposal is consistent with the Village, Parish or  
   Neighbourhood Plan; or  
  ii. There is evidence that people with a local connection to the Parish area have 
   a housing need  that cannot be met through affordable housing provision on 
   an allocated housing site , and the proposed development is supported by the 
   Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum.  
2. Proposals will also be considered against openness and character of the 
village/settlement and any design criteria in an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.  
3. Further detail and guidance for delivery of Policy P4 B will be set out in the Meeting 
Housing Needs Supplementary Planning Document.  
Justification 
 Policy 4B responds to the identified need in some Parish and Neighbourhood Plan areas of 183.
providing affordable housing for people with a local connection to the Parish or 
Neighbourhood Plan area and the importance of development in helping to sustain local 
community services. 
 The policy supports the provision of affordable housing where there is evidence of need that 184.
cannot be met through affordable housing provision on an allocated housing site. The 
provision of affordable housing developments to meet the needs of people with a local 
connection to the Parish or neighbourhood will be supported on Green Belt land. The policy 
will ensure that the most suitable site in the village is used as outlined in the Parish or 
Neighbourhood Plan. All sites will be assessed for their accessibility to services and facilities, 
the impact of development on the Green Belt and environmental considerations. 
 The policy is justified by the acknowledged role that providing homes for local people in 185.
these Parishes or Neighbourhood Plan areas has in supporting communities and maintaining 
the vitality of rural settlements through retaining population which supports local services and 
facilities. 
Policy P4C – Meeting Housing Needs - Market Housing  
1. In assessing the housing mix on allocated and windfall major deve lopment sites, the 
Council will, in negotiations, have regard to:  
  i. Site size;  
  ii. Current indicative Borough -wide needs assessments;  
  iii. The existing mix of market housing and local housing demand in the area;    
  
  
62 
  iv. Accessibility to local services  and facilities , and access to public transport in 
 accordance with pPolicy P7;  
  v. The economics of provision, including particular costs that may threaten the 
   viability of the site;  
  vi. The need to secure a range of house types and sizes in the locality in helping 
   to achieve socially balanced and mixed communities.  
2. Where the Council issues a concept masterplan for a site , this will include details of 
the likely profile of household types requiring market housing, e.g. multi -person, 
including families and children, single persons and couples, as identified by the latest 
HEDNA.  
3. Market dwellings shall be provided in accordance with the following mix:  
  i. 1 or 2 bedrooms – 30% 
  ii. 3 bedrooms – 50% 
  iii. 4 or more bedrooms – 20% 
4. Further detail and guidance for delivery of Policy P4 C will be set out in the Meeting 
Housing Needs Supplementary Planning Document.  
Justi fication 
 The Council is justified in requiring that the mix of market housing reflects the latest evidence 186.
on need for household types and sizes, so that market provision reflects local Borough 
demand and promotes and sustains mixed and balanced communities. 
 The recommended market mix is derived from the outputs of the 2020 HEDNA, which is a 187.
Borough-wide assessment. A similar mix of housing in all areas is expected but this will be 
applied flexibly according to specific local characteristics.  In applying the mix to individual 
development sites, regard will be given to the size and nature of the site and character of the 
area; any relevant policies in Neighboured Plans; up-to-date evidence of need; and the 
existing mix and turnover of properties at the local level.  
 Specific sites, such as town centre development, may result in a different mix of housing 188.
being delivered. 
 Based on the evidence, it is expected that the focus of new market housing provision will be 189.
on 2- and 3-bed properties; which will also assist affordability. Continued demand for family 
housing can be expected from newly forming households. Some demand for smaller to 
medium-sized properties (2- and 3-beds) can be expected to increase opportunities for older 
households to downsize and allow turnover of existing larger family homes.  
 The Council will monitor what is being built to ensure that a reasonable mix of market 190.
housing is provided across the Borough. 
 In applying this policy, any room designated as a bedroom should comply with the criteria set 191.
out in the national space standard s, in accordance with Policy P5 .  
 
 
  
  
 
 63 
63 Policy P4D – Meeting Housing Needs - Self and Custom 
Housebuilding  
1. The Council will require developers of allocated sites to make a contribution to Self 
and Custom Build Housing on residential sites of 100 units or more.  Contributions 
will be expected to be made in the form of 5% of open market dwellings in the form of 
Self and Custom Build Plots on each development site, but will take into account:  
  i. Site size;  
  ii. Accessibility to local services and facilities and access to public transport;  
  iii. The economics of provision, including particular costs that may threaten the 
   viability of the site;  
  iv. Whether the provision of self and custom build plots would prejudice the  
   realisa tion of other planning objectives that need to be given priority in the 
   development of the site;  
  v. The need to secure a range of house types and sizes in the locality in helping 
   to achieve socially balanced and mixed communities; and  
  vi. The nee d to achieve a successful and functional housing development.  
2. The Council expects these plots to be offered for sale with outline planning 
permission, fully serviced to the boundary , and unconstrained access to the highway 
for a period of 12 months to t hose Registered on Solihull’s Self and Custom Build 
Housing Register.  The value of the plots will be subject to an independent valuation 
by a Registered Surveyor.  After 12 months the plot will revert to the developer and 
will be built out for market housi ng. 
3. Further detail and guidance for delivery of Policy P4 D will be set out in the ‘Meeting 
Housing Needs’ Supplementary Planning Document.  
Justification 
 The Council is justified in making provision for self and custom build housing in order to 192.
comply with the Self and Custom Housebuilding Act, the Housing and Planning Act, National 
Planning Policy Guidance and the needs on the self-build register. 
 The Housing and Planning Act 2016 took forward the requirements of the Self-build and 193.
Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 further by introducing a ‘Right to Build’. This requires local 
planning authorities to support custom and self-builders registered in their area in identifying 
enough suitable plots of land to build or commission their own home to meet local dema nd 
through their Local Plan.  
 In accordance with the Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 and the Housing and 194.
Planning Act 2016 the Government released Ministerial Regulations on 31 October 2016.  
These Regulations enable the Council to split the Register into two parts.  Part 1 of the 
Register is for those who potentially meet Local Connection Criteria and Assessment of 
Financial Resource. Applicants who meet these qualifying criteria will have the ‘Right to 
Build’ and Policy 4D will create suitable plots of land to build or commission their own home.  
Part 2 of the Register is for all other applicants.  The Council does not have a legal obligation 
to identify enough suitable plots of land for those on this part 2 of the Register, however it   
  
  
64 
 does illustrate a level of demand , which has been considered through the development self-
build and custom housebuilding policy.  
 The Council has approved Local Connection Criteria and Assessment of Financial 195.
Resources and fees for the Solihull Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Register.  As at 30 
October 2019 there were 370 individual entries on the Register along with 4 groups 
containing a total of 18 individuals. 
Policy P4E – Meeting Housing Needs - Housing for Older and 
Disabled People  
1. New housing develo pments will be expected to provide a mix of dwelling size and 
type to meet the identified needs of older people and those with disabilities and 
special needs , in accordance with current assessments of housing need and 
evidence:  
2. All new build housing on major development sites must be built to Category M4(2) 
(Accessible and Adaptable dwellings) of approved Building Regulations Document M; 
Volume 1, unless it is built in to M4(3);  
3. At least 5% of housing on major development sites must be wheelchair user  
dwellings to M4(3) of the Building Regulations;  
4. All developments of 300 dwellings or more must provide specialist housing or care 
bed spaces , in accordance with the Council’s most up  -to -date statement of need on 
older person’s accommodation.  
5. This policy will be applied flexibly , taking into account:  
  i. Site specific factors which may make step -free access unsuitable or unviable;  
  ii. The economics of provision, including particular costs that may threaten the 
   viability of the site;  
  iii. Whether the provision of housing at these standards would prejudice the  
   realisation of other planning objectives that need to be given priority in the 
   development of the site;  
  iv. The need to achieve a successful housing development.  
6. Applicatio ns for specialist housing for older people and younger adults with 
disabilities will be supported where :  
 i. The site is accessible to shops, amenities and public transport;  
  ii. It can be demonstrated that satisfactory Pprimary hHealth cCare services will 
be    accessible to serve the residents of the development;  
  iii. The development makes a positive contribution towards meeting identified 
   needs set out in the Council’s most up -to -date statement of accommodation 
   need;   
  
 
 65 
65  iv. All specialist housing must meet the Category 2, Category 3(2a) or Category 
 3(2b) requirements of the Building Regulations, Approved Document M,  
 Volume 1.  
75. Applications for care homes (Use Class C2) for older people and younger adults with 
disabilities will be supported where:  
  i. The site is in close proximity to shops, amenities and public transport;  
  ii.  It is appropriate to the needs of the intended occupiers, staff and visitors;  
  iii. There are satisfactory pPrimary hHealth cCare services to serve the residents 
of    the development within reasonable proximity;  
  iv.  The design meets or exceeds the most up to date standards set by the Care 
   Quality Commission (or successor bodies) regarding the safety and suitability 
   of premises;  
  v. The proposal will facilitate an improvement in the quality of care provided , in 
   particular , including the provision of nursing care.  
86. A planning condition will define the percentages of M4(2) and M4(3) required for 
each planning approval.  
97. Where references to the Building Regulations in the policy change, the requirement 
shall be taken to refer to the most up -to-date standard.  
810. Further detail and guidance for delivery of Policy P4 E will be set out in the Meeting 
Housing Needs Supp lementary Planning Document.  
Justification 
 National planning policy requires local planning authorities to plan for the needs of different 196.
groups in the community, including older people and younger adults with learning disabilities, 
autistic spectrum conditions, mental health and physical disabilities and sensory 
impairments. 
 
  
  
  
66 
  Planning policy must therefore understand the housing needs of particular groups and this is 197.
an important part of the Council’s duties under the Equality Act 2010, including the Public 
Sector Equality Duty.   
 The proportion of older people in the population is forecast to increase. The number of 198.
people aged 75 and over is projected to increase by 7,147 between 2020 and 2036 to 
comprise 12% of the population .  
 It is also projected that there will be a 35% increase in the number of people aged 65 and 199.
over with dementia and a 31% increase in those aged 65+ with mobility problems. 
 A number of Neighbourhood Plans identify the requirements to provide a range of housing 200.
for older people, and Local Plan policy P4E supports this. Consultation responses to the 
2016 Draft Local Plan also supported provision for older people and those with disabilities. 
 It is important that all older people have good and affordable housing choices. Not all older 201.
people need specialist accommodation; many will prefer to remain in their own homes. There 
is therefore a clear need to increase the supply of accessible and adaptable dwellings and 
wheelchair user dwellings as well as providing specialist housing. 
 An important part of meeting need for older people will be through general purpose new 202.
homes built to accessible standards and which are suitable and attractive for ‘downsizing’. 
This will include ‘a ge-restricted general market housing’ designed for people aged 55 and 
over and the active elderly which may include some shared amenities such as communal 
gardens but does not include support or care services. 
 Policy P4E supports the Council’s adult social care approach. Suitable general needs 203.
housing and specialist schemes both contribute to older and disabled people having good 
housing options. Extra Care, or Housing with Care can be very important in supporting a 
higher level of independence for longer and providing a more gradual transition as care 
needs increase. The support of a community and the informal provision of care by residents 
are also important. This brings long term benefits for both adult social care and the National 
Health Service.  The policy also supports one of the priorities of the Birmingham and Solihull 
Sustainability and Transformation Partnership to improve the health and wellbeing of the 
population by working with local partners, particularly focussing on employment, education, 
housing and work. 
 Government has consolidated a wide range of new housing standards. This is based on 204.
minimum Building Regulations requirements with the ability for local planning authorities to 
apply the optional national standards over and above these. One of the optional standards 
covers accessibility. 
 Optional standards can only apply where a policy is included in a Local Plan. Policy P4E 205.
therefore applies the optional accessibility standards in Solihull.  
 Conditions will be applied to relevant planning permissions to ensure compliance with Policy 206.
P4E. Where references to the Building Regulations in the policy change, the requirement 
shall be taken to refer to the most up- to-date standard. 
 The two optional Building Regulation standards for accessibility and adaptability are M4(2) 207.
and M4(3).  M4(2) promotes the ability of people to remain in their homes as their 
circumstances change as it covers design measures that can allow homes to be adapted. 
M4(3) relates specifically to wheelchair user housing and distinguishes between ‘wheelchair 
adaptable’ (M4(3 2a)) and ‘wheelchair accessible’ dwellings (M4(3 2b)). Policy P4E requires 
‘wheelchair adaptable’ .  as ‘w ‘Wheelchair accessible’ only applies where the Council is 
responsible for allocating or nominating an individual.  
  
 
 67 
67  The HEDNA demonstrated a need for homes which are suitable for older people and those 208.
with disabilities (physical, sensory and learning). This is also evidenced by local Borough 
wide data and Council assessments and plans. 
 The HEDNA also demonstrated the need to increase the supply of accessible and adaptable 209.
dwellings and wheelchair user dwellings as well as providing specific provision of older 
persons housing. The evidence supported a policy requirement that: 
 All dwellings (in all tenures) meet the M4(2) standards 
 A need for around 700 dwellings to be for wheelchair users (M4(3)) in the period to 
2036, met by a requirement that 5% of new homes are built to M4(3 2a).   
 Policy P4E therefore sets a requirement for M4(2) and M4(3) dwellings to be provided on all 210.
major development. Conditions will be applied to relevant planning permissions to ensure 
compliance with Policy P4E .  
211. Where application of the 5% requirement for M4(3) results in a fraction of a wheelchair user 
dwelling, provision will be rounded to the nearest whole dwelling. 
 In addition to enabling people to remain in their own homes, there is also a need for 212.211.
policy to support specialist provision. 
 Specialist housing is defined in paragraph 01 0 of National Planning Policy Guidance. 213.212.
provision can take the form of specialist housing and care homes. P4E will make provision 
for Extra Care or Hh ousing with Ccare dwellings, which are part of the overall housing need 
identified in Policy P5, and additional care bedspaces for elderly people.   
 Extra Care or Specialist hH ousing  with Care  will provide fully self-contained homes to 214.213.
people who may need care at the time that they take up occupation, or may develop a need 
for care over a period. People will have tenancies or leases which give them security of 
tenure and the right to control who enters their home. Schemes will have communal spaces 
and facilities, access to personal care and support 24 hours a day through an agency 
registered with the Care Quality Commission, community alarms and other assistive 
technologies and an office for use by staff serving the scheme. 
 Care Homes will provide individual rooms (‘care bedspaces’) on a licence within a 215.214.
residential building. They will provide a high level of care meeting all activities of daily living. 
Personal care and accommodation will be provided together as a package with no clear 
separation between the two. This type of provision includes residential, nursing and 
dementia care. Care homes will be Care Quality Commission regulated for the purpose of 
‘accommodation for persons who require nursing or personal care’. 
 Specialist housing and care homes must be in accessible locations, consistent with 216.215.
policy P7. 
 The Council is also justified in requiring the provision of homes which are designed to 217.216.
meet specific needs of older and/or disabled people (including people with learning and/or 
physical or sensory disabilities) because of the outstanding need for such accommodation 
and the relatively high cost of provision. 
 The population growth among adults aged 18-64 with disabilities is less pronounced 218.217.
than among older people, but the Council must develop affordable housing as an alternative 
to residential care.  It is expected that this need will mainly be met by the Council directly 
commissioning the required provision. 
 Applicants for planning permission should seek pre-application advice to establish 219.218.
whether their proposal will be classified as use class C2 or C3. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy   
  
  
68 
 B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
J Improving health and well being 
Policy P5 – Provision of Land for Housing  
1. The Council will allocate sufficient land for at least 5,270  net additional homes , to 
ensure sufficient housing land supply to deliver 15,017  additional homes in the period 
2020- 2036. The allocations will be part of the overall housing land supply detailed in 
the table below.  
2. The average annual housing land pro vision target is 938 net additional homes per 
year (2020 -2036). A trajectory showing how this target will be delivered from all 
sources of housing land supply is shown below.  It will be subject to annual review 
through the AMR.  
3. New housing will be supported on windfall  sites in accessible locations , where they 
contribute towards meeting bBorough -wide housing needs and towards enhancing 
local character and distinctiveness. Unless there are exceptional circumstances, new 
housing wi ll not be permitted in locations where accessibility to employment, centres 
and a range of services and facilities is poor.  
4. Housing will be provided as a mix of small and larger sites that will ensure a 
continuous supply of housing provision throughout the Plan period, and a continuous 
supply of affordable housing. Indicative delivery periods are included in the table 
below.  
National Space Standards  
5. In order to ensure that new residential development delivers appropriate levels of 
amenity and a susta inable living environment, new homes should comply with the 
nationally described space standard s set ou t by Government.  
Density 
6.  The appropriate density of new housing will  be based on a number of factors, and
 measured on the developable area of a site.  This will include site plots and estate 
 roads, but exclude land for other development requirements such as open space, 
 SuUDS and strategic highway infrastructure. Density will be informed by the 
following:  
  i. The need to maximise the efficient use of land;  
  ii. The appropriate mix of housing in accordance with Policy P4;  
  iii. Responding to local character and distinctiveness, including landscape and 
   townscape features, green infrastructure and heritage assets;   
  
 
 69 
69   iv. Scale, type and location of de velopment, in particular with regard to  
   accessibility of services by sustainable transport modes .; 
    
  
  
70 
 Justification 
Local Housing Need 
 Since the revised National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) was published in July 220.219.
2018, councils have been required to calculate their local housing need (LHN) using the 
Government's standard methodology. For the base year 1st April 2020, the LHN is 807 
dwellings per annum, which over the plan period would result in a need for 12,912 dwellings. 
Data source Number  
Households at 2020  90,937  
Households at 2030  97,259  
10 year difference in number of households  6,322  
Annual average increase in no. of households  632 
Median house price  £277,500  
Median workplace earnings  £32,970  
Affordability ratio  8.42 
Affordability increase28 27.6%  
Adjusted household projections annual average 
increase ( iei.e. the LHN)  807 
Plan period  2020 -36 
No. of years in plan period  16 
No. of dwellings required during plan period  – 
Minimum LHN  12,912  
 National planning practice guidance is clear that the LHN provides a minimum 221.220.
starting point in determining the number of homes needed in an area and it explains when it 
might be appropriate to plan for a higher housing need figure that the standard methodology 
indicates.   This has been addressed in the HEDNA whichHEDNA, which  has considered 
whether the UK Central Hub proposals represent a deliverable growth strategy that is likely 
to exceed past trends.  The HEDNA concludes it is and has therefore looked to see what 
additional workforce may be required.  On the basis that the standard methodology provides 
for higher jobs growth than baseline predictions indicate are necessary; and if commuter 
patterns for employment in the UK Central Hub area remain at 2011 census levels then a 
small increase to 816 dpa would be justified.  Over the plan periodperiod,  this would 
result in a need for Solihull of 13,056 . 
 This housing growth can be delivered through sites with planning permission, 222.221.
suitable deliverable sites identified within the Strategic Housing and Economic Land 
Availability Assessment, locations proposed for allocation by this policy and unidentified 
                                                           
28 The formula in the standard methodology converts the ratio into a percentage increase to be applied to the 
household projections.  
  
 
 71 
71 windfall sites, predominantly within South Solihull. The following table provides an overview 
of housing land supply. 
Solihull Housing Land Supply 2020-2036 (as of 1st April 2020) 
Source  Capacity  
1 Sites with planning permission (started)  1,663  
2 Sites with planning permission (not started)  1,119  
3 Sites identified in land availability assessments  320 
4 Sites identified in the brownfield land register (BLR)  77 
5 Town Centre Sites29 961 
6 Solihull Local Plan (2013) allocations without 
planning permission at 1st April 2020  350 
7 Less a 10% to sites with planning permission (not 
started), sites identified in land availability 
assessments, BLR and SLP sites  -283 
8 Windfall housing land supply   (2022 -2036)  2,800  
9 UK Central Hub Area  to 2036  2,740  
10 Allocated Sites  to 2036  5,270  
Total Estimated Capacity (rows 1 -10) 15,017  
Windfall Housing Supply 
 Windfall housing sites are sites that will become available for residential development 223.222.
during the Plan period that cannot be identified now. There is compelling evidence that 
windfall sites consistently become available in Solihull. The windfall assumption in the 
adopted Solihull Local Plan was 150 dpa.  The average windfall supply since 1992 has 
increased to 209 dpa and in the last decade is 231 dpa. The 5YLS position adopted at 
Cabinet in July 2019 set out a revised windfall rate of 200 dpa to reflect his position.  To 
prevent double-counting with existing permissions, the windfall completions are counted from 
the third year of supply, therefore from 2022 onwards. 
Housing Trajectory 
 To ensure that an adequate supply of housing will be available throughout the plan 224.223.
period consideration has been given to the likely delivery rates of both existing commitments 
and the proposed allocations over the plan period. A number of small-medium sites will gain 
permission and commence development within the first five years of adoption of the plan 
from 2021.  However, some of the larger sites will not make a significant contribution to 
completions until the mid-delivery phase. For this reason, and to ensure a robust five year 
housing land supply for the duration of the plan, the housing requirement is stepped: 
                                                           
29 Solihull Town Centre (861) & Chelmsley Wood Town Centre (100)   
  
  
72 
 Delivery Phase  Stepped 
Requirement  Annualised 
requirement  
I – 2020 -2026  5,106  851 
II and III – 2026 -2036  9,91130 991 
Total  15,017  938 
 
 
Maintaining Housing Land Supply 
 The NPPF  requires Councils to identify and maintain five years’ housing land supply 225.224.
with an additional buffer of 5% to ensure choice and competition in the market. The following 
table establishes the five year housing land requirement from the current base date of 1st 
April 2020: 
  
                                                           
30 Rounded up 0200040006000800010000120001400016000
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036Number of Dwellings  
Year  Chart Title  
Completions
Requirement 
  
 
 73 
73 Source  Capacity  
1 Sites with planning permission (started)  1,663 
2 Sites with planning permission (not started)  889 
3 Sites identified in land availability assessments  200 
4 Sites identified in the brownfield land register (BLR)  77 
5 Solihull Local Plan (2013) allocations without 
planning permission at 1st April 2020  350 
6 Less a 10% to sites with planning permission (not 
started), sites identified in land availability 
assessments, BLR and SLP sites  -152 
7 Allocated sites  1,170  
8 Windfall  housing land supply   (2022 -2025 )  600 
Total Estimated Capacity (rows 1 -8) 4,797  
Annualised requirement  851 
Annualised requirement + 5%  894 
5 year requirement  4,468  
5 year supply/requirement  5.37 years supply  
Allocated Sites 
 Summary Table of Residential Allocations  226.225.
Area31 Ref. Site Name  G 
B32 P 
D 
L33 Site 
Area 
(ha) Capacity  Delivery 
Period34 
Balsall 
Common  BC1 Barratt’s Farm  Y N 91 875 II and III  
BC2 Frog Lane  Y N 6 110 I 
BC3 Windmill 
Lane/Kenilworth 
Road Y N 7 120 I 
                                                           
31 The area or settlement the allocation is adjacent to (not necessarily the ward or parish it falls within). 
32 Does the allocation relate to releasing a site from the Green Belt. 
33 Is the site previously developed land, or at least a substantial part of it is.  
34 Indicative delivery period: I = years 0-5, II = years 5-10 & III = years 10 - 16   
  
  
74 
 Area31 Ref. Site Name  G 
B32 P 
D 
L33 Site 
Area 
(ha) Capacity  Delivery 
Period34 
BC4 Pheasant Oak Farm  Y Y 14 200  II 
BC5 Trevallion Stud  Y Y 12 230 I and II  
BC6 Lavender Hall Farm  Y Y 4 80 III 
Blythe  BL1 West of Dickens 
Heath Y N 23 350 I and II  
BL2 South of Dog 
Kennel Lane  Y N 47 1000  I, II and 
III 
BL3 Whitlocks End Farm  Y N 14 300 I and II  
Hampton in 
Arden35 HA1 Meriden Road , 
Hampton in Arden  Y Y 5 100 I 
HA2 Oak Farm , 
Catherine -de-Barnes Y Y 3 95 I 
Hockley 
Heath  HH1 School Road  Y N 6 90 I 
Knowle  
 KN1 Hampton Road  Y N 11 180 I and II  
KN2 South of Knowle   Y N 49 600 I and II  
Meriden  ME1 West of Meriden   Y N 4 100 I 
North of the 
Borough  NS1 Kingshurst Village 
Centre N Y 4 50 I 
Solihull  
 SO1 East of Solihull36  Y N 43 700 I and II  
SO2 Moat Lane  Depot  N Y 3 90 III 
Non Green Belt Sites  (2) 7 140  
Green Belt Sites  (16) 340 5,130   
Total 347 5,270  
 
  
                                                           
35 Site SO1 is also located within Hampton in Arden parish 
36 Although the site is located within Hampton in Arden parish, it functions as an extension of the urban area and so has 
been included in the Solihull settlement chapter.  
  
 
 75 
75 Housing Market Area 
 Solihull is one of 14 local authorities within the Greater Birmingham Housing Market 227.226.
Area (GBHMA). The Birmingham Development Plan (adopted January 2017) recognises that 
there is a shortfall of 37,900 homes, which needs to be met in the wider GBHMA up to 2031. 
Under the Duty to Cooperate, the Council has been working with its partners to address this 
shortfall.   
 Through the Local Plan Review process undertaken to date, the Council had 228.227.
indicated it would test the ability to accommodate 2,000 dwellings from the shortfall up to 
2031.  Now that the Council has tested and established an appropriate capacity it is able to 
confirm the contribution to the HMA as the difference between the identified supply and the 
LHN.  Thus the contribution to the HMA is 2,105 being the difference between 15,017 and 
12,912.  Thus 15,017 will be the housing requirement for the plan, this equates to an 
average of 938 dwellings per annum. 
 
 The figure of 12,912 was used rather than 13,056 (the HEDNA UK Central Hub ‘uplift 229.228.
figure’) as this represents the minimum needs of the Borou gh as determined by the standard 
methodology.  The occupation of the additional dwellings needed as a result of the UKC Hub 
uplift would be as a result of additional net migration into the Borough (as it is above the 
Borough’s own demographic needs) from elsewhere and to have added this to the 
contribution to the HMA shortfall would result in double counting. 
Putting the Level of Growth into Context 
 Solihull is recognised for its high quality environment whichenvironment, which  230.229.
attracts residents and investors to the sub-region. These include green infrastructure assets 
such as the Arden Landscape, the River Blythe SSSI, tree-lined suburbs and principal parks 
as well as major transport and economic assets such as UK Central, the M42 corridor and 
forthcoming HS2 Interchange. Growth needs to be managed at a sustainable rate so that the 
success of these assets are not compromised and can continue to deliver their economic 
and ecosystem services.  
 The proposed level of growth is significantly more than previously planned for and is 231.230.
recognition that the SLP 2013 used a constrained figure. The Council is now not only 
  
  
  
76 
 seeking to accommodate its own needs in full, but also help to accommodate some of the 
shortfall occurring in the HMA. 
Commentary on comparison to previous levels of growth 
 The level of growth now proposed in the Borough at 938 dwellings per annum 232.231.
represents a significant step change in the delivery of housing.  This is higher than has been 
achieved in any single year since 2001 (the highest being 836 in 2005/06).  The average 
over the last 5 years has been 706 dwellings per annum. 
Housing Requirement for Designated Neighbourhood Areas 
 Paragraph 65 of the NPPF states that the overall strategic housing requirement 233.232.
policy in the local plan should set out a housing requirement for designated Neighbourhood 
Plan areas which reflects the overall strategy for the pattern and scale of development and 
any relevant allocations. 
 The schedule below outlines the housing requirement for each of the designated 234.233.
Neighbourhood Areas in the Borough. This figure comprises the amount of housing expected 
to be delivered through site allocations (made in this plan) in each Neighbourhood Area 
along with sites identified in land availability assessments, those identified in the Councils 
BLR and site allocations in the Solihull Local Plan 2013 without planning permission at 1st 
April 2020.  
 Balsall 402 
 Berkswell 1, 356 
 Cheswick Green 1,002 
 Dickens Heath 650 
 Hampton in Arden 1,012 
 Hockley Heath 141 
 Knowle, Dorridge & Bentley Heath 8 08 
 Meriden 100 
National Space Standards 
 In 2015, the Government introduced nationally described space standards as a new 235.234.
form of technical planning standard that local authorities can adopt through their local plans. 
The standard provides for minimum gross internal floor areas and storage, to ensure that 
sufficient internal space within new homes for both a high quality of life and flexibility over 
time. This is especially important for smaller homes, which need to be fit for purpose and 
attractive in the market, e.g. to those wishing to down-size. For conversions it may be more 
difficult to achieve these standards, however, developers should set out how the internal 
space provision will meet housing needs. 
 Summary of National Space Standards37 236.235.
                                                           
37 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524531/160519_
Nationally_Described_Space_Standard____Final_Web_version.pdf   
  
 
 77 
77  
Density 
 It is important that efficient use is made of the land available to ensure delivery of 237.236.
sufficient new homes in the Plan period. 
 Assessing the efficient use of land and corresponding appropriate density will involve 238.237.
a range of considerations , including accessibility, infrastructure capacity, environmental 
issues and in particular, the prevailing character, identity and setting of the surrounding 
areas. . Each site has its own characteristics, context and constraints, and it is important that 
these are taken into account in creating well-designed places in accordance with policy P15.  
 In more sustainable locations, which are highly accessible by public transport, as well 239.238.
as walking and cycling, there will be opportunities to increase densities. Where it can be 
demonstrated that higher densities would respect the character and quality of an area, this 
will be supported. 
 Dwelling figures for Allocated Housing Sites have been informed through a series of 240.239.
concept masterplans, and are based on a range of densities deemed appropriate at each 
site. The eventual capacity of sites will depend on various factors, many of which will need to 
be addressed at application stage, including detailed design and layout. This may mean that 
dwelling and bed space totals for an allocated site fall outside the indicative range specified 
in the respective policy.  
  
  
  
  
78 
 Indicative densities38 
Dwellings per hectare 
(developable site area)  Houses Apartments  Mixed 
Town Centre/UKC Hub Area  40dph  90-150dph  50-70dph  
Urban redevelopment  35-45 dph  70-90 dph  45-60dph  
Significant extension of urban or 
larger village edge  30-40 dph  As 
appropriate  40-50dph  
Limited extension of urban or larger 
village edge  30-35dph  As 
appropriate  40-50dph  
 
 Where the density in a planning application falls significantly below those specified 241.240.
above, the applicant will be expected to provide supporting information justifying the density 
proposed. 
Concept Masterplans 
 The Council has prepared a concept masterplan for each site to ensure confidence 242.241.
on capacity and deliverability. Concept masterplans include details on: 
 A clear objective/aim for what is intended to be achieved in the overall development. 
 That key site constraints have been identified (both those that are fixed (i.e. to be 
accommodated within the scheme (e.g. important open spaces)) and those that need 
to be overcome or mitigated). 
 That all the different land uses/proposals and their scale that the site is to 
accommodate (including dwelling capacity) have been identified (this will include key 
green infrastructure/open space (including, where relevant, areas of biodiversity 
value that are to be retained) either within the site or adjacent to it). 
 Key access and movement routes to and through the site. 
 The infrastructure that is required to make that development an attractive and 
sustainable location has been identified. 
 A clear phasing and delivery programme (and this may demonstrate the need for 
critical infrastructure to be in place before occupation of certain phases). 
 Establishing a clear and logical boundary to identify precisely the land to be released 
from the Green Belt (for those allocations which require land to be removed from the 
Green Belt).  This does not mean that all of the site will be developed as it is 
necessary to ensure a clear, logical and defensible boundary to the Green Belt is 
formed. 
 It will be expected that where there are multiple ownerships involved, the concept 243.242.
masterplan will show a coordinated and comprehensive approach to the development of the 
site that is supported by relevant site promotors/developers so that piecemeal development 
is avoided.  This needn’t necessarily preclude a phased approach where one parcel of land 
or part of the site may be available for development in advance of another.  However it will 
                                                           
38 The densities relate to those to be achieved on the net developable area of a site.  
  
 
 79 
79 be expected that evidence can be provided of a joint and coordinated approach so that one 
phase of development does not prejudice a future phase, nor place undue viability pressures 
on a later phase to complete necessary infrastructure to serve the whole development.    
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
Policy P6 – Provision of Accommodatio n for Gypsies and Travellers  
1. An updated Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) is currently 
being undertaken and is in the process of being completed.  The Council will seek to 
meet the need for any permanent residential pitches to 2036 that is identified in the  
updated  GTAA. This will include meeting the needs arising from Gypsies and 
Travellers who meet the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) planning 
definition of a Traveller , as well as those who have ceased to travel permanent ly. It 
will also include an allowance for ‘undetermined’ households , where it was not 
possible to complete an interview during the completion of the GTAA, where 
required.  
Gypsies and Travellers  who meet the PPTS planning definition :. 
2. The accommodation n eeds of Gypsies and Travellers who meet the PPTS planning 
definition  of a Traveller  will be met through a combination of the remaining site 
allocations in the Council’s adopted Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocations Plan  (2014)  
that have not yet come forward ; work to identify whether need can be met through 
other unimplemented planning consents and vacant pitches on sites; and through 
work on a pitch deliverability assessment to identify whether identified need can be 
met through the intensification of existi ng, authorised Gypsy and Traveller sites .  
3. The remaining pitch allocations are:  
            i. The Haven – 6 pitches  
            ii.  Old Damson Lane – 2 pitches  
4. As far as possible, t he Council will seek  to meet any remaining need within the 
boundaries of existing authorised sites , or through an updated Gypsy and Traveller 
Site Allocations Plan.  
5. The following criteria will be used in the allocation of future sites and subject to 
compliance with other policies in the plan, applications whic h perform well against the 
criteria and which contribute to meeting any identified unmet need, will be considered 
favourably :.   
  
  
80 
   i. The size and scale of the site and the number of caravans stationed is  
   appropriate to the size and density of the local settled community, having  
   regard to factors such as the scale and form of existing pitches and sites in 
   the locality, and the availability of infrastructure, services and facilities;  
  ii. Any unacceptable adverse visual impact can be adequately min imised;  
  iii. The site is not in an area prone to flooding;   
  iv. Any unacceptable adverse impact on landscape or local nature conservation 
   designations, ecology, biodiversity, water quality , or the historic environment 
   can be mitigated;  
  v. There is no unacceptable adverse impact on privacy and residential amenity 
   for both site residents and neighbouring land uses, and the site will provide 
   safe and healthy living conditions for site occupants;  
  vi. The site has safe and convenient acc ess to the highway network;  
  vii. The site is of a sufficient size to support the provision of amenities and  
   facilities for the number of caravans proposed , and will have adequate  
   circulation space within the site for the parking and safe manoeuvr ing of  
   vehicles and trailers;  
  viii. Local services and facilities such as schools, health facilities, fresh food and 
   employment are accessible by walking, cycling and public transport, or it can 
   be demonstrated that the site is sustainable in other ways.  
6.  Sites in the Green Belt (whether temporary or permanent) will not be permitted  
 unless other reasonable alternative locations have been robustly discounted ,  
 including the availability of existing local provision, and only then  where appl icants 
 can demonstrate   ‘“very special circumstances ”’ as required by the PPTS . 
7.  Applications to intensify existing authorised Gypsy and Traveller Sites that contribute 
 to meeting any need that may be identified in the forthcoming 2020 GTAA will also be 
 supported where they meet the above criteria.  
Gypsies and Travellers  who do not meet the PPTS planning definition :.  
8. The provision of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers who have ceased to travel 
permanently  and do not meet the PP TS planning definition  will be supported, should 
any need be  identified in the forthcoming 2020 GTAA.   
9. Proposals for new sites or pitches, and applications for the intensification of existing 
sites will be assessed against criteria i  – viii above. Subj ect to compliance with other 
policies in the pPlan, applications which perform well against the criteria will be 
considered favourably.  
10. Sites in the Green Belt (whether temporary or permanent) will not be permitted 
unless other reasonable alternative locations have been robustly discounted , 
including the availability of existing local provision, and only then  where applicants 
can demonstrate  ‘“very special circumstances ”’ as required by the PPTS .  
  
 
 81 
81 Justification 
 Gypsies and Travellers in England have some of the worst outcomes of any group 244.243.
across a range of social indicators. It is well recognised that they are amongst the most 
socially excluded groups in society and research has consistently confirmed the link between 
the lack of good quality sites for Gypsies and Travellers and poor health and education. 
Accommodation issues contribute to many of the inequalities that Gypsy and Traveller 
communities experience, and are frequently a source of tensions between travelling and 
settled communities. The Government and the Council acknowledge that these inequalities 
and tensions must be addressed, but it is crucial to ensure that the planning system is not 
abused and that development is located in the most appropriate locations.  
 Together with the NPPF, the 2015 Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) sets out 245.244.
how local planning authorities should plan for the future accommodation needs of Gypsies 
and Travellers in their area. The PPTS highlights that the traditional and nomadic way of life 
of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople should be facilitated, while respecting the 
interests of the settled community and that planning authorities should make their own 
assessment of need, using a robust evidence base to establish accommodation 
requirements. Local Planning authorities should set pitch targets for Gypsies and Travellers 
and plot targets for Travelling Showpeople which address the likely permanent and transit 
site accommodation needs of travellers in their ar ea. 
 Gypsies and Travellers are defined in the PPTS as ‘Persons of nomadic habit of life 246.245.
whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or 
their family’s or dependents’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel 
temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus 
people travelling together as such’.  
 The Council is required to specifically and separately address the future 247.246.
accommodation needs of Travellers who meet the PPTS planning definition of a Traveller 
over the plan period. For those Gypsies and Travellers who do not lead a nomadic lifestyle 
(i.e. that have ceased to travel permanently and do not therefore meet the PPTS planning 
definition), there remains a requirement for the Council to continue to assess and plan for 
their needs as part of its wider responsibilities to plan to meet the accommodation needs of 
its settled community. Additionally, the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Equalities Act 2010 
protect the cultural choice of Gypsies and Travellers to live in mobile accommodation. In 
accordance with the NPPF and the Council’s public sector equality duty, these needs are 
also addressed in Policy P6.  
 The Council has commissioned an updated GTAA to identify the future 248.247.
accommodation requirements of Gypsies and Travellers in Solihull over the period 2020 to 
2036. However, the Covid-19 pandemic has had a severe impact on the completion of the 
household interviews that are required to support this work and at the time of publishing this 
Draft Submission Plan, the 2020 GTAA has not yet be finalised. Notwithstanding this, the 
GTAA is assessing the needs of all Gypsy and Travellers in the Borough, including those 
who meet the planning definition of a Gypsy or Traveller and those who do not. The GTAA 
will also include an assessment of need for any households that it is not possible to interview 
– this is referred to as undetermined need and the GTAA will include recommendations on 
how this need should be addressed. 
 Historically, the Council has demonstrated a positive and proactive approach to 249.248.
making sure that the needs of the Gypsy and Traveller community have been met, and it will 
continue to do so. In 2014, the Council adopted a Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocations Plan 
to address the pitch requirements as set out in the previous 2012 GTAA. The Site 
Allocations Plan allocates sites to meet the identified need of 38 permanent residential 
pitches between 2012 and 2027, in full.  Whilst most of the allocated sites now have planning   
  
  
82 
 permission, there are 8 pitches on identified site allocations that have not yet come forward 
through the planning application process. These sites / pitches were originally phased to 
come forward post 2017 to ensure provision later in the plan period and to secure the longer 
term need for sites.  
 The accommodation needs of travelling Gypsies and Travellers who meet the PPTS 250.249.
definition will be met through these remaining sites allocations, and emerging analysis also 
suggests that any additional immediate need may be accommodated through intensification 
of use within the boundaries of existing authorised sites. Where required, the Council will 
undertake an update of its Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocations Plan. In accordance with the 
PPTS, the policy sets out the criteria that will be used to guide the allocation of future sites. 
 Given the historic lack of suitable and available land outside the Green Belt for new 251.250.
Gypsy and Traveller sites, applications to intensify existing authorised Gypsy and Traveller 
Sites that contribute to meeting any need identified in the forthcoming 2020 GTAA for 
Gypsies and Travellers that meet the PPTS planning definition will also be supported where 
they meet the criteria set out in the Policy. This will ensure the effective use of land and 
optimise the use of existing sites. It will also have social benefits as many Gypsy and 
Travellers wish to live in extended family groups. 
 Planning applications to meet the need of Gypsies and Travellers who do not meet 252.251.
the PPTS planning definition will also be considered against the criteria as set out in the 
Policy.  
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
G To maintain a supply of Gypsy and Traveller sites and pitches  
   
  
 
 83 
83 Improving Accessibility & 
Encouraging Sustainable Travel 
Introduction 
 To make provision for sustainable communities and to realise the future economic 253.252.
ambitions of Solihull it is critical there is an integrated approach to transport and 
development across the borough.  Easy access to services and facilities such as jobs, 
education, fresh food retailers and open space by all modes; and an efficient, safe and 
attractive street and highway network are crucial to supporting these ambitions. The 
development of policies in this section of the draft local plan have had regard to Solihull’s 
role in the wider area recognising that both national road and rail networks cross through the 
Borough.  
 The Borough Portrait and Challenges identify the local transport issues in the 254.253.
Borough. This includes the difficulty in achieving sustainable modes of transport in the rural 
parts of the Borough, due to the number of small settlements and dispersed population, 
whilst many of the Borough’s roads suffer from congestion during peak hours. As well as 
creating social exclusions these issues can in turn detract from Solihull’s attractiveness as a 
place to live, work and learn whilst also supressing its economic potential.  Effective land use 
planning can, however, make a positive contribution towards re-balancing the transport 
system by influencing the location of development; supporting rural transport and 
encouraging take up of sustainable modes of transport.  
 Solihull Council is embarking on a strategy of ‘Managed Growth’ through the 255.254.
promotion of ‘UK Central’. UK Central brings together all of the Borough’s key economic 
assets, including regional business parks, town centres, Jaguar Land Rover, the Airport, 
future HS2 interchange station and the NEC. A key component to making UK Central a 
reality will be a balanced approach to transport - one that recognises the need to cater for 
cars and places appropriately as well as increasing emphasis on alternative transport 
modes. 
Movement for Growth & Solihull Connected 
 The West Midlands Combined Authority, has through its ‘Movement for Growth’ 256.255.
strategy set out the strategic direction for the region, while the Council’s transport strategy 
‘Solihull Connected’ (adopted 2016) sets out the strategic vision for managing the quality and 
performance of the transport system within Solihull and connections with the rest of the 
region and the UK.   
 Solihull Connected has five primary objectives: 257.256.
 Ensure that major transport investment enables and manages growth to achieve the 
Council priorities for homes and jobs; 
 Support and enable the integrated delivery of sustainable and efficient forms of 
transport like mass-transit, cycling and walking; 
 Contribute to the Council priorities to support people’s everyday lives and improve 
health and wellbeing through the promotion of smarter choices programmes linked to 
major and local infrastructure investment; 
 Identify a prioritised short, medium and long term delivery plan to achieve the 
overarching vision and objectives whilst recognising the specific needs of the different 
parts of the Borough;   
  
  
84 
  Ensure that the objectives of Solihull Connected are embedded in Local Plan and 
Health and Wellbeing policies to support walking, cycling and public transport use. 
 Both ‘Movement for Growth’ and Solihull Connected set out a vision of an inter- 258.257.
connected network of rapid-transit for the region, comprising Metro (light rapid transit) and 
SPRINT (bus rapid transit). In addition, Midlands Connect, of which Solihull is a partner, will, 
through its strategic transport strategy, identify the key road and rail infrastructure with the 
greatest economic impact across the whole (East & West) Midlands region. 
Cycling and Walking Strategy 
 To support Solihull’s Transport Strategy ‘Solihull Connected’ the Council has adopted 259.258.
is currently developing  a Cycling and Walking Strategy for the Borough.  
 Cycling and walking are recognised as important components to reduce congestion, 260.259.
improve air quality and support better physical and mental health. Cycling and walking have 
the real potential to enhance the vibrancy and special character of our Borough.  
 The Cycling and Walking Strategy presents the Council’s overall approach to active 261.260.
travel in the Borough. The strategy will sets out our vision for how we will deliver cycling and 
walking infrastructure, how we will improve the capability and confidence of our residents to 
cycle and walk more often and how we will ensure new developments cater for cycling and 
walking.   
 The Cycling and Walking Strategy is a key step in our approach to accommodate 262.261.
growth in travel demand on our network while maintaining Solihull’s special character.  
 Purpose of the Cycling and Walking Strategy:  263.262.
 set the overall vision for cycling and walking in Solihull 
 set a clear standard for cycling and walking infrastructure 
 ensure major developments consider active travel - more sustainable approach to 
transport 
 embed cycling and walking initiatives into local policy 
 Alongside As part of  the strategy  is the , we will also be producing a Local Cycling 264.263.
and Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP). LCWIPs are a new Government approach to 
identify cycling and walking improvements required at a local level.   
 The Solihull LCWIP will enable s a long-term approach to develop ing a local cycling 265.264.
and walking network within the Borough. The overall aim of the Solihull LCWIP will be is to 
improve cycling and walking infrastructure across the Borough over the next 10 years. 
Policy P7 Accessibility and Ease of Access  
1. All new development should be focussed in the most accessible locations and seek 
to enhance existing accessibility levels and promote ease of access.  
2. The Council will expect development proposals to fulfil the following:  
  i. Demonstrate how access to the site will be achieved in a sustainable manner , 
   by a range and choice of transport modes ;. 
  ii. For major residential development ,  provide access to a high frequency bus 
   service  within 400m of the site; and/or 800m of a rail station providing high 
   frequency services;   
  
 
 85 
85   iii. For all other development, provide access to a bus service offering at least a 
   30 minute daytime frequency within 400m of the site;  
  iv. Provide on -site transport infrastructure that promotes ease of access and  
   enhances accessibility levels;  
  v. Provide, contribute to and/or enhance off -site transport infrastructure  
   schemes (including, but not limited to, public rights of way/public footpaths 
   and cycle  ways)   where appropriate and viable;   
  vi. Are consistent with, and contribute to, the i mplementation of the ‘Solihull  
   Connected’ strategy  (or its replacement);  
  vii. For offices, retail and leisure development, are directed to locations in town 
   centres, or other established locations , including Birmingham Business Park, 
   Blythe Va lley Business Park, Birmingham Airport and NEC, as defined in  
   Policies P1, P2 and P19;  and national guidance.  
3. Access to all development will be required to demonstrate that:  
  i. It is safe, attractive and suitable for all people , by all modes;  
  ii. Priority is given first to pedestrian and cycle movements;  
  iii. Opportunities for sustainable transport modes have been taken up ;. 
  iv. Assessed in accordance with Policy P8 ‘Managing Travel Demand and  
   Reducing Congestion ’ and Policy P15 ‘Securi ng Design Quality ’ in the Local 
   Plan and the Concept Masterplans . 
 
Policy P8 Managing Travel Demand and Reducing Congestion  
1. The Council will support development proposals which:  
  i. Are located in accordance with the spatial strategy in seeking to reduce the 
   need to travel,  and that essential travel can be met by forms of sustainable 
   transport in addition to the private car;  
  ii. Promote linked trips by encouraging mixed  -use de velopment , where  
   appropriate;  
  iii. Do not have an unacceptable impact on public highway safety;  
  iv. Takes an evidence -based approach to demonstrate appropriate car parking 
   provision, taking account of location, trip rates , and, where relevant, travel 
    plan targets and forecast levels of car ownership .; 
2. The Council is unlikely to support developments:    
  
  
86 
   i. Where the impacts of increased delay to vehicles, pedestrians or cyclists,  
    taking account of the residual cumulative transport effe cts of 
development,    are severe ;. 
  ii. Where they will result in a reduction in safety for any users of the highway or 
   other transport network.  
3. The Council will support proposals for local Park and Ride at appropriate railway 
stations , subject to other policies in the Local Plan.  
4. Off-site parking provision proposed in association with economically important sites 
will be supported, subject to other policies in the Local Plan, where sustainable 
transport links between those sites and the parking provision are of a good quality, 
direct and attractive to use.  
5. The Council will require Transport Assessments and/or Travel Plans to accompany 
planning applications that include proposals which may generate significant traffic 
volumes, situa ted in traffic -sensitive locations , or otherwise likely to have a significant 
impact on the highway network.  
6. The Council will secure S 106/278 or utilise CIL contributions as appropriate to secure 
the necessary measures required to ensure the highway imp acts of new 
development are mitigated , and support the principles of sustainable development.  
This will include contributions towards the ongoing management of travel plans.  
 
Policy P8A Rapid Transit  
1. The Council will support the principle of proposals for the delivery of METRO and 
SPRINT as part of an inter -connected network of rapid -transit lines across the region, 
particularly along the following three  four corridors in Solihull that provide access to 
the UK Central Hub  and Birmingham City Centre : 
  i. Eastern Corridor Metro Extension to UK Central Hub  
  ii. Birmingham City Centre to UK Central Hub SPRINT  
  iii. Hall Green to UK Central Hub/North Solihull SPRINT  
  iv. Warwick Road corridor Solihull Town Centre to Birmingham CC SPRINT  
2. Where development proposals sit either within or adjacent to these corridors , they 
will be requested to make a contribution towards the delivery of SPRINT or METRO 
(as appropriate). In addition , developments will be expected to design in access 
opportunities to ensure connectivity to Rapid Transit infrastructure is maximised from 
the outset.  
Justification 
Locating Development  
  
 
 87 
87  NPPF sets out the principle that Local Plans should support development which 266.265.
facilitates, where possible, the use of sustainable modes of transport.  
 Paragraph 103 of the NPPF indicates that significant development should be focused 267.266.
on locations which are or can be made sustainable through limiting the need to travel and 
offering a genuine choice of transport modes.  However, it also recognises  that opportunities 
to maximise sustainable transport solutions will vary between urban and rural areas. Careful 
choice of location and layout of new development, combined with appropriate design and 
management measures (including adequate provision for pedestrians, cyclists and users of 
public transport) in all new development can help to reduce the dependence upon private 
cars, providing a safer, and more sustainable (and in the case of walking a cycling, a more 
healthy) alternative means of travel for leisure or functional purposes. 
 Improvement to existing public transport such as rail and bus service along with the 268.267.
development of new public transport modes such as light rapid transit and bus rapid transit 
can offer enhanced access for communities to jobs, service and leisure opportunities. This 
can reduce reliance on private cars for travel and lead to lowering in traffic levels arising from 
new development. To be most effective they should provide direct links between main areas 
of population, and retail and employment centres; complemented by high quality inter-
changes with other modes of transport.  
 Without reliable access to local services, healthy and affordable food, jobs, 269.268.
education, open space, medical and leisure facilities; communities can become 
disadvantaged and enter into a cycle of social exclusion. For example, 18-24 year olds in 
North Solihull experience high levels of unemployment, but also low car ownership, leaving 
them reliant on other transport modes to access jobs, education and training opportunities. 
Further exacerbating their circumstance is the poor connection between North Solihull and 
employment locations in the south of the Borough, especially Solihull town centre. Together 
with Solihull Connected and Movement for Growth, along with the emerging Local Transport 
Plan for 2021, the Local Plan will work to improve accessibility and ease of movement within, 
and from, North Solihull the Regeneration Area  to create opportunities for improved 
connectivity to key centres for employment and education.  
 Policy P7 directs residential development to the most accessible locations that 270.269.
benefit from realistic, commercially and environmentally sustainable opportunities to access 
local services and jobs; and non-residential development to locations where it can be readily 
accessed by non-car modes but particularly by public transport.   
 In assessing access to 271.270.
bus services, access to frequent 
and reliable services are critical 
in ensuring the bus is 
considered a realistic mode of 
travel. In this respectrespect,  
Policy P7 sets out an 
expectation that major 
development should be located 
within a 400m walking distance 
of a high frequency bus service  
offering a daytime frequency of 
15 minutes or better. For rail, 
high frequency is defined as 3 
or more services per hour 
during peak periods . 
 Where development 272.271.
cannot be provided in 
  
  
  
88 
 accordance with the accessibility criteria as part of this policy then mitigation will be expect ed 
to demonstrate how sustainable transport choices can be made.  Such mitigation will be 
proportionate to the scale of development. 
 Further to the location of development, consideration must be given to the quality of 273.272.
access to it by sustainable transport modes, and ease of access in, around and to that 
development for different users. Policy P7 expects high quality access by non-car modes to 
be designed into developments in order for public transport, walking or cycling (including 
linking where possible to LCWIP corridors) to become the preferred modes of travel. Access 
routes that are well connected, attractive, legible and safe, as well as facilities to encourage 
travel by sustainable transport modes, such as provision of cycle storage, will be required 
where they do not exist.  
 The Council is committed to ensuring that new developments are located in locations 274.273.
with the highest accessibility where reliance on the private car is low and take up of 
sustainable modes is high, thereby not materially adding to existing highway congestion. 
Planning can influence road safety through its control and influence on the design of new 
development and consideration should be given to pedestrian and cycle links in terms of 
personal safety, ensuring neither a sense or fea r of crime is encouraged through an isolation 
of the routes from other activities and street users which may discourage the use of the 
connecting links. Developers should consider the safety and needs of everyone in the 
community. 
Managing Demand for Travel 
 The expected increase in travel demand arising from population growth, HS2 and UK 275.274.
Central will introduce transport challenges which, without application of effective land use 
planning, are likely to further compound congestion on the Borough’s road network during 
peak hours. To ensure that transport does not in itself become a barrier to growth, the local 
plan sets a framework for promotion and facilitation of sustainable development where 
housing, jobs, local services and facilities are connected through a range and choice of 
transport modes. 
 Furthermore, increased availability and uptake of public transport, walking and 276.275.
cycling can complement wider accessibility and social inclusion, particularly in helping 
narrow income and health equality gaps between North Solihull and the remainder of the 
Borough.  Worklessness and health inequalities can be reduced through increasing 
opportunities to travel via non-car modes through the increased levels of activity involved in 
travelling by non-car modes. Enabling people to access their local area in a variety of ways 
can help to provide a sense of belonging and community cohesion as people become 
familiar with the area and build social networks. 
 Policy P7 sets out a framework under which development will be located in the most 277.276.
accessible locations. It therefore provides the primary step in managing travel demands 
associated with development from the outset, by ensuring that realistic opportunities are 
available to travel by non-car modes. 
 Policy P8 seeks thereafter to ensure that the travel demands associated with new 278.277.
development are managed in a sustainable manner and that subsequent traffic generated 
does not create or exacerbate network congestion to a point of severe highway impact.  To 
be clear, the impacts of development will be informed by robust Transport Statements and/or 
Assessments, which, where appropriate, model the underlying highway characteristics at the 
point development is expected to commence as well as future points thereafter (as 
appropriate to the build out of the development). Such assessments will have regard to the 
impact of the proposed development but should also factor in the cumulative impacts on the 
surrounding highway network, having regard to other known development proposals and 
planned infrastructure works where appropriate. Provision of safe and secure access to new  
  
 
 89 
89 development remains paramount.  Transport Assessments and Travel Plans will be required 
in association with particular types and scale of development to forecast the transpor t 
impacts associated with development, ensure that detrimental impacts are adequately 
mitigated and secure the implementation of, or contributions towards, appropriate measures 
to encourage and enable travel by non-car modes.   
 The Council will expect an evidence-based approach in forecasting parking demand and 278.
servicing provision which uses established evidences bases and/or, where relevant, first 
principles.  
279. As applications come forward the Council will look to work with applicants, developers and 
freight operating companies to promote steps to bring forward efficient and sustainable road 
freight operations in our borough. Examples may include promoting use of ultra-low emission 
vehicles or paying consideration to environmental impacts, road safety issues and traffic 
congestion.  
    
  
  
90 
 High Speed 2 Rail 
 The HS2 Act received Royal Assent in February 2017, with the Notice to Proceed 281.280.
issued in April 2020 and construction works are now underway; with the line expected to be 
open between 2029- 33.   
 The Act provides the powers and land necessary to construct and operate High 282.281.
Speed 2.  Detailed matters relating to design and construction arrangements will be 
submitted to, and considered by, the Council as the approval body (termed ‘Qualifying 
Authority’) under the HS2 Planning Regime. 
 However, the Act also ‘disapplies’ many aspects of national, regional and local 283.282.
legislation and policy, replacing it with that which is more directly relevant to the design and 
delivery of the railway. Specific grounds are set out upon which HS2 related applications can 
be considered, conditioned or refused; meaning that the policies set out in this Plan cannot 
be applied by the Council in the usual manner when considering such applications.  
 The Council will continue to work with HS2 Ltd on measures to minimise impacts on 284.283.
communities and the environment as a result of the construction of the railway and 
associated infrastructure. 
 Other policies in the plan (most notably Policy P1 “UK Central Hub Area”), provide 285.284.
the policy framework for considering development proposals associated with the railway, 
such that no further policies are required in this chapter. 
Rapid Transit 
 An efficient and accessible inter-connected rapid-transit network can play a vital role 286.285.
in improving the current transport system both locally and regionally whilst accommodating 
forecast increases in travel demand. The network can also help support wider urban 
regeneration and, in a more local context, go some way to reducing the transport severance 
between North and South Solihull.  
Bypass Improvement Lines 
 The 2006 UDP sought to safeguard the lines of three longstanding potential by- 287.286.
passes to Balsall Common, Hockley Heath and Knowle.  The 2013 SLP concluded that the 
need to retain safeguarding of the lines was no longer justified.  In relation to Hockley Heath 
and Knowle, there is nothing to suggest that this conclusion needs to be revisited.  However 
this is not the case in relation to Balsall Common. 
 The traffic associated with the HS2 Interchange site (and wider Hub area), and 288.287.
growth potential south of Coventry, especially when combined with traffic generated from 
new housing in the area, is likely to have an effect on the A452 as it passes through Balsall 
Common.  This justifies the provision of an alternative route that could accommodate 
through traffic, and provide a basis for new residential developments to access the network 
in an appropriate manner.  The Balsall Common settlement chapter gives more detail in 
relation to this. 
Motorway Service Areas (MSA) 
 In 2001 the Secretary of State (SoS) was minded to grant permission for an on-line 289.288.
MSA to serve the M42 near to Catherine de Barnes.  It was judged that the need for the 
services outweighed the harm to the Green Belt that had been identified.  However, in 2005 
prior to the formal decision being made, the SoS was of the view that due to material change 
in circumstances since the original inquiry that the inquiry ought to be re-opened.  
 The inquiry re-opened in 2008 and the MSA proposals near to Catherine de Barnes 290.289.
were considered alongside alternative proposals for an off line facility at junction 4.  At the 
re-opened inquiry the Highways Agency’s (as Highways England was then known) primary  
  
 
 91 
91 concern was to ensure that the safe and efficient operation of the strategic highway network 
would not be compromised by an MSA; and this included the operation of the Active Traffic 
Management (ATM) which had been b rought into use after the initial inquiry. 
 In 2009 the Secretary of State dismissed the two appeals.  Although the SoS 291.290.
concluded that there was still a significant unmet need, this need did not constitute the ‘very 
special circumstances’ that would be sufficient to clearly outweigh the substantial harm that 
had been identified in relation to both schemes.  In relation to the Catherine de Barnes 
proposals, she did not consider that the proposals before her were compatible with the safe 
and efficient working of the ATM system. 
 Since then revised planning applications have been submitted and  subsequently 292.291.
refused by the Council. are currently being assessed by the Council and Highways England.  
However, the option to appeal the decisions is still open and until the development 
management process is fully resolved,  Whilst the applications are under active and detailed 
consideration it is not considered necessary to address the issue further through this review 
of the development plan. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
    
  
  
92 
 Protecting and Enhancing our 
Environment  
Introduction 
 The national definition of sustainable development aims to enable people to meet 293.292.
their needs without compromising the quality of life of future generations, and includes 
protection and enhancement of the physical and natural environment, and efficient use of 
resources and energy. The NPPF states that the purpose of the planning system is to 
contribute to sustainable development, which includes the need to protect and enhance the 
natural environment, use natural resources more prudently, and to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change, thereby moving to a low carbon economy. 
 Since the SLP was adopted, the Council has developed a “Climate Change 294.293.
Prospectus” which captures how the Council is delivering a sustainable, low carbon Solihull. 
The prospectus sets out the Council’s vision for the future, along key themes that are 
essential if the Borough is to become more sustainable. They are: 
 Clean Growth 
 Clean Air 
 Nature Gain 
 Communication, Education & Engagement 
 Climate change is regarded as one of the greatest challenges facing humanity and 295.294.
the future of the planet today. There is strong scientific consensus39 on both the causes of 
anthropogenic increases of greenhouse gases within the atmosphere, as well as the 
impacts. 
 The UK was the first country to introduce legally binding targets for the reduction of 296.295.
greenhouse gases in the Climate Act 2008. The Act also established the Committee on 
Climate Change (CCC) to ensure that emissions targets are evidence-based and 
independently assessed. Following advice in the publication of ‘Net Zero – The UK’s 
contribution to stopping global warming’ by the CCC, the Act was amended in June 2019 to 
change the target from 80% reduction of 1990 levels to net zero by 2050. A net-zero GHG 
target for 2050 will also deliver on the commitment that the UK made by signing the Paris 
Agreement to  keep global warming b elow a temperature increase of 2°C.   
 In July 2019, the West Midlands Combined Authority declared an even more 297.296.
ambitious target of net zero by 2041.  On the 8th October 2019 the Council took action to 
tackle the climate change emergency and adopted a Statement of Intent to Protect the 
Environment40.  To implement the statement the Council has pledged action on a number of 
fronts, and where these relate to land use matters they have been included in this plan.  Of 
particular significance is the endorsement of the target of net-zero emissions by 2041, and 
this is a key objective of this plan. 
 Mitigation means reducing or preventing the causes of climate change, such as 298.297.
promoting renewable or low-carbon energy sources and reducing energy consumption. 
                                                           
39 https://www.theccc.org.uk/what- is-climate-change/the-science- of-climate-change/  
https://royalsociety.org/-/media/Royal_Society_Content/policy/projects/climate-evidence-causes/climate-change-
evidence-causes.pdf 
40 https://www.solihull.gov.uk/Portals/0/Planning/Climate-Statement-Oct-2019.pdf  
  
 
 93 
93 Adaptation refers to dealing with the impacts of climate change that are occurring now and 
will continue to affect our people and places. Tackling both the causes and impacts of 
climate change are cross-cutting themes addressed in the strategy, site allocations and 
policies throughout this Plan.  
 Planning can help to support the transition to a low carbon economy and to provide 299.298.
resilience to impacts from a changing climate. The location and design of new development 
in the Borough will help to minimise greenhouse gas emissions, the risk of flooding, and 
other impacts from a changing climate, whilst policies will encourage the use of renewable 
and low carbon energy. The WMCA recognises the value of supporting the demand and 
supply chain of the environmental technologies sector for the regional economy. 
 The Borough’s high quality green and blue infrastructure (GI) is one of its greatest 300.299.
assets. Our longest river, the River Blythe, is a designated SSSI, 14 of our parks have Green 
Flag awards and our suburbs are characterised by tree-lined streets. High quality, well-
connected GI is our Natural Capital and has multiple benefits, which include: 
 Attracting Investment 
 Creating Sense of Place 
 Providing opportunities for recreation and play 
 Improving health and wellbeing 
 Habitat for wildlife 
 Flood prevention and alleviation  
 Addressing Climate Change  
 Urban cooling  
 Filtering air and soil pollution  
 Reducing noise impacts  
 GI is not just our parks and countryside, but is a network of green and blue spaces 301.300.
made up of street trees, gardens, ponds, rivers, canals, hedgerows, woodlands, playing 
pitches, public rights of way and more.  
 The Government recognises the need for “more, bigger, better and joined” habitats to 302.301.
address fragmentation, degradation and the consequent decline in biodiversity. The 
ecosystem services provided by a healthy well-functioning natural environment are essential 
for sustainable economic growth and tackling the causes and effects of climate change. The 
economic and social benefits of protecting our Natural Capital far outweigh the cost of their 
protection, and there are significant economic opportunities available for greener goods and 
services.  
 The natural environment is fundamental to Solihull’s attractive urban and rural 303.302.
environment, which helps to attract and retain investment and people. The need to address 
the decline in biodiversity and fragmentation of habitats locally and to enhance and restore 
the Borough’s green infrastructure network to maximise the benefits for people and nature 
are recognised in the challenges and objectives, and the policies of this plan. 
 The Council values its existing GI assets and is preparing a Natural Capital 304.303.
Investment Strategy, which will capture the opportunities to address this challenge based on 
the GI Infrastructure Study (2012) and Sub-regional GI Study (2013). 
 Using natural resources more sustainably will help to protect resources for the future 305.304.
and contribute towards economic efficiency. This is reflected in a number of the challenges 
and objectives in this plan, notably those relating to water resources, waste management   
  
  
94 
 and minerals. More efficient use of water resources in new development will help to reduce 
the amount of waste water requiring treatment and discharge to the Borough’s watercourses, 
protecting water quality, and minimising the risk of flooding. Treating waste as a resource 
that has value and using recycled materials will help businesses to be more efficient as well 
as conserving natural resources, such as the mineral resources in the Borough. The plan 
addresses the challenges involved in providing for more waste management facilities and to 
contribute to local and sub-regional needs for sand and gravel aggregates. 
 The Government recognises the importance of protecting the amenities of existing 306.305.
and future occupiers of land and buildings (NPPF). This plan recognises that protecting 
amenity whilst providing for employment, housing and other growth will be a challenge and 
has as an objective the need to avoid, minimise or mitigate adverse impacts. 
Policy P9 Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change  
1. Proposals for development will be required to demonstrate that, dependent on their 
scale, use and location, measures are included that mitigate and adapt to the 
impacts of climate change. Full details of the pro posed measures should be 
incorporated into a Climate Change Assessment , in accordance with the Climate 
Change SPD.  
2. At a strategic level , measures to reduce carbon emissions and transition to a low 
carbon economy will include:  
 i. Locate development where it minimises the need to travel, particularly by  
 private vehicle, and maximises the use of sustainable forms of transport such 
 as cycling, walking , and public transport.  
 ii. Design development that enables transition to a ne t zero carbon economy 
 and make efficient use of natural resources.  
 iii. Promote and attach significant weight to the installation of district, low carbon 
 and renewable energy schemes.  
 iv. Expect major developments, particularly in Solihull Town Ce ntre and the UKC 
 Hub Area, to connect to or contribute towards , existing or planned district  
 energy and/or heat networks.  
3. At a site level , development must apply the ‘energy hierarchy’ to reduce energy 
demand for heating, lighting and cooling and m inimise carbon dioxide emissions as 
follows:  
 i. All new dwellings to achieve 30% reduction in energy demand/carbon  
 reduction improvement over and above the requirements of Building  
 Regulations Part L (2013) at the time of commencement up to March 2025.  
  ii. From April 2025 , for all new dwellings to be net zero carbon.  
 iii. Minor non -residential development will conform to at least BREEAM Very  
 Good and major non -residential dev elopment will conform to at least  
 BREEAM Excellent.  
   
  
 
 95 
95  iv. Provide at least 15% of energy from renewable and/or low carbon sources for 
 all major housing developments and non -residential developments of  
 1000sqm or more.  
 v. Supply energy efficient ly and give priority to decentralised and/or district  
 energy supply.  
 vi. For all major developments, implement a recognised quality regime that  
 ensures the 'as built' performance (energy use, carbon emissions, indoor air 
 quality, and overheating risk) matches the calculated design performance of 
 dwellings as specified above.  
 vii. Source low carbon and sustainably sourced building materials wherever  
 possible, e.g. secondary aggregates, recycled products and FSC certified 
 timber.  
 viii. For residential development of new dwellings: provide at least one charging 
 point for electric vehicles per dwelling. For non -residential development, 1 
 charging point will be provided per 10 parking spaces. On development sites 
 without allocated parkin g, a contribution will be made to the Council’s  
 Charging Infrastructure Fund  and/or provision to be made through a  
 commercial rapid charging point.   
4. In order that development proposals are adaptive and resilient to climate change, 
measures will in clude:  
  i. Flood prevention and mitigation measures, including (SUDS); and water  
   efficiency measures as set out in Policy P11.  
  ii. Layout (including orientation) and design that enhances natural ventilation 
   and lighting, and minimises the need for energy for heating and cooling, such 
   as Passivhaus.  
  iii. Integrated green infrastructure, such as SUD Ss, green spaces and corridors, 
   retaining and planting trees, green roofs &and walls, landscaping and rain  
    gardens.  
Renewable and low carbon energy and carbon offsetting schemes  
5. Planning permission will be granted for renewable or low carbon energy 
developments, and carbon offsetting schemes, provided that they:  
  i. Do not cause demonstrable harm to r esidential amenity  or established  
   commercial operations ;  
  ii.  Avoid or minimise impacts on the historic environment;  
  iii.  Can demonstrate no adverse effect on the natural environment , including   
   designated sites;  
  iv.  Do not have an unacceptable visual impact which would be harmful to its  
   setting;  
  v.  Will not have a detrimental impact on highway safety.    
  
  
96 
   Where located within the Green Belt, renewable or low carbon energy  
 developments or carbon offsetting schemes that would constitute   
 ‘inappropriate development’ will also need to demonstrate very special  
 circumstances in order to be approved.  
Community energy  
6. The Council will support the establishment of Renewable  Energy Service Companies 
and community -led initiatives to reduce energy use and exploit renewable energy 
sources within the Borough.  
Climate Change Assessment  
7. A Climate Change Assessment  shall be submitted with relevant applicants 
applications to demon strate how the criteria in this policy (where relevant) have been 
met. 
Justification 
 The NPPF is clear that planning, at both a strategic and decision-making level, 307.306.
should fully support the transition to a low carbon economy; secure radical reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions and support the delivery of renewable and low carbon energy. 
The Council recognises that it has a crucial role to play in mitigating against and adapting to 
climate change through this plan. 
 National climate change targets aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 37% of 308.307.
1990 levels by 2020, 57% by 2030 and 100% by 2050. In the period 2005-2018, CO 2 
emissions per person in the Borough have declined, but at a slower rate than the wider West 
Midlands Combined Authority area. The WMCA have set an ambitious and accelerated 
target to achieve net zero carbon by 2041, and this is supported by the Council. The carbon 
budget for Solihull during the plan period is MtCO2 .  The Council will take full account of 
national and local targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and increasing the 
generation of energy from renewable and low carbon sources, when considering 
development proposals.  
 The Council  continues to implement the  Home Energy Efficiency and Affordable 309.308.
Warmth Strategy , and working towards the Government’s  Fuel Poverty target: to ensure that 
as many fuel poor homes as is reasonably practicable achieve a minimum energy standard 
(Energy Performance Certificate rating) of Band ‘C’ by 2030. 
 24% of the UK’s carbon emissions are from the transport sector. Greenhouse gas 310.309.
emissions can be minimised by reducing the need to travel and ensuring that future 
occupiers of new developments have a choice of low carbon travel options. The Council’s 
Transport Strategy ‘Solihull Connected’ states to support a low-carbon future Solihull will 
work in partnership with regional partners and align with the West Midlands Strategic 
Transport Plan ‘Movement for Growth’, the GBSLEP Low-carbon Transport Strategy, 
Birmingham Connected and Highways England; in particular to support people making low-
carbon travel choices such as walking, cycling and public transport, the market for low-
carbon vehicles and investment in recharging infrastructure and new technologies. The 
plan’s spatial strategy promotes development in the most accessible locations wherever 
possible; in less accessible locations Policy P7 and P8 provide the parameters to increase 
accessibility and reduce dependence on private vehicles. The Council’s Local Walking and 
Cycling Infrastructure Plan will provide greater opportunities for active travel and reduce 
reliance on the private car.  
  
 
 97 
97     
  
  
98 
  Reducing the impacts of climate change and improving air quality are twin objectives. 311.310.
The Council’s Electric Charging Vehicle Strategy aims to increase the coverage of electric 
charging points across the Borough and future-proof technological advancement. All new 
development is expected to provide useable charging infrastructure directly or, where this is 
proven to be impractical, contribute to the Council’s Charging Infrastructure Fund. 
 
 This policy seeks to encourage the development of low carbon and renewable 312.311.
energy solutions appropriate to the circumstances and scale of development. The 
contribution that such proposals make towards the reduction of emissions will be given 
significant weight. 
 Proposals to develop decentralised energy and heating networks in the Borough will 313.312.
be encouraged and should be based on the latest available evidence, such as the 
Renewable Resource Assessment (2020). Any impacts from infrastructure, including on-site 
low carbon and renewable energy installations, on the surrounding natural, built and historic 
environment, including ground and surface water quantity and quality, or on residents or 
businesses will be considered, with significant weight to be given to the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions to be achieved. Where adverse impacts are identified, these 
should be minimised, or be subject to appropriate mitigation. In locations where 
decentralised energy and heating networks or off-gas networks exist, or have the greatest 
potential, such as Solihull town centre, UKC Hub, and major business parks, developers will 
be expected to connect to or deliver decentralised networks, unless it is demonstrated that 
this is not feasible or viable. 
 Proposals for renewable or low carbon energy generation, such as photovoltaic 314.313.
arrays or windfarms, will take into account evidence provided in the forthcoming Renewable 
Resource Assessment and Net Zero Action Plan. Two-thirds of the Borough is designated 
Green Belt, and proposals which harm the openness and permanence of the Green Belt are 
not considered ‘appropriate development’. Therefore, such proposals will need to provide 
Very Special Circumstances to be considered. 
 20% of the UK’s GHG emissions originate from energy use in the housing stock. The 315.314.
Government is committed to increasing the energy efficiency of existing and new dwellings in 
a way that is fair, affordable and inclusive. The energy efficiency requirement of Part L of the 
Building Regulations will be uplifted in 2025 as part of the Future Homes Standard. The 
Council are keen that the very latest Building Regulations are applied to qualifying 
development and not kept at the time of the first planning permission being granted. This is 
especially significant for large strategic allocations. Proposals for low carbon design such as 
Passivhaus or accelerating Building Regulations to zero carbon will be given substantial 
weight. 
 Efficient use of natural resources contributes to reducing our carbon and ecological 316.315.
footprint.  Buildings and their surrounding landscape should be designed to make efficient 
use of natural resources during construction, operation and maintenance. Ensuring the 
 
  
 
 99 
99 resilience to the impacts of a changing climate at the build stage rather than retrofit is more 
cost-effective, inclusive and lowers fuel poverty . Sunlight and energy efficiency should be 
considered as an integral part of the layout through passive solar design and natural 
ventilation systems. Developments should also consider whole-life performance and costs. 
The consideration of a range of adaptation measures, including the location, design, 
materials, build and operation of developments, and the provision of green infrastructure, will 
be given substantial weight. 
 Climate change is already happening, with rising temperatures and increase in 317.316.
flooding. The anticipated effects of climate change include more frequent extreme weather 
events; heavier rainfall and greater risk of flooding; and more and longer-lasting heat waves. 
The more vulnerable in society; those on low incomes, the elderly and young, those with 
long-term illness are also more vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This policy aims 
to ensure that all sections of the community are more resilient to the effects of climate 
change. 
 Green infrastructure delivers multiple cost-effective benefits in mitigating and 318.317.
adapting to climate change. Planted areas can slow water flows, decrease surface run-off, 
even out temperature fluctuations, trap pollution and encourage biodiversity.  
 Guidance on minimising the consumption of water resources and addressing flood 319.318.
risk concerns, which are likely to increase in importance in the future, is included within 
Policy P11. Guidance on minimising demand for energy in new developments is included 
within Policy P15 and protecting the most vulnerable from the impacts of climate change in 
Policy P18. 
 More detail on compliance with Policy P9 and the wider climate change objectives of 320.319.
the Local Plan are set out in the Council’s Climate Change SPD. A Climate Change 
Assessment will be submitted with planning applications to show how different criteria of the 
policy have been met. The Viability Study supporting the Local Plan Review provides 
evidence that meeting the aims of the policy is viable, and robust evidence will need to be 
provided if this is not the case. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
I Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
    
  
  
100 
 Policy P10 Natural Environment  
1. The Council recognises the importance of a healthy natural environment in its own 
right, and for the natural capital benefits it provides to the people, places and 
econo my of the Borough. The Council will seek to protect, enhance, restore, increase 
and connect the natural environment and secure measurable net gains in 
biodiversity. The full value and benefits of the natural environment will be taken into 
account in consid ering all development proposals, including the contribution to the 
green economy, the health and wellbeing  of residents, and the role of green 
infrastructure in reducing the impacts of climate change and improving air quality. 
Joint working with neighbouri ng authorities and partners will be supported, 
recognising the need for a landscape - scale approach to the natural environment and 
conservation of biodiversity and geodiversity.  
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
2. The Council will seek to conserve, enhance and restore biodiversity and geodiversity 
across the Borough. Development whose primary objective is to conserve or 
enhance biodiversity  and/or geodiversity  will be supported; while opportunities to 
incorporate biodiversity improvements in , and around , developments will be 
encouraged, especially where this can secure measurable net gains for biodiversity.  
3. Protection of designated sites, ancient woodland, and priority habitats shall include 
the establishment of b uffers to any new development , so that they connect with 
existing and created green infrastructure assets.  
4. Development should be informed by up -to-date information on habitats and species, 
and take full account of national and local guidance on conserv ing biodiversity, 
opportunities for biodiversity enhancement and for improving and restoring the 
Borough’s green infrastructure (especially fragmentation of habitats). When 
appropriate, development should seek to enhance accessibility to the natural 
environment, especially for disabled people.  
5. Developers will be expected to take full account of the nature conservation or 
geological value, and the existence of any protected, rare, endangered or priority 
habitats or species included in the Local Biodiversi ty Action Plan, national S.41 list, 
or sites in the Local Geological Action Plan, as well as the Wildlife and Countryside 
Act and Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations.  
6. Developers will be required to undertake an ecological survey , proportio nate to the 
scale and type of development, following best practice methods.  
7. In considering the need for green space improvements associated with new 
development, developers should have regard for the standards and priorities in the 
Green Spaces Strateg y/Open Space SPD in relation to accessible natural green 
space, and Defra’s forthcoming GI standards.  
   
  
 
 10
1 101 Biodiversity  Net Gain  
8. Development will be required to demonstrate how it will secure  a ‘net gain’ in 
biodiversity  of at least 10% compared with the p re-development baseline.41 
9. In the first instance, net gain should be provided in situ, as habitats and features to 
support native biodiversity, as well as conserving and enhancing existing nature 
conservation assets value within , and around , the development .  
10. In the circumstances where development, which otherwise meets the objectives of 
the Plan, is likely to have significant harmful effects on the natural environment , as a 
result of the development itself, or the cumulative impact of de velopments, 
developers must demonstrate that all possible alternatives that would result in less 
harm have been  considered and robustly discounted .  
11. Where development is permitted, appropriate mitigation of the impacts and 
compensation will be require d to deliver a net gain in biodiversity. This should be 
provided as:  
  i. habitat creation and/or restoration ;, 
  ii. increased connectivity of the ecological and green infrastructure network,  
   and; 
  iii. responds  to landscape character and local distinctiveness.  
12. Enhancements should be undertaken either on the site, or in its vicinity, but where it 
is clearly justified that this is not possible, biodiversity offsetting, in alternative 
strategic locations within  the Borough’s ecological or green infrastructure network, 
may be considered  as a last resort.  
13. Evidence should be provided using the Warwickshire, Coventry and Solihul l 
Biodiversi ty Impact Assessment calculator , or Defra equivalent. Further guidance wi ll 
be provided in a Green Infrastructure and Biodiversity Net Gain SPD.  
Arden Landscape  
14. The Council will seek to protect, enhance and restore the diverse landscape features 
of the Borough and to create characteristic habitats such as new woodlands, cop ses, 
hedgerows and standard trees, urban trees, species -rich grassland, wood pasture, 
parklands, wetlands and heathland . Tto halt , and where possible reverse , the 
degrading of the Arden landscape and promote local distinctiveness.  
15. Development should take full account of national and local guidance on protecting 
and restoring the landscape and the areas in need of enhancement, including 
guidance relating to the countryside. Developers will be expected to incorporate 
measures to protect, enhance and res tore the landscape, unless it is demonstrated 
that it is not feasible, disproportionate , or unnecessary.  
  
                                                           
41 The Council will take seriously any attempt to minimise the biodiversity baseline value, such as the removal of trees 
prior to planning application.   
  
  
102 
 16. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that they:  
  i. Consider the context and setting, including local distinctiveness, natural and 
   historic landscapes and character, and impact on tranquillity;  
  ii. Identify likely visual impacts on the local landscape (and townscape) and its 
   immediate setting , and undertake appropriate landscape design and 
mitigation     mitigation  to red uce these impacts;  
  iii. Aim to conserve, enhance and/or restore important landscape features in  
   accordance with the latest local and national guidance, ensuring their long 
   termlong-   term management and maintenance;  
  iv. Address the importance of habitat biodiversity features, including aged and 
   veteran trees, ancient woodland trees and hedges and their contribution to 
   landscape character, where possible enhancing these features through  
   means such as buffering an d reconnecting fragmented areas.                             
17. Sites of Special Scientific Interest : Development likely to have an adverse effect 
on a Site of Special Scientific Interest, whether directly or indirectly, will be subject to 
special scrutin y and will be permitted only if, in exceptional circumstances, it can be 
demonstrated that the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the nature 
conservation value or scientific interest of the site , and the national policy to 
safeguard such sites. W here development is permitted that may have a direct or 
indirect adverse effect on a Site of Special Scientific Interest, developers will be 
required to incorporate measures to enhance the condition of the site and contribute 
to its favourable status.  
18. Local Nature Reserve, Local Wildlife Site or Geological Site : Development likely 
to have an adverse effect on a locally designated site will be permitted only if the 
reasons for the development clearly outweigh the nature conservation or geological 
value o f the site and its contribution to wider biodiversity objectives. Where 
development would have an adverse effect on a site of local value, developers will be 
expected to incorporate measures to enhance the site , or to restore the links 
between sites to imp rove connectivity in the ecosystem network based on local 
evidence. Evidence of net gains to biodiversity will be required.  
19. Ancient woodland and Veteran trees : Development likely to have an adverse 
impact on ancient woodland and/or veteran trees will n ot be permitted unless there 
are wholly exceptional circumstances. Where development may have an adverse 
impact on ancient woodland or veteran trees, applicants should refer to Natural 
England and the Forestry Commission's Standing Advice and Assessment Gu ide on 
Ancient Woodland and Veteran Trees.  
Justification 
 The Natural Environment White Paper was published in 2011, seeking to address 321.320.
concerns about the decline and fragmentation of the natural environment, highlighted in the 
Lawton Report, through the provision of more, better, bigger and joined spaces for nature. It 
set out a national target to halt biodiversity loss by 2020, supported by the Biodiversity 
Strategy for England . The White Paper recognised the economic benefits that are obtained 
from natural environment resources or natural capital and makes clear that biodiversity loss 
has important adverse economic and social consequences, as well as environmental ones.   
  
 
 10
3 103  Since the publication of the White Paper and Biodiversity Strategy in 2011, there 322.321.
have continued to be national declines in both the quantity and quality of priority (S.41) 
habitats and species. The Government’s 25-year Environment Plan affirms that it places ‘the 
utmost importance on our commitments to biodiversity and nature conservation’, and sets 
out bold ambitions and measures to ‘leave [the] environment in a better state than we found 
it and pass on to the next generation a natural environment protected and enhanced for the 
future.’ 
 The policy addresses the themes in the White Paper, the Lawton Report and the 25- 323.322.
year Environment Plan by confirming that the full value of the natural environment will be 
taken into account in considering development proposals, and net gains in biodiversity will 
be sought. This should include the potential for the natural environment to improve health 
and wellbeing, contribute to the multi-functional benefits of green infrastructure, and reduce 
the impacts of climate change, e.g. through urban cooling and the management of surface 
water flows. 
 Solihull is we ll-placed to deliver on these ambitions as the Council has a proven track 324.323.
record of securing biodiversity gains and green infrastructure improvements in a variety of 
projects, notably the ERDF Wildlife Ways and the Solihull Habitats and Nature Improvement 
programmes. These have provided over 150 hectares of habitat enhancements within parks, 
open spaces and along footpaths and cycleways.  
 The Borough is home to a rich and varied natural environment and extended green 325.324.
infrastructure network within both a rural and urban setting. These include rivers, canals, 
ancient woodland, species-rich wildflower meadows and pastures, geomorphic features and 
more formal parks, gardens and tree-lined streetscapes. These assets constitute the 
Borough’s natural capital and provide a wide range of ‘ecosystem services’ from providing 
areas of recreation for people and a green environment to improve mental health and 
wellbeing; to water management, flood risk alleviation, carbon storage, food and timber 
production and mitigating the effects of air and noise pollution.  
 However, the natural environment is, in parts, too small scale, fragmented, degraded, 326.325.
under visitor pressure, at risk of pollution, or incorrectly managed and the impacts of new 
development need to be considered from the outset to minimise harm and maximise 
opportunities for nature recovery, including the opportunity for connecting habitats and 
corridors. 
 Solihull’s countryside lies within the Arden landscape character area, for which 327.326.
guidance is provided in Natural England’s National Character Area study and the 
Warwickshire Landscapes Guidelines for Arden. These identify the landscape types that ar e 
characteristic to the area and the need for enhancement or restoration in much of the 
Borough. The Council commissioned a Landscape Character Assessment (LCA) as part of 
the Local Plan Review evidence base and ‘Solihull’s Countryside’ sets out the strategy for 
the countryside in the Borough and defines a number of zones within which different policy 
objectives apply. It highlights continuing landscape change and declining distinctiveness 
within the Borough’s countryside. Developers will be expected to take the LCA, Countryside 
strategy or its successor into account in locating and designing development. 
 An integrated approach to the conservation of natural ecosystems will be sought, 328.327.
based on landscape-scale conservation, so as to contribute to targets to halt and reverse 
biodiversity loss, and to deliver economic and social benefits for Solihull’s residents and 
businesses.  New development should incorporate biodiversity conservation through good 
design.  Developers will be expected to use national guidance on the provision of buffers 
between development and any ancient woodland, designated site or priority biodiversity 
action plan habitat. Where development is within 500 metres of woodland recorded in 
Natural England’s Ancient Woodland Inventory, the Forestry Commission will be consulted. 
Up to date information on biodiversity resources is provided through the Warwickshire,   
  
  
104 
 Coventry and Solihull Habitat Biodiversity Audit, of which the Council is a partner, and 
opportunities for enhancement are highlighted in the Warwickshire, Coventry and Solihull 
Green Infrastructure Strategy and Solihull’s Natural Capital Investment Plan. Developers will 
be expected to make use of this information in seeking to protect and enhance biodiversity 
through development. 
 The Council recognises and will promote the need for and benefits of joint working 329.328.
with a range of sectors, including public sector bodies, farming and agriculture, voluntary 
groups, wildlife charities, Neighbourhood Areas and private landowners to achieve 
landscape scale conservation and enhance the strategic green and blue infrastructure 
network. The Council is a partner in the Kingfisher Country Park project, with Birmingham 
and environmental agencies and groups, to protect and restore the landscape of the River 
Cole and Kingshurst Brook and their surrounds in North Solihull. The Council supports the 
work of the Local Nature Partnership for Warwickshire, Coventry and Solihull, such as the 
West Arden Living Landscape project, Tame Valley and River Cole NIA, and the Cole Valley 
Vision. ‘Nature Conservation in Solihull’ and the Council’s Natural Capital Investment Plan 
set out the strategic objectives for biodiversity conservation in the Borough, and developers 
should take these and other strategies relating to the natural environment into account. The 
Council will work with Natural England and partners on the development and implementation 
of a Local Nature Recovery Strategy (LNRS)  l to reverse the fragmentation of ecological 
networks and connect wildlife sites. Such initiatives will provide wildlife corridors and ‘sinks’ 
for species in response to the effects of climate change, as well as provide multi-functional 
green infrastructure to enhance ecosystem services. 
 The policy recognises the importance of designated areas such as the nationally 330.329.
important Sites of Special Scientific Interest, of which there are five in the Borough including 
the River Blythe, and locally important wildlife and geological sites and nature reserves. It 
also recognises that many of 
these important sites are in 
unfavourable condition, and 
the potential for nearby 
development to help deliver 
improvements. The policy sets 
out the relative importance to 
be attached to designated sites 
when considering development 
proposals, including the 
special scrutiny afforded to 
Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest, in line with national 
guidance. However, 
biodiversity conservation will 
not be achieved by protecting 
Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest alone. Locally 
important wildlife and 
geological sites continue to be designated in the Borough and have been successfully 
protected through policies in development plans for many years. The LNRS will identify and 
further connect these ‘jewels in the crown’ with corridors and stepping stones for nature to 
thrive. 
 The policy highlights the importance of creating opportunities for wildlife in enhancing 331.330.
and restoring the green infrastructure network both within and around new development 
sites. Integrating biodiversity through green infrastructure networks and wildlife corridors will 
be essential to halt and reverse the fragmentation of resources identified in the Lawton 
 
  
 
 10
5 105 Report and evidenced in the State of Nature report 2019. Developers will be expected to 
take proper account of the value of sites proposed for development, to deliver a net gain in 
biodiversity and habitat creation and to have regard for Local Biodiversity Action Plan 
priorities, accessible natural green space standards and priorities in the Green Spaces 
Strategy or its successor, as well as take account of the forthcoming Defra Green 
Infrastructure standards. 
 Applicants will be required to carry out ecological surveys, proportionate and relevant 332.331.
to the type and scale of development, to determine the biodiversity value of the site in terms 
of species and habitats. The Warwickshire, Coventry and Solihull Biodiversity Impact 
Assessment calculator (as updated) or the Defra Metric 2.0 (as updated) should be used to 
calculate the baseline biodiversity units of the site, as a comparison for net gain. In line with 
the Environment Bill, if activities which would lower the biodiversity value are carried out after 
30th January 2020, then the pre-development biodiversity value will be measured as 
immediately before the activities took place. 
 The Council is committed to an increase in nature conservation value throughout the 333.332.
Borough and the delivery of net gains for biodiversity. Only where it is clearly justified this is 
not practicable to achieve net gain on-site, and where it is shown to have been considered 
and sought from the early stages of the design and layout of the development, will off-site 
provision, in the form of land in lieu or equivalent financial contributions, be agreed.  
 Where development would be harmful to the natural environment, developers must 334.333.
consider alternatives that would result in less harm, and to incorporate appropriate mitigation 
and, where relevant, compensation so as to deliver a net gain in biodiversity, landscape 
character restoration and ecosystem services. Indirect impacts should also be taken into 
account, such as air pollution from traffic and light pollution, the latter in particular for bats 
and invertebrates. Biodiversity offsetting should only be delivered as a last resort. Where 
biodiversity offsetting is agreed, then the offset should be provided within the Borough or 
contributing to net gains that will result in a measurable enhancement of the Borough’s 
ecological or green infrastructure network. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
Policy P11 Water and Flood Risk Management  
Water Quality  
1. All new development should have regard to the actions and objectives of the  relevant 
River Basin Management Plan in striving to protect and improve the quality of water 
bodies in , and adjacent to , the Borough, including the Rrivers Blythe and Cole and 
their tributaries. Developers shall undertake thorough risk assessments of the impact 
of proposals on surface and groundwater systems and incorporate appropriate 
mitigation measures where necessary. The Council will require developers to   
  
  
106 
 demonstrate that all proposed development will be served by appropriate sewerage 
infrastructure , and that there is sufficient sewage treatment capacity to ensure that 
there is no deterioration of water quality, or that the delivery of any development will 
not be delayed by the need for additional water treatment provision.   Drainage 
systems shall depl oy surface features within the development site for water quality 
purposes, unless these are demonstrated to be unviable.  
Water Efficiency and Disposal  
2. Disposal of surface water must comply with the following hierarchy:  
  i. Recycling/reuse;  
  ii. Discharge into the ground by infiltration;  
  iii. Discharge to a surface water body or watercourse;  
  iv. Discharge to a surface water sewer, highway drain, or another drainage  
   system;  
  v. Discharge to a combined sewer.  
Recycling/reuse  
3. The Council recognises the need for water efficiency in all new development. 
Developers must demonstrate the highest possible standards of water efficiency 
through the recycling of potable, grey water and rainwater, and the use of water 
efficient fittings and applianc es, in order to minimise consumption to a maximum rate 
of 110 litres per person , per day.  
Infiltration  
4. Development within areas identified as being at risk from groundwater flooding must 
be subject to full and careful investigation before infiltration measures are proposed, 
in order to minimise flood risk on the site and reduce risks elsewhere. The use of 
infiltration systems in areas deemed to be at risk from groundwater flooding must be 
agreed with the Council , as Lead Local Flood Authority. On previo usly developed 
land where there is contamination known or suspected, any infiltration proposals 
must be agreed with the Environment Agency.  The quantity and quality of 
groundwater resources should be protected.  
Discharge to watercourse  
5. Where a developer  proposes that a site discharges to a watercourse, appropriate 
modelling and supporting calculations must be provided to ensure sufficient receiving 
capacity exists. The Environment Agency must be consulted if a proposal relates to a 
Main River or an Area of Critical Drainage Problems.  
Discharge to sewer  
6. Where discharge to a public sewer is proposed , discharge rates must be agreed with 
the Council as Lead Local Flood Authority, and confirmation obtained from the 
relevant infrastructure owner.   
  
 
 10
7 107 Sustainable  Drainage Systems  
7. All development must include the use of above ground sustainable drainage 
systems, in order to contribute towards wider sustainability considerations, including 
amenity, recreation, conservation of biodiversity , and landscape character , as well as 
flood alleviation and water quality control. Developers are encouraged to secure 
reduction of flood risk by the provision or enha ncement of green infrastructure and 
the inclusion of an on -site attenuation.  
8. At an early stage, developers must  ensure that adequate space is made for the 
above ground storage of surface water within the design layout of all new 
developments , to support the full use of sustainable drainage systems (S UuDS) and 
must demonstrate that improvements to water quality will  be maximised through 
consideration of a range of techniques.  All developments must explore opportunities 
to provide betterment in terms of water quality and quantity to the wider area , and 
provide evidence as to the potential for cumulative benefits to be  delivered through 
the implementation of a strategic approach to risk reduction.  
Water Quantity  
9. On all development sites, surface water discharge rates to any drain, sewer or 
surface water body shall be limited to the equivalent site specific greenfiel d run off 
rate. Where it is proposed to discharge run  off at rates greater than greenfield rates, 
developers will be required to demonstrate why it is not feasible to achieve greenfield 
rates , and to secure agreement from the Counci l as Lead Local Flood Au thority  
ahead of submission of any application.  
10. In all cases, the greenfield run  off rate shall be agreed with the Council as Lead Local 
Flood Authority, the Environment Agency, Severn Trent Water and the Canal and 
River Trust, as appropriate. The gree nfield run  off rate should take into account the 1 
in 1 year, 1 in 30 year and 1 in  100 year rainfall events, including climate change 
allowances.  
Flood Risk Reduction  
11. Developers shall explore opportunities to contribute towards the objectives of 
relev ant Catchment Flood Management Plans and Flood Risk Management Plans. 
Development must promote the reduction of flood risk by seeking to reinstate the 
natural floodplain, and the de -culverting and improvement of on -site watercourses. 
Development should be set back at least 8m (from the top of bank or toe of a flood 
defence) of Main Rivers and 5m from Ordinary Watercourses for maintenance 
access. This includes existing culverted watercourses.  
12. New development will not normally be permitted within areas at  risk of flooding. 
Where it is clearly demonstrated that there are no other viable sites at lower risk of 
flooding, consideration will be given to development in such locations, providing that 
it is designed to be safe from the effects of flooding and will  minimise flood risk on the 
site and reduce risks elsewhere. Applications for new development where there is a 
flood risk issue must be accompanied by a site specific flood risk assessment . Such 
assessments should be completed having regard to this policy and National 
Guidance.  
13. Developers must demonstrate that the layout and design of a development, including 
the finished floor levels, and the drainage system take account of both fluvial and   
  
  
108 
 surface water flows in extreme events so as to avoid flooding of properties, both 
within and outside the site.  
13.      New development sites must be resistant and resilient to flooding, to accord with the 
NPPF. Drainage systems must be designed so that flooding does not occur on any 
part of or off the site in a 1 to 30 year rainfall event, u nless an area is designated to 
hold or convey water as part of the design, or in any part of a building or plant 
susceptible to water in a 1 to 100 year rainfall event. The design of the site should 
ensure that flows resulting from events in excess of a 1 to 100 year rainfall event, are 
managed so as to minimise the risks to people and property, including flows from 
adjacent land where relevant.  
14.     Finished floor levels must be no lower than 300mm above average surrounding 
ground level. Where at risk from fluvial flooding, finished floor levels must be a 
minimum of 600mm above the 1 to 100 year plus climate change flood level, or for 
minor development where detailed modelling of the latest climate change allowances 
has not been undertaken, no lower tha n 600mm above the 1 in 1,000 year flood 
level. All development layouts should direct the most vulnerable elements of a 
development to the areas of lowest risk, including access routes wherever possible 
whilst also ensuring layouts are such that proposals d o not result in an impediment to 
flow. 
15.     Where development results in the loss of flood plain storage, compensatory storage 
should be provided on a level for level and volume for volume basis. Mitigation 
measures should be provided up to the 1 in 100  (1% AEP) plus climate change fluvial 
flood event including the requirement for safe access and egress.  
1416. At an early stage, dialogue should be held with the Lead Local Flood Authority to 
ensure developments do not detrimentally impact upon existing an d planned flood 
risk management schemes , including ensuring land identified for flood storage is 
safeguarded , as well as exploring all opportunities for additional flood risk reductions 
and protections that can be delivered as part of the proposals working  in partnership 
with the Lead Local Flood Authority.  Developers are required to contribute towards 
the cost of planned flood risk management schemes through Section 106 or 
Community Infrastructure Levy charging schedules.  All new developments that 
benefi t from existing flood risk management schemes should contribute towards their 
on-going maintenance.  
Justification 
 The European Water Framework Directive became part of UK law in 2003 and 335.334.
requires improvements to the quality of water bodies, including rivers, lakes, reservoirs, 
canals and aquifers. These requirements are reflected in the Environment Agency’s River 
Basin Management Plans, with the Humber River Basin Management Plan setting out the 
Water Framework Directive target for each water body to achieve ‘good’ status. At March 
2016, one part of the River Blythe was classified ‘bad’, three parts ‘poor’ and one part 
‘moderate’.  For the length of the River Cole within the Borough, a decline has been 
measured from ‘moderate’ status in 2009 to ‘poor’ status in 2015. The Council requires well 
designed development in the right locations with appropriate drainage processes that can 
contribute towards River Basin Management Plan objectives. Where viable, surface drainage 
features shall be deployed in accordance with the Construction Industry Research 
Information Association (CIRIA) sustainable drainage systems manual, with approved 
proprietary engineered pollution control features used only if surface features are  
  
 
 10
9 109 demonstrated not to be viable. The European Water Framework Directive also establishes 
groundwater quality standards and measures to prevent or limit pollutants into groundwater.  
 National planning guidance on water quality and flood risk requires plans to take 336.335.
account of infrastructure needs such as water resources. The guidance also requires new 
development to be directed to areas at the lowest risk of flooding using a sequential, risk-
based approach to the location of new development to avoid and/or manage flood risk. 
 The Council has undertaken an update to the Water Cycle study for the Borough, in 337.336.
consultation with the Environment Agency and Severn Trent Water. The study demonstrates 
that the level of development and the site allocations proposed in the plan are capable of 
being delivered without significant water and sewerage infrastructure improvements. 
However, the policy requires all new development to contribute to Water Framework 
Directive and River Basin Management Plan objectives by protecting and improving the 
quality of water bodies through the provision of appropriate sewerage infrastructure and 
sustainable drainage techniques. Developers will be expected to demonstrate that they have 
thoroughly assessed the impact of their proposals on surface and ground water systems, 
and incorporated any necessary sewerage and drainage mitigation measures . to ensure the 
quantity and quality of water resources are protected.  
 The Council recognises the need for water efficiency in all new development. The 338.337.
Water Cycle study recommends adoption of the optional higher standard of water efficiency 
as it identifies Solihull to be in moderate water stress, due to the economic benefits of 
reduced supply, and because of the increased sewer capacity. The policy requires 
developers to demonstrate the higher standard through the recycling of potable, grey water 
and rain water, and the use of water efficient fittings and appliances, before seeking disposal 
of surface water, in accordance with the hierarchy in Part H of the Building Regulations. 
 Reducing water consumption has the effect of reducing carbon emissions as water 339.338.
companies use energy to collect, treat and supply water and to treat waste water. Simple 
demand management measures, particularly those that reduce hot water use, have 
significant potential to save water and energy, and reduce the carbon footprint of the water 
system. This accords with guidance in the NPPF, which requires local planning authorities to 
adopt proactive strategies to adapt to climate change.  
 The Environment Agency 340.339.
is promoting the use of 
sustainable drainage techniques 
as a means of contributing to the 
requirements of the Water 
Framework Directive and 
reducing flood risk, as well as for 
wider benefits, such as the 
conservation of biodiversity, 
enhancement of the amenity of 
urban areas and to assist in 
adaptation to climate change. The 
NPPF gives priority to the use of 
sustainable drainage systems in 
areas at risk of flooding and for 
major development. Sustainable 
drainage systems assist with the 
provision of green infrastructure, 
supported by the NPPF and the 
Council’s Green Infrastructure study.  
  
  
  
110 
  Sustainable drainage systems will be required for all development Developers will be 341.340.
expected to design in these requirements at an early stage in the development of new 
proposals, and to demonstrate that the proposed solution will maximise the benefits to the 
water environment. The Council does not regard underground storage tanks only as an 
appropriate sustainable drainage system, and will require at least one surface feature to be 
deployed within the drainage system for a development site for water quality purposes, with 
more features where runoff may contain higher levels of pollutants. 
 Control of discharge rates from new and previously developed sites is an important 342.341.
part of flood risk management, supporting the NPPF by utilising opportunities offered by new 
development to reduce the causes and impacts of flooding, and the overall level of risk in the 
area and beyond. Ensuring that new developments discharge to greenfield rates reduces the 
wider impact, whilst limiting discharge rates associated with previously developed sites will 
reduce pressure on existing watercourses and sewer systems. 
 The Environment Agency’s Catchment Flood Management Plans provide an 343.342.
overview of flood risk across river catchments and recommend ways in which risks now and 
in the future can be managed. New development in the Borough will be expected to 
contribute towards the policy objectives of the Catchment Flood Management Plans. Most of 
the Borough lies within the Mid Staffordshire and Lower Tame policy unit within the Trent 
Catchment Flood Management Plan, where the objective is to take action to store water or 
manage runoff in locations that provide overall flood risk reduction or environmental benefits 
locally or elsewhere in the catchment. The western part of the Borough adjacent to 
Birmingham, and the eastern part adjoining Coventry lie in the Birmingham and Black 
Country, and the Coventry Cluster policy units in the Severn Catchment Flood Management 
Plan respectively. The Catchment Flood Management Plan objective in these areas is to 
take further action to reduce flood risk. Reinstatement of the natural floodplain, the de-
culverting and improvement of on-site watercourses also helps contribute towards the 
objectives of the Humber River Basin Management Plan and achieving the Water 
Framework Directive target of each water body within the Borough achieving good status. 
 The Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority for Solihull and has published a Local 344.343.
Flood Risk Management Strategy to help reduce flood risk and mitigate the impact of 
flooding in the Borough. Developers will be expected to review and pay due regard to the 
recommendations included within the Local Flood Risk Strategy produced by the Lead Local 
Flood Authority. The Strategy may highlight opportunities to work in partnership with the 
Environment Agency and the Lead Local Flood Authority to contribute to the reduction of 
flood risk to new development and to third party land. 
 The Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment for Solihull has identified the main 345.344.
flood risk areas within the Borough taking account of climate change and has been used 
alongside the Environment Agency’s flood zone and risk of flooding from surface water maps 
to help guide new land allocations within the plan to areas at low risk of flooding, via a 
sequential test.  
 Where there may be higher risks of flooding of new land allocations because the 346.345.
detailed modelling of watercourses has not been undertaken or parts of a site lie within 
higher flood zones, a Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been undertaken. This 
applies to Sites BC1, ,, BL1, BL2, BL3, HA1, KN1, KN2, ME1, SO2, UK1 and UK2.  This 
more detailed assessment defines flood zones where relevant and provides guidance on the 
parts of sites where development should and should not take place, as well as considering 
opportunities for enhancement. The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been used 
to inform the concept masterplans and Site Policies in the relevant Settlement chapters.   
 For new developments at risk of flooding, a site specific flood risk assessment must 347.346.
be undertaken which demonstrates that the development will be safe for its lifetime, in 
accordance with the NPPF.  
  
 
 11
1 111 348. New development sites must be resistant and resilient to flooding, to accord with the NPPF. 
Drainage systems must be designed so that flooding does not occur on any part of or off the 
site in a 1 to 30 year rainfall event, unless an area is designated to hold or convey water as 
part of the design, or in any part of a building or plant susceptible to water in a 1 to 100 year 
rainfall event. The design of the site should ensure that flows resulting from events in excess 
of a 1 to 100 year rainfall event, are managed so as to minimise the risks to people and 
property, including flows from adjacent land where relevant. Finished floor levels must be no 
lower than 300mm above average surrounding ground level. Where at risk from fluvial 
flooding, finished floor levels must be a minimum of 600mm above the 1 to 100 year plus 
climate change flood level, or for minor development where detailed modelling of the latest 
climate change allowances has not been undertaken, no lower than 600mm above the 1 in 
1000 year flood level. Where relevant, the layout of buildings should direct the most 
vulnerable elements of a development to the areas of lowest risk, including access routes 
wherever possible. 
349. Where development results in the loss of flood plain storage, compensatory storage should 
be provided on a level for level and volume for volume basis. Mitigation measures should be 
provided up to the 1 in 100 (1% AEP) plus climate change fluvial flood event including the 
requirement for safe access and egress. 
 Across the Borough 2,000 existing properties are considered to be at risk of fluvial 350.347.
flooding. For surface water flooding, there are approximately 1,500 properties across the 
Borough considered to be within a 1 in 30 year flood outline and 4,500 properties within the 1 
in 100 year flood outline. In order to increase resilience, where developments are proposed 
that increase the size of buildings within areas identified to be at risk from flooding then 
appropriate individual property level resilience measures should be incorporated in order to 
reduce the impact and associated costs of repair of homes and buildings along with misery 
and disruption caused by flooding to families and businesses.  
    
  
  
112 
 Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
Policy P12 Resource Management  
Management of waste  
1. The Council will promote and c ontrol new development to prevent the production of 
waste within the Borough wherever possible, in accordance with the principles of the 
Circular Economy,  and will encourage prevention from existing buildings and uses. 
Where this is not feasible, waste shall be treated as a resource to be reused, 
recycled, or from which value will be recovered, with management to be as high up 
the waste hierarchy as possible. Disposal of waste shall be a last resort, to be 
considered only when all other options have been  exhausted.  Developers will be 
expected to demonstrate that waste production will be minimised through the 
production of Whole Life plans for new building s. 
2. Management of waste shall seek to maximise the contribution to economic 
development and employme nt in the Borough. Waste operators will be expected to 
demonstrate that the greenhouse gas emissions from the operations involved and 
associated transport of waste from source to processi ng facility have been 
minimised, in line with national and local targ ets for the transition to a net zero carbon 
economy . 
Identifying suitable sites and areas  
3. The Council will seek to ensure that an equivalent tonnage is provided for within 
waste management facilities in the Borough to that arising in the Borough. To 
achieve this, a sequential approach will be used to determine the appropriate location 
for new waste management facilities:  
  i. On-site management  
  ii. Consolidation or expansion at strategic waste management sites  
  iii. Suitable industrial areas or si tes allocated for industrial or employment uses  
  iv. Co-location of complementary waste management operations at Berkswell 
   and Meriden quarries  
  v. Area of Search for waste management facilities.  
4. Wherever possible, on -site management of waste shal l be preferred, unless the 
activities would result in unacceptable harm through impacts on the environment, 
transport , or on neighbouring uses, or it is demonstrated that management elsewhere 
would have wider sustainability benefits.   
  
 
 11
3 113 5. Strategically impor tant waste management sites within the Borough, where waste 
management activities will be supported in principle, are identified on the Policies 
Map. These sites include the site of the former Arden Brickworks in Bickenhill, which 
contains the household wa ste recycling centre, and a range of other waste 
management operations, the materials recovery facilities at Berkswell and Meriden 
Quarries, the composting facilities in Berkswell, and the Moat Lane and Chapelhouse 
Depot waste transfer stations in the Matu re Suburbs and North Solihull.  
6. When investigating the suitability of sites for waste management operations in the 
Borough, the potential for consolidating or expanding waste management facilities at 
the former Arden Brickworks site, for locating waste m anagement facilities on 
appropriate industrial sites or employment areas within the Borough, and for the co -
location of complementary waste operations at Berkswell and Meriden quarries shall 
be considered. Where it is not possible or appropriate for new op erations to be 
developed on- site or in these locations, developers shall consider the potential of 
sites within the Area of Search for waste management facilities identified on the 
Policies Map.  
Household Waste and Recycling Centre  
7. Land within Site UK2 Land at Damson Parkway , (which is allocated for employment 
purposes in Policy P1  and Policy UK2 ), could potentially accommodate a relocated 
Household Waste and Recycling Facility .  
Criteria for suitability of waste management proposals  
8. The Council will  have regard to the following criteria in considering the suitability of 
sites for waste management facilities:  
  i. The contribution towards national and local waste management strategies, 
   objectives and targets, including the Solihull Municipal Waste Management 
   strategy 2010 -2020  (or its replacement)  
  ii. The contribution towards economic development and employment in the  
   Borough, particularly in or accessible from the North Solihull Regeneration 
   Area  
  iii. The contribution to national and local targets to reduce greenhouse gas  
   emissions, taking account of those resulting directly from the operations  
   (Policy P9), and those from the transport of wastes from the source of  
   arisings to the point of end management  
  iv. The potential for on -site management associated with development and other 
   uses  
  v. The potential for the development of shared facilities for more than one waste 
   planning authority , where these would accord with this policy  
  vi. The potential for the co -location of complementary activities where there are 
   no adverse cumulative impacts  
  vii. The contribution towards the restoration of former mineral workings in the  
   Borough    
  
  
114 
   viii. The suitability of the site for the type of  wastes and operations involved,  
   including whether the activity can take place within a building or other  
   enclosure  
  ix. The impacts on transport infrastructure, including the potential for the use of 
   alternative modes to road transport, opport unities for extensions of footpaths 
and bridleways, and highway safety  
  x. The compatibility of waste management activities with neighbouring uses, 
   including the nature of the wastes, operations, hours of working and any  
   cumulative effects where wa ste management activities already exist  
  xi. The availability of suitable previously developed land and/or redundant  
   buildings  
  xii. The impact on the Green Belt, taking account of National Policy and Policy 
   P17 of this plan  
  xiii. The impact on the environment, including the protection of water resources 
   and quality (Policy 11), conservation of biodiversity (Policy P10), high quality 
   design (Policy P15), the protection of the historic environment and built  
   heritage (Policy P16), and on air quality (Policy P14) from emissions and dust  
  xiv. The impact on amenity and health, including visual intrusion, noise and  
   vibration, litter, odour, vermin and bird attraction, including the impact on  
   aerodrome safeguarding.  
Provision of waste  facilities in non -waste development  
9. In considering non -waste management development proposals, the Council will take 
into account any adverse impact on existing waste management infrastructure, the 
strategically important waste management sites and the  potential of the Area of 
Search for waste management facilities identified in this pPlan. Non -waste 
development will be required to accommodate facilities for the storage, sorting and 
presentation of waste arising from the development, and developers will  be expected 
to demonstrate satisfactory provision for waste management.  
Justification 
 Waste is a product of inefficient processes and the Government’s aim is to prevent 351.348.
waste, treat it as a resource, and drive waste management up the waste hierarchy to 
improve efficiency and reduce impacts. The waste hierarchy consists of prevention, 
preparing for reuse, recycling, other recovery, with disposal only as a last resort.  National 
guidance expects communities to take more responsibility for managing their own waste, 
which can be equated to managing an equivalent tonnage of waste to that arising in their 
areas. Waste management should be considered alongside other spatial planning concerns, 
including economic development, regeneration and the national imperative to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. The National Planning Policy for Waste requires that sites and/ 
or areas for the location of waste management facilities should be identified in Local Plans, 
and sets out locational criteria. 
 A Waste Needs Assessment for Solihull was published in November 2018. In 2017, 352.349.
there were just under 0.1 million tonnes of Local Authority Collected Waste arisings in the 
Borough, with 0.093 million tonnes comprising household waste. Projections indicate that  
  
 
 11
5 115 arisings could increase to between 0.110 to 0.123 million tonnes by 2036, with the increase 
driven primarily by the increase in households. For 2017, estimated Commercial and 
Industrial waste arisings for the Borough were between 0.040 and 0.048 million tonnes. 
Projections indicate these could increase to between 0.068 and 0.069 million tonnes by 
2036. For Construction and Demolition waste arisings, estimates range between 0.447 to 
0.513 million tonnes, which could increase to between 0.667 and 0.814 million tonnes by 
2036, although the report recognises that the projections could be a significant over-
estimate, as they rely on significant levels of excavation waste and dredging spoils every 
year. Agricultural waste arisings in the Borough are very small, 0.0003 to 0.0005 millio n 
tonnes, and are not expected to increase. Hazardous waste arisings in the Borough are 
small at around 0.009 million tonnes, and projections suggest little change to between 0.007 
and 0.011 million tonnes by 2036.  
 In 2017, there were 13 353.350.
waste management facilities in the 
Borough handling about 1 million tonnes, 
with a theoretical capacity of more than 2 
million tonnes. Figures for 2018 show a 
reduction in the number of facilities to 
12, with a reduced input of around 0.616 
million tonnes. However, there are 
further facilities under construction and 
with planning permission at Meriden and 
Berkswell quarries respectively, and 
another operating without permission, 
which will increase capacity.  The 
significant shortfall identified in the SLP2013 no longer exists, although the Waste Needs 
Assessment identifies a couple of needs that could be addressed through the Local Plan 
Review.   These are considered below. 
 The Household Waste Recycling Centre (HWRC) off Coventry Road, Bickenhill is at 354.351.
capacity and in its current format is not suitable for enhancing the recycling of materials. The 
Waste Needs Assessment highlights the fact that additional household waste recycling 
capacity will be required to meet the needs of the increased population and number of 
households in the Borough during the Plan period. This could be provided by an expansion 
of the existing Centre, or by relocation to a larger site elsewhere in the Borough. An 
Assessment of land for potential relocation of the HWRC and Depot was prepared in June 
2019,  which highlights the potential to relocate the HWRC to Site UK2 as one of the options.  
The Council has not made a decision on whether the existing facility ought to be expanded, 
or whether an alternative location ought to be pursued.  At this stage the plan is seeking to 
give a policy context for the principle of the use should it be decided that the HWRC should 
be relocated to a site within the UK2 allocation. 
 The exceptional circumstances to justify the potential use of the site are as follows; 355.352.
 No suitable site has been identified outside the Green Belt, given the nature of the 
use and the number of visitors that will be attracted to the site; 
 No suitable previously developed or underutilised land has been identified and none 
is available on the Brownfield Land Register; 
 The site is located within a proposed allocation for employment uses and accords 
with the policy on the location of waste management facilities; 
 The site is well-located centrally in the Borough, close to and accessible from the 
main urban areas in the west and north, as well as major rural settlements; 
  
  
  
116 
  The site is accessible from the strategic highway network, with sufficient space for 
queuing vehicles at peak times; 
 The site is relatively isolated from residential uses, other than the Gypsy and 
Traveller site, for which impacts can be minimised and mitigated.  
 There is also a potential need for recycling/composting capacity to provide for Local 356.353.
Authority Collected Waste and Commercial and Industrial waste. The Waste Needs 
Assessment recommends capacity for around 62,000 tonnes per annum for recycling and for 
30,000 tonnes per annum for composting, which could require a site or sites of up to 5 
hectares in total area. The composting requirement is likely to be addressed by 
developments already in the pipeline, including a planning permission at Meriden Quarry, 
and a facility in Berkswell. 
 The first option for managing waste should be on-site where this is feasible, delivers 357.354.
wider sustainability objectives, and does not result in unacceptable harm to environmental 
assets, transport infrastructure or on neighbouring uses. If this is not possible, developers 
will be expected to consider the potential of the strategic waste management sites, or 
suitable industrial sites in the Borough for appropriate or complementary activities. For 
operations that are complementary to mineral extraction, such as recycling of construction 
and demolition waste, or more appropriate in remote locations, such as open composting, an 
Area of Search for waste management facilities has been identified, utilising opportunities 
offered by former mineral workings. Waste that cannot be managed higher up the waste 
hierarchy is managed at the jointly owned Coventry and Solihull Energy from Waste plant in 
Coventry. 
 The policy sets out the criteria that will be used to assess the appropriateness of 358.355.
waste management proposals. These include national and local strategies, objectives and 
targets, including the National Waste Management Plan for England, National Planning 
Policy for Waste and the Solihull Municipal Waste Management strategy 2010-2020 and the 
Mid-Point Update 2015, the contribution towards economic development and regeneration, 
including in North Solihull  Regeneration , and to national and local targets to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. The potential for on-site management, shared facilities and co-
location of complementary activities will be taken into account, along with the suitability of 
the location or site, the availability of previously developed land or redundant buildings, and 
whether the operations would take place in the open or are enclosed. The impacts of 
proposed waste management operations on the Green Belt, the environment, transport 
infrastructure including aerodrome safeguarding, highway safety, amenity and health will be 
considered, and any unacceptable harm will need to be minimised and/or appropriate 
mitigation incorporated. 
 Other development may compromise or restrict the potential of waste management 359.356.
operations on the strategic waste management sites or in the area of search for waste 
management facilities. In considering proposals for non-waste management development in 
or adjacent to these locations, the Council will take account of any adverse effect on the 
potential for waste management activities. Non-waste development in all areas will be 
expected to include appropriate facilities for the storage, sorting and presentation of waste. 
Developers will be expected to demonstrate satisfactory provision for waste management 
through a Design and Access Statement or similar supporting evidence, taking account of 
the Council’s waste and recycling service guide for developers. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
D  Securing sustainable economic g rowth  
  
 
 11
7 117 E  Protecting key gaps between settlements 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable transport 
I  Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
PolicyOLICY P13 Minerals  
Mineral Safeguarding Areas  
1. Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) for sand and gravel aggregate resources 
between Berkswell, Hampton and Meriden and east of the NEC and M42, including 
sites for important associated infrastructure and to meet potential needs are defined 
on the Policies Map.  
2. The Council will permit the search for new minerals ,  whether within or outside the 
Mineral Safeguarding Areas, providing that the criteria for minerals development 
proposals are met. Permission for exploration will not necessarily imply tha t a 
subsequent consent for mineral extraction will be forthcoming.  
3. Within these MSAs, proposals for non -mineral development will only be permitted 
where it can be demonstrated that the development will not result in the sterilisation 
of mineral resource s, or the loss of important infrastructure or sites for potential 
infrastructure needs in the areas. Prior to development, developers will be expected 
to ensure that all safeguarded minerals that would be affected are extracted, unless it 
is demonstrated t hat the resources have no economic value, extraction is not feasible 
or would result in excessive costs or delays, or that there is an overriding need for 
the development that outweighs the need to safeguard the mineral resources.  
Alternative materials  
4. The Council will  actively  promote the use of alternative materials, such as secondary 
and recycled aggregates in all new development within the Borough. Provision for 
alternative materials will be encouraged on sites for significant development within 
the Borough, where appropriate. Permanent facilities will be encouraged within the 
area of search for appropriate waste management facilities defined on the Policies 
Map.  
Provision for primary sand and gravel extraction  
5. Provision for primary sand and gravel  resources will be made through a mixture of 
specific sites, preferred areas and/or areas of search to help meet the identified 
requirement of 8.24 million tonnes for the West Midlands Metropolitan Area over the 
pPlan period. These will include sites alrea dy granted planning permission , where not 
included in the current sub -regional landbank.  
6. Preferred areas for primary sand and gravel extraction were identified in the adopted 
Solihull Local Plan 2013 at Marsh House Farm  (MIN3) , Hornbrook Farm (MIN1) and 
west of Berkswell Quarry  (MIN2) , which will provide around 2.0 million tonnes and 
are defined on the Policies Map. Two further areas are identified as Specific Sites for 
sand and gravel extraction as extensions to the existing quarries at land south -east 
of Meriden Quarry  (MIN4) , and land south -east of Berkswell Quarry (MIN5) , which 
will provide a further 2.1 million tonnes and are also defined on the Policies Map. 
Extraction of any site or part thereof that will impact on an adjacent Site of Special   
  
  
118 
 Scien tific Interest or Local Wildlife Site will be permitted only if the necessary 
avoidance and/or mitigation is incorporated to protect the SSSI/LWS.  
7. An area of search for primary sand and gravel extraction is identified between 
Berkswell, Hampton and Meri den to meet the shortfall in provision, and is defined on 
the Policies Map. However, inclusion within an area of search does not imply that all 
of the mineral resources are viable , or that extraction would be acceptable. Sand and 
gravel extraction outside the areas of search may also be permitted, if there is 
evidence that insufficient mineral resources from the areas of search are likely to 
come forward within the Pplan period, or that production targets will not be met.   In all 
cases, proposals should hav e regard to the points set out within this policy.  
Mitigation, restoration, aftercare and after use  
8. Proposals for mineral working or related infrastructure will be assessed against the 
following criteria:  
  i. Contribution towards  national and local str ategic objectives or wider needs , 
   including national and local targets for minimising carbon emissions and using 
   alternative materials;  
  ii. Contribution towards the local and sub -regional economy;  
  iii. Contribution towards local communities and c haracter and quality of the  
   environment;  
  iv. Opportunities for the co -location of related uses and wider benefits such as 
   the production of secondary or recycled aggregates;  
  v. Impact of the proposed activities, including any associated infrastr ucture, on 
   surrounding land uses and amenity, taking account of the nature of the  
   operations, duration, hours of operation, noise, dust , vibration, air pollution, 
   visual impacts and, in respect of underground extraction, the impact of  
   subsidence;  
  vi. Impact on the local and sub -regional transport network, including the routing 
   of lorries to and from the site and the potential for rail freight;  
  vii. Impact on the environment, landscape, built heritage and archaeology, nature 
   conservation interests, ground and surface water quantity and quality, best 
   and most versatile farmland, agricultural businesses and aerodrome  
   safeguarding;  
  viii. Measures for mitigating any environmental  , transport or other impacts , or for 
   compensation for loss or damage where appropriate, including the provision 
   of appropriate buffers between extraction and environmental or other assets;  
  ix. The potential for subsidence, migration of gases and contamination of ground 
   water associated with underground extraction;  
  x. Restoration to a safe and high quality condition with appropriate aftercare in 
   accordance with agreed restoration and aftercare schemes , and within an 
    agreed period following the cessation of extraction; and   
  
 
 11
9 119   xi. Reclamation to an agreed use, which should prioritise the contribution the site 
   could make to green infrastructure, the conservation and enhancement of 
   biodiversity, including Local Biodiversity Action Plans, the enhancement and 
   restoration of the Arden landscape, flood risk management, appropriate  
   recreation uses and agriculture, as well as the availability of suitable infill  
   material if appropriate.  
9. Proposals for ancillary uses will be permitted where they are located within the 
extract ion site, are limited to the life of the permitted reserves and minimise the 
impacts on environmental assets, transport infrastructure and surrounding occupiers 
and uses. The Council will support proposals for complementary recycling facilities, 
which shou ld be as close as possible to the point of extraction or disposal.  
Justification 
 The NPPF requires the Council to safeguard proven mineral resources from 360.357.
sterilisation by non-mineral development, together with existing, planned and potential 
infrastructure facilities. Mineral Safeguarding Areas have been defined for sand and gravel 
resources, based on work undertaken in Mineral Safeguarding in Solihull. The Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas include any known or anticipated sites for infrastructure including two 
concrete plants and one dry silo mortar plant at Berkswell and Meriden Quarries, and sites 
for the production of secondary and recycled materials at both quarries. The policy requires 
the prior extraction of minerals where non-mineral development that could sterilise resources 
is proposed unless justified, in accordance with national guidance. 
 The national and local guidelines for aggregates provision in England 2005 to 2020 361.358.
assume a significant contribution from alternative materials, which reduces the requirement 
for the production of primary aggregates. The policy promotes the use of alternative 
materials in construction within the Borough and provides for new and expanded facilities 
within a defined area of search. The co-location of primary extraction and permanent 
secondary facilities is likely to bring benefits in minimising transport and environmental costs. 
Temporary facilities for alternative materials will be encouraged on sites for significant 
development in the Borough. 
 The national and local guidelines for aggregates provision in England 2005 to 2020 362.359.
provide a target production figure for primary aggregates for the West Midlands, which has 
been apportioned to sub-regions following advice from the West Midlands aggregates 
working party (WMAWP). Whilst account still needs to be taken of the guidelines, the NPPF 
requires minerals planning authorities to prepare an annual Local Aggregate Assessment 
(LAA) to plan for a steady and adequate supply of aggregates. The West Midlands 
Metropolitan Area LAA 2015 puts forward two scenarios based firstly on the apportioned 
figure of 0.55 million tonnes per annum, and secondly on the ten year rolling average of 
sales data of just under 0.5 million tonnes per annum. The latter figure results in a 
requirement of 11.5 million tonnes for the period 2020 to 2036, including a seven year 
landbank. 
 The latest WMAWP AMR for 2017 identifies permitted reserves of 3.99 million tonnes 363.360.
for the Metropolitan Area as at 31 December 2017. However, the 2018 survey indicates that 
this has reduced to 3.26 million tonnes as at 31 December 2018. This would leave 8.24 
million tonnes to be provided for across the Metropolitan Area to 2035.  
 The Borough is the main source of primary aggregate production for the Metropolitan 364.361.
Area, with annual production of up to 0.5 million tonnes of sand and gravel representing over 
90% of the LAA production target. Production fell to 0.36 million tonnes in 2018, reflecting 
the closure of Stonebridge Quarry, following the issue of a Stop Notice by the HS2   
  
  
120 
 Company. The contribution from Solihull reflects the relative levels of sand and gravel 
resources in Solihull and Walsall, the only authorities that contribute to primary sand and 
gravel production. This policy takes account of the provision for primary sand and gravel 
production within the Black Country Core Strategy. There may be a need to review the policy 
when the Black Country Plan Review is completed.  
 
 In seeking to meet the requirement for primary sand and gravel production, the 365.362.
Council identified a number of preferred areas for extraction in the adopted Local Plan 2013. 
Whilst part of Hornbrook Farm has been granted planning permission, applications have yet 
to come forward on the remaining preferred areas. The potential reserves from the preferred 
areas may be affected by the line of the HS2 rail link and conditions attached to working 
adjacent to the line.  
 Following a Call for Sites, two sites with viable mineral resources have been 366.363.
identified, and are allocated as specific sites. These form extensions to the existing quarries 
at land south-east of Meriden Quarry and land south-east of Berkswell Quarry and are 
shown on the Policies Map. The sites proposed for sand and gravel extraction are located in 
the Green Belt. However, mineral extraction is not inappropriate development in the Green 
Belt, provided that it preserves openness and does not conflict with the purposes of including 
land in Green Belt. Both sites lie within the Area of Search for Primary Sand and Gravel 
Aggregates. Land south-east of Berkswell Quarry (CfS532) is adjacent to a SSSI/Local 
Wildlife Site, so any proposal for mineral extraction will need to incorporate measures to 
protect and enhance the SSSI/Local Wildlife Site, in line with Policy P10.    
 These preferred areas and specific sites provide for a proportion of the total 367.364.
requirement only, with the remainder to be provided from within defined areas of search in 
both Solihull and Walsall. Proposals for sand and gravel extraction outside these areas will 
be permitted where this can be justified. The policy provides for a minimum landbank of 7 
years at the end of the plan period, in accordance with national guidance. 
 The policy sets out the criteria for new minerals development in the Borough, to 368.365.
ensure mitigation of environmental and transport impacts, in accordance with national 
guidance. It seeks to ensure that minerals development contributes to wider national and 
local objectives, such as the reduction of carbon emissions, and the use of alternative 
materials. 
 The criteria include the protection of the amenities of surrounding occupiers and land 369.366.
uses, and the local and sub-regional transport network from unacceptable impacts. Working 
 
  
 
 12
1 121 practices will be required to avoid or minimise impacts on health and the environment from 
extraction, processing, management and transportation of materials. Environmental and 
other assets of acknowledged importance, including best and most versatile agricultural 
land, the natural and historic environment, and water resources and quality will need to be 
protected, with appropriate mitigation and compensation where necessary, in accordance 
with the environmental policies in this plan. The impact on aerodrome safeguarding shall 
include the need to minimise bird strike hazard. The provision of buffers to rivers should be 
wide enough to accommodate natural changes to the river’s location. Any proposal adjacent 
to the River Blythe Site of Special Scientific Interest will be expected to maintain a minimum 
30 metre buffer to the Site of Special Scientific Interest. The Council will require that 
investigations are undertaken to demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact on a Site 
of Special Scientific Interest or Local Wildlife Site before planning permission is granted. 
 Guidance is provided on the restoration and aftercare of mineral sites once extraction 370.367.
has ceased and on the after use to which the land should be put, in accordance with national 
guidance. The restoration of any site that has a biodiversity designation, or equivalent 
biodiversity value, shall prioritise the contribution to biodiversity objectives. Reclamation 
schemes will be expected to prioritise the potential for contributing to green infrastructure, 
biodiversity objectives, including national and local biodiversity action plan targets, to policies 
seeking to enhance and restore the Arden landscape, and to flood risk management. Where 
appropriate, after uses may include agriculture and recreation uses providing these are in 
accordance with other national and local planning policies. The availability of materials to 
restore mineral sites will need to be a consideration to avoid unreasonably lengthy 
restoration. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable transport 
I  Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
K  Protecting and enhancing our natural assets   
Policy P14 Amenity  
1. Proposals for new development, extensions and changes of use will be expected to 
safeguard the amenities of existing an d future occupiers of homes, businesses and 
other uses. When determining planning applications, the Council will:  
  i. Permit development only if it secures high quality design (see Policy P15) , 
   whilst respecting the amenity of existing and future occupiers ; and the  
   character of the surrounding area ; 
  ii. Expect developers  to locate and design new developments so as to minimise 
   adverse  visual and other amenity impacts, whilst making efficient use of land;  
  iii. Seek to safeguard important trees, hedgerows, natural habitats and  
   woodlands, and will require new and replacement tree and hedgerow  
   planting; and, where appropriate, new woodlands;    
  
  
122 
   iv. Ensure development does not have a significant adverse impac t on local air 
   quality , either directly or indirectly resulting in unacceptable effects on human 
   health, local amenity and the natural environment. Where appropriate,  
   development should  incorporate  appropriate attenuation, mitigation or  
   compe nsatory measures where necessary. Where this cannot be achieved, 
   ensure that impacts can be off-set by funding alternative measures or  
   initiatives that will help reduce air pollution burdens within the Borough ; 
  v. Require proposals for development  on land known , or suspected to be ,  
   contaminated to include appropriate information to enable the potential  
   implications to be assessed and to incorporate any necessary remediation. 
   Developers should also fully consider the previous use of any land, to avoid 
   unforeseen contamination that may be identified during the development  
   process;  
  vi. Seek to minimise the adverse impact of noise and vibration. Development 
   likely to create significant noise or vibration effects will be permitted  only if 
   located away from sensitive uses , unless measures can be incorporated to 
   adequately protect against such impacts. Similarly, sensitive development will 
   only be permitted if located away from sources of significant noise or  
   vibration, unless incorporating measures proven to reduce impacts to  
   acceptable levels.  Developers will be required to adequately assess and  
   quantify potential noise and vibration impacts and to consider both existing 
   pre-development and resultant post -development acoustic outcomes along 
   with resultant internal and external noise environments. The transmission of 
   structure - borne  / ground  -borne noise and vibration as well as airborne noise 
   may need to be considered , and where development presents such potential 
   effects, will be required to demonstrate scheme design and operation so as to 
   adequately address and mitigate significant impacts. Mitigation shall be based 
   on proven methods to adequately remove, minimise, attenuate or otherwise 
   control adverse impacts. The assessment of noise and vibration and  
   conclusions drawn shall recognise , and accommodate , requirements  
contained     contained   iin relevant legislation, standards 
and guidance .;  
  vii. Protect residential and shopping areas, community facilities and open space 
   from the introduction of incompatible development or anti -social uses  that  
   may jeopardise local amenity. Development that presents a likelihood of  
   significant harm  becau se of impacts from noise , odour  or atmospheric  
   pollution will not be permitted  unless they can demonstrate appropriate  
   attenuation, mitigation or remediation measures to adequately control , and 
   limit, those impacts identified.  In locations that may be affected or influenced 
   by existing or approved uses or activities, where  noise, odour, or air pollution 
   present the potential to impact on the amenity of any newly introduced  
   residential or other sensitive receptor, such development will n ot be permitted 
   unless the negative impacts can be satisfactorily mitigated or abated ; 
  viii. Consider the impact of light spillage and pollution from artificial light on local 
   amenity, nature conservation and those parts of the countryside in the  
   Borough that retain an intrinsically dark sky  (including countryside locations) . 
   Development proposals should ensure that  light impacts are fully assessed as 
   necessary, and that  any adverse impacts are limited , or can be satisfactorily 
   mitigate d; and   
  
 
 12
3 123   ix. Protect the tranquil and locally distinctive areas in the Borough by guiding 
   new development to locations that will avoid or minimise adverse impacts.  
Justification 
 The NPPF  sets out that planning policies should ensure that developments create 371.368.
places with a high standard of amenity for existing and future users.  Securing a good 
standard of amenity is an integral component of good design. Developments that affect 
people’s visual and other amenities, such as those that create noise, odour or air pollution 
require careful siting to minimise impacts and appropriate measures to minimise or mitigate 
any impacts that location does  not resolve. Equally, the siting and design of sensitive uses, 
such as residential development needs  careful consideration to ensure that problems are 
not created. Significant new growth in the Borough is being  promoted through this plan and 
the policy seeks to ensure that new development is appropriate for its location. Whilst it will 
be important to make effective and efficient use of land that makes provision for essential 
development, the Council will seek to protect people’s amenity and fully consider the likely 
impacts on health, living conditions and the natural environment. 
 Homes in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) can provide an alternative, affordable means 372.369.
of accommodation but can also cause issues within local communities in terms of impact on 
residential amenity and loss of traditional family housing. Within the Borough there are 
approximately 100 HMOs.  Whilst a small proportion of total households it  i’s still an 
important consideration.  Proposals for new large HMOs (properties containing more than 6 
unrelated individuals) will therefore be considered against this policy having regard to impact 
on amenity and character in particular. Such proposals will also have regard to Policy 8 with 
regards parking and highway impact and P15 in terms of design. The conversion of existing 
properties to small HMOs are currently managed by Permitted Development rights. The 
Council will continue to review this position going forward and if necessary will introduce an 
Article 4 direction based on justifiable evidence. All proposals for new purpose built HMOs 
will be considered against all relevant Plan policies. 
 The NPPF states that planning policies and decisions should contribute to and 373.370.
enhance the natural and local environment by recognising the wider benefits from natural 
capital including trees and woodland. The policy recognises the importance of protecting 
and increasing trees and  woodlands for amenity and other benefits. These include the 
enhancement or restoration of the Arden landscape, increasing green infrastructure (in 
both the public and private realm), conservation and enhancement of biodiversity, informal 
recreation, opportunities to improve air quality or mitigate impacts and addressing the 
impacts of climate change. Important trees, hedgerows and woodlands will include trees in 
conservation areas, those covered by tree preservation orders, veteran trees or those with 
potential to be veteran trees, features characteristic of the Arden landscape  or included in 
national or local biodiversity action plans, and trees and hedgerows covered by regulations 
or best practice guidance, such as the Hedgerow Regulations and the British Standard for 
trees and construction. Policy on conserving the landscape  and biodiversity, including the 
protection of ancient woodlands in the Borough, is contained in Policy P10. 
 In the context of wider national and regional air quality objectives, the policy supports 374.371.
the aims of the Solihull Clean Air Strategy (2019 – 2024), including the actions that will be 
taken to improve air quality and reduce population exposure to the pollutants known to be 
most harmful to human health. The integration of air quality considerations with land-use 
planning decisions is essential to ensure that developers fully understand the air quality 
impacts presented by their development. Development should therefore seek to minimise or 
mitigate adverse impacts on air quality, as well as enabling improvements to air quality, 
where appropriate. In addition to the effect of more substantial developments, consideration   
  
  
124 
 will be given to the potential cumulative impact of smaller developments on air quality, 
including their implications for vehicle emissions. As a partner in the Low Emissions Towns 
and Cities (LET&C) Programme and a member of the West Midlands Combined Authority, 
the Council will support proposals aimed at securing better air quality across the 
metropolitan area, through measures such as the provision of infrastructure to encourage 
the use of electric vehicles for freight and public transport journeys within and beyond the 
Borough. A key objective of the Council Plan is to improve Solihull’s air quality and implement 
the Electric Vehicle Strategy . Given the significant residential and commercial developments 
proposed across the Borough in the coming years, it is important that suitable infrastructure 
is in place to enable use of electric vehicles. Policy P9 sets out the Council’s requirements for 
electric vehicle charging points associated with new development. The Council is keen to 
ensure that developments are future proofed and aligned with low-carbon targets as well as 
contributing to regional and local air quality objectives. The Planning Practice Guidance 
on Air Quality provides guidance for local authorities and developers and applicants are 
also encouraged to refer to the LET&C Programme’s Good Practice Air Quality Guidance 
(May 2014), particularly in relation to integrating mitigation into scheme design.. Developers 
will be expected to ensure that development does not have a significant adverse impact on 
local air quality in considering  the location and design of new development, and incorporate 
appropriate measures where necessary during construction and operation. 
 Sites coming forward for redevelopment in the Borough should be assessed to 375.372.
establish if there are contaminated land issues that may impact on the proposal, the 
surrounding area or affect other receptors or ecosystems. The policy  reflects the importance 
of providing appropriate information on any contamination that may be present. However, i t 
is often the case that a site that presents contamination issues may not have originally been 
‘suspected or known’. It is therefore important to ensure that developers consider the previous 
use of any land to avoid unforeseen contamination that may be identified during the 
development process. 
 The Council recognises the existence of significant sources of noise or potential 376.373.
noise within the Borough, such as Birmingham Airport, major roads and railways including 
HS2, mineral workings and some industrial processes, and the need to protect noise 
sensitive uses, including housing, education and health institutions. The policy seeks to 
ensure that the impacts of noise and vibration are properly investigated, assessed , 
quantified and mitigated to ensure adequate protection is afforded. Where this is not 
possible, the policy aims to prevent such development taking place. However, it is important 
to ensure that existing businesses and facilities, whose activities and impacts are 
established, do not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of new 
development being permitted nearby. 
 Some uses may be harmful to amenity as a result of, noise, odour or atmospheric 377.374.
pollution, such a mineral workings, sewage treatment works, certain types of waste 
management activities or certain intensive agricultural uses. The Council will protect 
residential, shopping, heritage assets, community and recreation areas from uses that 
present a significant negative impact on amenity and ensure that, where permitted, such 
development incorporates measures to avoid or minimise any adverse impacts. 
 ‘Solihull’s Countryside’ identifies suburbanisation as a threat to the character and 378.375.
quality of the countryside. Whilst built development is controlled through Green Belt policy, 
light spillage  and light pollution from residential , commercial and other sites and sources 
may need to be assessed and understood, particularly where potential harm to 
residential and community amenity, as well as ecosystems and biodiversity is 
identified . In accordance with the NPPF, the policy seeks to ensure that development is 
appropriate for its location and that the impact of light pollution from artificial light on local 
amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation is limited.    
  
 
 12
5 125  Solihull’s Countryside notes  the loss of remoteness and a reduction in tranquillity 379.376.
associated with development and traffic growth and the need to maintain local 
distinctiveness. The Planning Practice Guidance suggests that tranquil areas are likely to 
be relatively undisturbed by noise from human sources that undermine the intrinsic character 
of the area. It may, for example, provide a sense of peace and quiet or a positive 
soundscape where natural sounds such as birdsong or flowing water are more prominent 
than background noise. Whilst much of the Borough is subject to interference from road, rail 
or air traffic, other noisy activities, or urban influences, there remain some quiet areas. 
These include canal corridors, footpaths, some conservation areas, villages and hamlets 
away from major roads and flight paths, and some more remote rural areas. The Council will 
seek to protect tranquil and locally distinctive areas by guiding development, especially that 
involving noisy operations or significant traffic, away from these areas.. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
Policy P14 A Digital Infrastructure and Telecommunications  
1. The Council will support proposals for the expansion of electronic communications 
networks , including next generation mobile technology (such as 5G) 
telecommunications  and full fibre broadband connections, whilst also seeking to keep 
the numbers of radio and telecommunications installations to a minimum consistent 
with the efficient operation of the network.  
2. The Council will have regard to the needs of telecommunications operators, any 
technical constraints on location of telecommunications apparatus, the potential for 
sharing sites and other existing tall buildings and other structures, the impact of 
development on its surroundings, the sensitivity of t he environment , and the design 
and external appearance of telecommunications apparatus.  
3. In considering proposals for new sites or equipment, applicants will be expected to 
ensure that the size of the apparatus is kept to the minimum necessary to achieve 
their purpose and demonstrate that there are no other technically suitable locations 
or design solutions that meet operational requirements and cause less environmental 
harm or visual impact. Applicants are strongly encouraged to consult with relev ant 
local ward members, Parish Councils, and neighbourhood planning forums on the 
identification of suitable locations.  
4. The Council will expect proposals for residential and business development to 
include provision for on -site Ultrafast  broadband  infrastructure to enable connectivity 
to wider networks. Such infrastructure should be designed and installed as an 
integral part of the development to ensure that properties and premises are 
constructed and occupied with connections readily available.  Infrast ructure (such as 
ducting for cables) should be future  -proofed to enable cable upgrades and minimise 
future disturbance during maintenance.  
Justification   
  
  
126 
  The NPPF recognises that advanced, high quality and reliable communications 380.377.
infrastructure is essential for economic growth and social wellbeing. It indicates that 
authorities should support the expansion of electronic communications networks, whilst 
aiming to keep the number of masts and sites to a minimum, consistent with the efficient 
operation of the network and providing reasonable capacity for future expansion. The 
Government’s Industrial Strategy also seeks to boost digital infrastructure through the 
provision of funding for 5G technology and for local areas to encourage the roll out of full-
fibre networks. As part of this, the West Midlands is to become the UK’s first ever multi city 
test bed for 5G mobile technology. 
 The guidance for telecommunication development reflects both the strategic 381.378.
requirements of networks and the limitations imposed by the nature of the technology, as 
well as the need to protect amenity and sensitive environments. Sensitive uses include 
residential areas, education and health institutions, all heritage assets and their settings, 
features characteristic of the Arden landscape, sites of ecological and geological importance, 
open space and the Green Belt. In such areas telecommunications infrastructure 
development will be discouraged, unless there are no other locations that meet operational 
requirements and cause less environmental harm. Telecommunications infrastructure 
improvements should be undertaken sensitively and equipment should be sympathetically 
designed and camouflaged where appropriate. Both the individual and cumulative impacts 
should be considered, to avoid any unacceptable visual harm. 
 In more rural parts of Solihull telecommunications infrastructure often has poor 382.379.
capacity and coverage. Some parts of the Borough experience slow broadband speed and 
poor telecommunication signals. Improvements to the telecommunications infrastructure can 
address this problem and thereby help to combat social exclusion of residents, improve 
access to services (including emergency services), and reduce the need to travel. 
 An improved communications network also contributes to the local economy by 383.380.
providing people with a choice as to how and where they can operate their business, 
facilitating home working and potentially attracting new employment opportunities. 
 Access to broadband is a vital component of infrastructure in today’s world. It is key 384.381.
to growing a sustainable local economy, vital for education and home working and an 
increasingly central part of community cohesion and resilience, particularly in rural areas.  In 
addition, Local Authorities are increasingly reliant on digital infrastructure to provide services 
and interact with their customers and the Council acknowledge the need for 5G in the future 
delivery of public services. 
 The policy seeks to ensure that communications infrastructure is treated as essential 385.382.
infrastructure in new developments. New properties and premises should be constructed 
with connections already installed to enable occupiers to secure direct connections from the 
moment they move in. Local Planning Authorities have a pivotal role to play in encouraging 
developers to ‘future-proof’ their developments by installing direct fibre access, wherever 
possible, not least to avoid any future disruption in terms of highways works. 
 In addition to the reputational and wider economic benefits of ensuring that resident s 386.383.
are able to access high speed broadband when they move into new developments, there is 
also the issue of avoiding the costs and frustrations to occupiers of future retrofitting if the 
infrastructure is not fit for purpose. 
 Enhanced broadband provision also has the potential to reduce the need for road, 387.384.
rail and air travel. Developers are key in determining how projects shape an area; therefore 
the planning of telecommunications infrastructure in relation to development is vital. 
388. This will be complementary to the Coventry, Solihull and Warwickshire Superfast 
BroadbandConnecting Solihull & Warwickshire  project whichproject, which  the Council is  
  
 
 12
7 127 part of.  This is a project that is helping to deliver the broadband initiative, particularly in the 
rural areas.  
    
  
  
128 
 Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
O Providing infrastructure and securing developer contributions 
   
  
 
 12
9 129 Promoting Quality of Place 
Introduction 
 The Borough’s high quality natural, built and historic environment is fundamental to 390.386.
its success as an attractive place to live, work, visit and invest. The policies contained in this 
section are critical to retaining the quality of Solihull’s distinctive places. Together with the 
other policies in the Plan, particularly, in the chapters dealing with Protecting and Enhancing 
our Environment, and Supporting Local Communities, the application of Policies in this 
section, will ensure Solihull remains an attractive, ambitious, locally distinctive and 
prosperous Borough. 
 High quality design is fundamental to making places more attractive, sustainable, 391.387.
safe, healthy and accessible. Good design can help reduce and mitigate the impacts of 
climate change; promote healthier lifestyles; create safer places and make high quality and 
attractive places that foster civic pride.  
 NPPF states that local planning authorities should set out in their Local Plan a 392.388.
positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment, including 
heritage assets most at risk.  Heritage assets include buildings, monuments, sites, places, 
areas or landscapes identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions, because of their heritage interest. These assets are an irreplaceable 
resource, and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. 
 Most of the undeveloped area of the Borough is designated as Green Belt, where 393.389.
national policy provides a presumption against development that is inappropriate.  The 
Borough’s Green Belt includes the strategically important open  land between the urban 
areas of Birmingham and Solihull and the city of Coventry, known as the Meriden Gap, and 
key gaps between urban areas and rural settlements. Protecting  the Green Belt in Solihull 
will contribute to the purposes set out in national policy. It is also vital for maintaining the 
attractive rural setting and environment that helps to bring  investment and people to the 
Borough. Management of the countryside is largely dependent  on agricultural businesses, 
which face significant pressures on incomes and changing demands for products. 
 The Green Belt in Solihull has been  under  constant pressure since it was first 394.390.
proposed  in 1960.  Successive development plans for Solihull have removed land from the 
Green Belt to meet housing and other needs. Developments of national and regional 
significance have also been allowed, justified by very special circumstances. This plan 
recognises that the scale of the growth faced by the Borough and the lack of significant 
development opportunities outside the Green Belt mean that some substantial 
adjustments to the Green Belt are required to meet development needs, including those 
required in the UK Central Hub Area to provide an appropriate planning framework for the 
Council’s ambitions for the HS2 Interchange and adjoining area. 
Policy P15 Securing Design Quality   
1. All deve lopment proposals must be of a high quality design. Proposals will be 
expected to contribute to, or create, high quality places and spaces which spaces, 
which  have regard to local distinctiveness and achieve inclusive and sustainable 
design.   
2. In deliver ing high quality design, development proposals will be expected to:  
  i. Conserve and contribute positively to local character, distinctiveness and  
   streetscape quality and ensure that the scale, massing, density, layout,    
  
  
130 
    territory (including space between buildings), materials and landscape of the 
   development is sympathetic to the surrounding natural, built and historic  
   environment;  
  ii. Ensure new developments include useable private outdoor amenity space 
   and provide public and private o pen spaces where there is a choice of areas 
   of shade, shelter and access to recreation that will benefit people, wildlife and 
   provide flood storage and carbon management ;. 
  iii. Secure the sustainable , long-term use of new development through flexible, 
   robust and future -proofed design and layout  (including through low carbon 
   technologies) ; 
  iv. Make appropriate provision for water management within development,  
   without causing unacceptable ha rm to retained features, utilising innovative 
   design solutions.  Sustainable Drainage Systems should respond to , and  
   complement , landscape character and urban design, in accordance with the 
   principles of Policy P11 - Water and Flood Risk Manageme nt; 
  v. Conserve, restore and enhance biodiversity, reflecting the principles of Policy 
   P10 Natural Environment;  
  vi. Respect and enhance landscape character and quality, including trees,  
   hedgerows and other landscape features, integrating them in to the  
   development, and contribute to strategic and local green infrastructure.  
   Proposals should relate well to local topography and landscape features and 
   consider the protection and management of the existing tree stock on site. 
   There shoul d not be an unacceptable loss of , or damage to , existing trees. 
    Developments should incorporate new tree planting, including streets 
being    tree-lined wherever possible;   
  vii. Create attractive, inclusive, safe, active, legible and uncluttered str eets and 
   public spaces, which integrate with existing paths, streets, circulation  
   networks and patterns of activity , and have regard to the quality of the  
   frontage public realm and the transition between the site boundary and the 
   street ;. 
  viii. Make sufficient provision for sustainable waste management (including  
   facilities for kerbside collection, waste separation and minimisation where  
   appropriate) without adverse impact on the street scene, the local landscape 
   or the amenities  of neighbours;  
  ix. Contribute positively to the creation of high quality places which are  
   accessible, interconnected and easily maintained. The design and layout of 
   developments should promote health and wellbeing , support wildlife,  
   encourage  walking and cycling , and reduce crime and the fear of crime  
   through the adoption of Secured by Design principles.  
3. All residential development proposals shall demonstrate how they meet Building for 
Life 12, or its equivalent.  
4. All developments sh ould comply with the urban design principles set out in 
established current design guidance, including at present; The National Design 
Guide (2019), Urban Design Compendium 1 and 2 (2007),  Manual for Streets 1  
  
 
 13
1 131 (2007) and 2 (2010), Building for Life 12 and  Secured by Design principles, or their 
equivalents.  
5. Development proposals should also comply with any local design guides and 
standards, including Conservation Area Appraisals, the Urban Forestry Strategy, 
adopted Supplementary Planning Guidance and D ocuments, as well as the relevant 
design policies of any applicable ‘made’ Neighbourhood Plan s in the Borough.  
6. Development proposals should make efficient use of land, optimising densities in 
appropriate locations and ensuring that site characteristics,  context and constraints 
are considered, whilst responding positively to the surrounding natural, built and 
historic environment.  
7. Developers should be proactive in responding to climate change and adopt 
sustainable and low carbon construction principles  in terms of design, layout and 
density, consistent with the principles of Policy P9 – Climate Change.  Sunlight and 
energy efficiency should be considered as part of the layout , through solar design 
and natural ventilation systems. Buildings and their sur rounding landscapes should 
be designed to make efficient use of natural resources during construction, operation 
and maintenance.  
8. Applicants are encouraged to engage in pre -application discussions at an early stage 
in the design process and will be requ ired to demonstrate that they have followed the 
robust Assessment -Involvement -Evaluation -Design process outlined in the national 
guidance on Design and Access Statements. Major development proposals are 
required to demonstrate how the local community has b een consulted and engaged 
in the design process, in accordance with the Council’s adopted Statement of 
Community Involvement. Significant development proposals will also be encouraged 
to engage with , and be reviewed through , the Regional Design Review proc ess 
(MADE).  
9. Where a developer is promoting a phase of a wider site allocation or larger windfall 
development opportunity , they will also need to demonstrate how they have engaged 
with other relevant land owners or developers with an interest in the site  to ensure 
the proposed phase does not prevent, constrain or otherwise impact negatively upon 
relevant development opportunities. This should have specific regard to the 
importance of securing comprehensive delivery of major sites , including infrastructure  
planning, place making, sustainable development, design and the prevention of 
ransom strips.  
Justification 
 The Government’s policy on design is clear in the NPPF.  ‘The creation of high quality 395.391.
buildings and places is fundamental to what the planning and development process should 
achieve. Good design is a key aspect of sustainable development, creates better places in 
which to live and work and helps make development acceptable to communities’.   The 
NPPF  also sets out how planning policies and decisions should ensure that the key 
objectives of good design are secured and makes clear that ‘permission should be 
refused for development of poor design that fails to take the opportunities available for 
improving the character and quality of an area and the way it functions.’  
 Additionally, the National Design Guide establishes ten characteristics of well- 396.392.
designed places . It emphasises the importance of responding positively to context, creating 
locally distinctive character, the value of creating strong communities and responding to   
  
  
132 
 issues such as climate change. As part of the government’s collection of Planning Practice 
Guidance, developments will be expected to have regard to the National Design Guide.  
 Although there can be many individual design ‘issues’ to be addressed, a key 397.393.
principle is how they improve the character and quality of an area and integrate to create 
well designed and well-built places and spaces that benefit people and communities at all 
stages of life and with different abilities.   
 Policy P15 provides a set of design principles for applicants to adhere to. These 398.394.
include the scale and visual appearance of the building (including the territory it sits within), 
as well its environmental performance, water management, impact on the natural 
environment, its integration with its surroundings and neighbouring public spaces. The policy 
acknowledges that high quality sustainable materials and construction standards are also 
important to ensure the durability and longevity of new development. 
 
 In addition to built development, the National Design Guide recognises that nature 399.395.
and the natural environment contribute to the quality of a place, to people’s quality of life and 
is a critical component of well-designed places. As such, the policy seeks to ensure that 
natural features (including natural and designed landscapes) are integrated into 
developments to support quality of place, health and wellbeing, biodiversity, water 
management and address climate change. 
 Trees in particular can deliver economic, social and environmental benefits. As 400.396.
outlined in the Solihull Urban Forestry Strategy (2019 – 2029), trees characterise and make 
Solihull’s streetscapes and urban landscapes more joyful, liveable and resilient to extreme 
weather. Their importance is reflected in the Policy given that well planned and designed 
places and spaces with trees can reduce the landscape impact of new development, 
promote health and wellbeing and are crucial in tackling the long term effects of climate 
change. In accordance with the ‘Living with Beauty’ report of the Building Better, Building 
Beautiful Commission (January 2020), there will be an expectation to incorporate tree 
planting in development including streets being tree-lined wherever possible. However, it is 
essential that new developments are appropriately designed and planted to ensure that new 
trees are suitable for the location, have longevity, and that existing mature trees are not 
 
  
 
 13
3 133 compromised. The protection and management of existing tree stock on site should be in 
accordance with industry best practice, with a view to achieving a harmonious and 
sustainable relationship between new construction/existing structures and their surrounding 
trees. 
 In well-designed places, water features also form part of an integrated system of 401.397.
landscape, biodiversity and drainage. Sustainable Drainage Systems can be used to 
enhance the surrounding environment and provide many additional benefits including 
attenuation, improvements to biodiversity and habitat, character, amenity and open space.  
 The policy recognises that planning can help increase resilience to the impacts of 402.398.
climate change through the built design, layout and landscape design of development, such 
as promoting low carbon design approaches to reduce energy consumption in buildings . The 
Council is committed to ensuring developments and places are designed to deal with the 
challenge of adapting to and mitigating to Climate Change and would therefore encourage 
applicants to exceed building regulations where possible.  
 Policy P15 also requires development proposals to create safe and attractive streets 403.399.
and public spaces, which reduce crime and the fear of crime. Whilst adherence to Secured 
by Design principles is important for all new built development, it can also be relevant to 
smaller scale proposals such as changes of use to licensed premises and the installation of 
cash points, where applicants should engage with a West Midlands Crime Prevention Design 
Advisor at an early stage. As well as considering the impact of development proposals on 
public safety and the incidences of anti-social behaviour, the reference to crime in the Policy 
also relates to creating safer buildings and places that are better protected from terrorist 
attack.  
 The Borough’s high quality natural, built and historic environment is fundamental to 404.400.
its success as an attractive place to live, work and invest. As such, the policy strives to 
create development with the highest standards of design and sustainability, across the 
Borough. This should be evidenced by demonstrating compliance with Building for Life 12 or 
its equivalent. Development associated with the key economic assets within UK Central will 
be expected to be designed to the highest quality standard to ensure these areas become 
design exemplars for the Borough and sustainable communities. Policy P1 makes clear that 
to assist the growth proposals for the UK Central Growth Area, a concept framework will be 
prepared to ensure that a comprehensive and coordinated approach is followed.  
 However, not all parts of the Borough have a high quality environment and a key part 405.401.
of the strategy is to improve the built environment, particularly in some areas of North 
Solihull and parts of the Mature Suburbs.  
 Concept Masterplans have been prepared for all residential sites allocations in the 406.402.
Local Plan. The Masterplan approach is born out of the Council’s ambition to accommodate 
growth, with place-making providing the central theme. The illustrative concept masterplans 
are intended to demonstrate how sites could be brought forward for development in a form 
which both seek to respond to the Borough’s needs and safeguards the long term desirability 
of Solihull as a place to live and work. Each concept masterplan sets out at a broad level 
how the sites ought to be developed and the likely housing capacity. The Council will require 
the development of residential site allocations in the Plan to be in general accordance with 
the principles of the Concept Masterplan for the respective site allocation. 
 The appropriate density of residential development will be informed by the need to 407.403.
make efficient use of land together with the desirability of maintaining an area’s prevailing 
character and setting.  Where it can be demonstrated that a higher density would improve 
the character and quality of an area, this will be supported.   
  
  
134 
  In more sustainable locations, which are highly accessible by public transport, as well 408.404.
as walking and cycling, there will be opportunities to increase densities. However, careful 
consideration must be given to the existing character of the local area.  
 It is also particularly important to ensure that new development being assimilated into 409.405.
an existing residential area is designed to avoid ‘town cramming’, where overly large 
properties are squeezed onto plots that are only big enough for smaller dwellings. The 
Council  will undertake a review of its current principal supplementary planning guidance 
relating to design (New Housing in Context) to ensure it remains fit for purpose or whether it 
requires amending to ensure it provides appropriate guidance to assist in the application of 
this policy. A Backland Development SPD is also being prepared so that backland and 
related infill developments are designed to protect and make a positive contribution to 
existing residential areas.  
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
Policy P16 Conservation of Heritage Assets and Local 
Distinctiveness  
1. The Council recognises the importance of the historic environment to the Borough’s 
local character and distinctiveness, and to civic pride, and the cultural, social, 
environmental and economic benefits that its conservation brings. Heritage assets 
are an irreplaceable resource that should be conserved as appropriate to their 
significance, sustained and enhanced, and put to viable use consistent with their 
conservation.  
2. The Council considers that the following characteristics make a significant 
contribution to the local character and distinctiveness of the Borough:  
  i. The historic core of Solihull Town Centre and its adjacent parks;  
  ii. The historical development and variety of architectural styles within the  
   Mature Suburbs and the larger established rural settlements of Meriden,  
   Hampton -in-Arden, Balsall Common, Knowle, Dorridge, Bentley Heath,  
   Hockley Heath, Cheswick Green and Tidbury Green;  
  iii. The Arden landscape, historic villages, hamlets, farmsteads, country  and  
   lesser houses and the distinct medieval core of historic rural settlements  
   including Berkswell, Barston, Temple Balsall, Meriden Hill, Walsal End,  
   Hampton -in-Arden, Bickenhill and Knowle;   
  
 
 13
5 135   iv. Parks, gardens and landscape including common , woodland, heathland and 
   distinctive fieldscapes as defined in the Warwickshire Historic Landscape  
   Characterisation; and  
  v. The canal and railway network, including disused railway lines and the  
   working stations at Solihull, Olton, Dorridge a nd Shirley, together with  
   associated structures.  
3. Development proposals that impact upon this character and significance will be 
expected to demonstrate how this impact has been assessed and minimised, using a 
recognised process of assessment, involv ement, evaluation and design.  
4. Development will be expected to conserve heritage assets in a manner appropriate 
to their significance, conserve local character and distinctiveness, create or sustain a 
sense of place and seek and take opportunities to enhance the contribution made by 
the historic environment to the character of a place. In Solihull, heritage assets 
include :; Listed Buildings, Scheduled Ancient Monuments, Registered Parks and 
Gardens, Conservation Areas and also non -designated assets. Th e latter include 
buildings, monuments, archaeological sites, places, areas or landscapes positively 
identified in Solihull’s Historic Environment Record, or during development 
management work as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions, such as those identified on the Local List of Heritage Assets. The 
historic landscape includes ancient woodlands, hedgerows and field boundaries, and 
archaeological features , such as earthworks.  
5. All applications that affect the historic  environment will be expected to have 
considered and used, as a minimum the evidence in the Solihull Historic Environment 
Record, conservation area appraisals and management plans, to inform the design of 
the proposal. Development proposals affecting herit age assets should be assessed 
using further sources, and appropriate expertise where necessary.  This should be 
explained in the accompanying Design and Access Statement or, for significant 
proposals, in a Heritage Statement.  
6. Proposals seeking to modify heritage assets for the mitigation of and adaptation to 
the effects of climate change will be expected to be sympathetic and conserve the 
special interest and significance of the heritage asset or its setting.  
Justification 
 Paragraph 184 and 185 of the NPPF advise that Local Planning Authorities should 410.406.
set out in their Local Plan ‘a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the 
historic environment’, recognising that ‘heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource’ which 
should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. The Planning (Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 also places several duties on Local Planning 
Authorities:  
 In considering whether to grant listed building consent for any works, to pay special 
regard to the desirability of preserving the listed building or its setting or any features 
of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses; 
 To designate and review the designation of Conservation Areas and publish 
proposals for their preservation and enhancement; and 
 To pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or 
appearance of Conservation Areas.   
  
  
136 
  The 20 Conservation Areas within the Borough are shown on the Policies Map.  411.407.
Links to available appraisals can be found on the Council’s website. The Council will produce 
appraisals and management plan proposals for all of its conservation areas in due course, 
and will periodically review these. 
 The Council recognises the importance of the historic environment to the Borough’s 412.408.
local character and distinctiveness, its contribution to the five distinct ‘places’ of Solihull and 
the cultural, social, environmental and economic benefits of conserving heritage assets in 
proportion to their significance. In line with the NPPF, Policy P16 encourages the 
conservation of the historic environment whilst ensuring that assets have viable uses that 
enable that conservation. It also promotes the recognition of the wider social, cultural, 
economic and environmental benefits of its conservation, and the desirability of new 
development contributing positively to local character and distinctiveness. The Policy defines 
the special characteristics whichcharacteristics, which  the Council considers make a 
significant contribution to Solihull’s local distinctiveness and advocates strong protection of 
those qualities and the Borough’s wider historic environment. The policy also seeks to 
ensure that all development preserves or enhances heritage assets in a manner appropriate 
to their significance, as defined in the evidence base for the Local Plan, or as their 
significance emerges during the planning process.  
 To conserve the heritage assets and sense of place within Solihull, all development 413.409.
proposals affecting heritage assets will also be expected to adhere to current established 
guidance.  At present this includes National Planning Practice Guidance and all relevant 
Historic England publications including Conservation Principles, Policies and Guidance 
(2008). 
 
 A substantial body of evidence on the historic environment has been collected and 414.410.
informed the development of the Local Plan and this Review, its strategy for the Borough’s 
historic environment and the selection of sites allocated for development. Key pieces of 
evidence such as the Warwickshire Historic Landscape Characterisation (June 2010), 
Warwickshire Historic Farmstead Characterisation Project (August 2010), Warwickshire 
Landscape Guidelines: Arden (November 1993), Solihull Characterisation Study (December 
2011) and Solihull Historic Environment Record have been used to develop an 
understanding of Solihull’s historic environment, local distinctiveness and its heritage assets; 
 
  
 
 13
7 137 those parts of the historic environment which have a particular value or significance.  Whilst 
some of these studies are now a number of years old, their content remains valuable and 
reasonable to this date. 
 The Archaeological Assessment (2018 and 2020) provides evidence of the 415.411.
archaeological assets in the Borough, with general and site specific assessments and 
recommendations relating to the development proposals in this Plan. A Heritage Impact 
Assessment (2019 and 2020) has been undertaken for those development sites where 
potentially significant impacts on heritage assets were identified, in consultation with Historic 
England. These assessments have informed decisions on site selection and shaped the 
concept masterplans prepared for each site.   
 The Historic England Heritage at Risk registers, Solihull’s Conservation Area 416.412.
Appraisals and Management Plans have also identified current threats to the Borough’s 
historic environment and one of the purposes of Policy P16 and the delivery strategy is to 
focus on addressing such threats. The Solihull Landscape Character Assessment provides 
evidence of the character and local distinctiveness of the landscape, including historic 
landscapes. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
Policy P17 Countryside and Green Belt  
1. The Council will safeguard the ‘“best and most versatile ’” agricultural land in the 
Borough , unless there is an overriding need for development that outweighs the loss, 
and will seek to protect the character of the countryside.  
2. Land designated as Green Belt in the Borough is identified on the Policies Map and 
will be kept permanently open, in accordance with national Green Belt policy.  
3. Inappropriate development will not be permitted in the Solihull Green Belt, unless 
very sp ecial circumstances have been demonstrated in accordance with the NPPF.  
Paragraphs 145 and 146 of the NPPF set out forms of development that are not 
regarded as inappropriate.  In interpreting these paragraphs , the following provisions 
will apply:  
 i. Limited in -filling or redevelopment may take place in the following settlements 
 without constituting an inappropriate development:  
  Chadwick End  
  Cheswick Green  
  Millison’s Wood    
  Tidbury Green .   
  
  
138 
  ii. Limited infilling in villages shall be interpret ed as the filling of a small gap  
 within an otherwise built - up frontage with not more than two dwellings.  
 iii. Disproportionate additions shall be interpreted as additions that are more than 
 40% of the original floor  space of the building.  
 iv. Wher e the re -use of buildings or land is proposed, the new use, and any  
 associated use of land surrounding the building, should not conflict with, nor 
 have a materially greater impact on, the openness of the Green Belt and the 
 purposes of including land  in it, and the form, bulk and general design of the 
 buildings shall be in - keeping with their surroundings.  
4. In considering proposals for inappropriate development in the Green Belt, the 
following factors may be taken into account as very special circ umstances:  
  i. The reasonable expansion of established businesses into the Green Belt will 
   be allowed where the proposal would make a significant contribution to the 
   local economy or employment, providing that appropriate mitigation can be 
   secured.  
  ii. Waste management operations , provided the development accords with the 
   waste management policy of the Pplan. 
  iii. The delivery of rural exception sites for housing are to be brought forward in 
   accordance with pPolicy P4B of this pPlan. 
  iv. The construction of renewable energy provision is to be brought forward , in 
   accordance with Policy P9 of this Pplan and pPara 147 of the NPPF.  
5. Development within , or conspicuous from , the Green Belt must not harm the visual 
amenity of the Gr een Belt by reason of siting, materials , or design.  
6. The small settlements of Hampton -in-Arden, Hockley Heath, Meriden and Catherine 
de Barnes are inset in the Green Belt and are not therefore subject to Green Belt 
policy. Nevertheless, the Council, in c onsidering applications for development in 
these settlements, will take into account the importance of their rural setting and of 
their attributes, such as historic buildings, open space, density of development, 
landscape and townscape that contribute towa rds their special character. 
Immediately beyond the inset boundary, strict Green Belt policies will apply.  
Justification 
 Most of the countryside within the Borough is in use for agriculture, and farmers are 417.413.
largely responsible for managing the land.  Farmland is generally of good to moderate quality 
capable of supporting a healthy mixed farming economy. About one fifth of the farmland falls 
within the ‘best and most versatile’ agricultural land category, which Solihull’s Countryside 
Strategy 2010-2020 indicates should be protected, as an irreplaceable resource and for its 
contribution to the rural character of the Borough. The Solihull Landscape Character 
Assessment highlights the character and local distinctiveness of the landscape and its 
sensitivity to development, and is a key tool in helping to manage change.  
  
 
 13
9 139  
 Green Belt policy is set out in the national policy and will apply across the whole of 418.414.
the rural area of the Borough, other than the inset areas around settlements and other major 
developments. National policy makes clear that established Green Belt boundaries should 
be altered only in exceptional circumstances and only when a local plan is being prepared or 
reviewed. It also describes the circumstances when built and other development should be 
considered as an exception to inappropriate development. 
 The pressure on the Green Belt in Solihull has been intensified by the requirement 419.415.
for development emerging from housing needs (both for the Borough and wider housing 
market area); the lack of vacant and derelict land in the Borough; national guidance on 
windfall housing; and local requirements for employment land, waste management and 
mineral extraction. This is reflected both in the significant number of sites in the Green Belt in 
the SHELAA, and the paucity of sites in the urban area. 
 Significant adjustments to Green Belt boundaries are required in the UK Central Hub 420.416.
Area to provide an appropriate planning framework for the Council’s ambitions for the HS2 
Interchange and adjoining area, and to meet the needs of the key economic assets within 
the area. Further significant adjustments are required elsewhere to meet local housing and 
employment land needs and to address Solihull’s contribution toward the shortfall in new 
housing land across the wider housing market area. Where land is to be deleted from the 
Green Belt as part of this Plan, exceptional circumstances are considered to be met to justify 
the change in boundaries, as required by the NPPF.  
 The Solihull Strategic Green Belt Assessment (GBA) assesses the contribution that 421.417.
the Green Belt in the Borough makes towards the purposes of including land in the Green 
Belt. The GBA demonstrates that the Green Belt in the Meriden Gap between Solihull and 
Coventry makes the most significant contribution, although the Green Belt on the edge of the 
urban area and some settlements also contributes significantly. The findings have been used 
to help justify the removal of land in the UK Central Hub Area from the Green Belt and to 
identify suitable sites for new housing and other purposes elsewhere. 
 A small number of minor changes will be made to address anomalies in Green Belt 422.418.
boundaries across the Borough, taking into account an assessment of submissions made 
during the preparation of this Plan. 
 In total all of the proposed allocations relating to Green Belt sites amount to 423.419.
approximately 574ha42 out of a Borough total of approximately 11,945ha.  This represents 
4.8% of the total. 
                                                           
42 140ha for the HS2 Interchange site, 94ha for the employment allocation at Damson Parkway and 340 ha for the 
residential allocations. 
  
  
  
140 
  The policy is consistent with national Green Belt policy, but provides some further 424.420.
guidance to help establish whether development would be inappropriate. 
 Limited infilling in villages, identified as appropriate development in the Green Belt in 425.421.
the NPPF, will be permitted in Chadwick End, Cheswick Green, Millison’s Wood and Tidbury 
Green ,.. This reflects the character of these settlements, the limited impact that small infill 
developments would have on the wider Green belt, including by way of openness, and the 
limited, small scale opportunities that exist within their settlement envelope.   In the other 
Green Belt villages and hamlets in the Borough, new building, other than that required for 
agriculture and forestry, outdoor sport, outdoor recreation and cemeteries, or for extensions 
and alterations will be considered to be inappropriate development, in order to protect the 
Green Belt and the character and quality of the settlements ... 
 The NPPF advises that extensions or alterations to buildings in the Green Belt should 426.422.
not result is disproportionate additions to the original building. The House Extensions 
Guidelines SPD provides further guidance on this issue, limiting extensions to a maximum of 
40% of the original habitable floor space. This guidance applies to buildings outside 
settlements and established ribbons of development within the Green Belt, but includes 
properties on the end of ribbons of development. 
 The re-use of permanent and substantial buildings in the Green Belt is not 427.423.
inappropriate development. Locally, there is considerable pressure for the conversion of 
agricultural barns to new uses. The policy sets out some additional criteria for re-use of 
buildings to ensure that the new use does not conflict with or have a materially greater 
impact on the Green Belt, and is in keeping with the surroundings. 
 A number of established businesses are located within or adjacent to the Green Belt 428.424.
in Solihull, such as Jaguar Land Rover and Whale Tankers. The reasonable expansion of 
such businesses into the Green Belt, whilst remaining inappropriate development, will be 
allowed where justified by a significant contribution to the local economy or employment. 
 Policy P12 identifies the need for some additional waste management capacity in the 429.425.
Borough, and a number of strategic waste management sites, and an area of search for new 
waste management facilities within the Green Belt. This policy is consistent with guidance in 
the NPPF but makes clear that the contribution towards new waste management capacity in 
the Borough may amount to very special circumstances, provided the development accords 
with the waste management policy in this plan. 
 Policy P20 sets out that new, additional or relocated sports facilities may be b rought 430.426.
forward, and these may well be proposed in the Green Belt.  The NPPF sets out (at 
paragraph 141) the desire to plan positively to enhance their beneficial use, including looking 
at opportunities for outdoor sport and recreation.  Changes of use for outdoor sport would 
not expected to be inappropriate development, nor should any new buildings that are 
providing appropriate facilities. 
 The NPPF supports positive planning to retain and enhance landscapes, visual 431.427.
amenity and biodiversity, and this policy indicates that development within or conspicuous 
from the Green Belt must not harm visual amenity through siting, materials or design. 
 The settlements of Catherine de Barnes, Hampton in Arden, Hockley Heath and 432.428.
Meriden are inset from the Green Belt. Whilst Green Belt policies do not apply within these 
settlements, the Council will take into account their rural setting and special character in 
considering development proposals. 
   
  
 
 14
1 141 Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
I Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
L  Improving water quality and flood risk 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
Policy P17A Green Belt Compensatio n 
1. In accordance with paragraph 138 of the NPPF, planning permission will not be 
granted for development of sites removed from the Green Belt , unless and until 
appropriate compensatory improvements to environmental quality and accessibility of 
remaining Green Belt is incorporated into a Section 106 agreement.  Such 
compensatory improvements shall be proportionate to the extent of land being 
remo ved from the Green Belt and will be in accordance with the following hierarchy:  
2. Where compensatory improvements have been identified as part of the concept 
masterplans included as part of the Local Plan, that such improvements are included 
in the develo pment proposals.  
3. Where compensatory improvements have not been identified as part of the concept 
masterplans included as part of the Local Plan , that the compensatory improvements 
are provided in accordance with the following hierarchy:  
 i. Compensatory improvements to remaining Green Belt land adjacent to, or in 
 close proximity to , the development site;  
 ii. Compensatory improvements to remaining Green Belt land adjacent to, or in 
 close proximity to , the settlement or area accommodating the development;  
 iii. Compensatory improvements to remaining Green Belt land in an area  
 identified for environmental improvements as part of the Council’s Green  
 Infrastructure Opportunity Mapping.  
4. In the event that it is robustly demonstrated tha t none of the above options can be 
satisfied (e .g. as land is not available) , then the Council will accept a commuted sum 
that it will use to undertake compensatory improvements.  
Justification 
 Land designated as Green Belt in the Borough will be kept permanently open, in 433.429.
accordance with national Green Belt policy. This Plan has had to make significant incursions 
into Green Belt in order to meet housing and other needs for the Borough and the wider 
area. Where Green Belt has been allocated, exceptional circumstances for housing or other 
development have been fully demonstrated in accordance with paragraph 136 of the NPPF. 
 Paragraph 138 of the NPPF requires that plans should set out ways in which the 434.430.
impact of removing land from the Green belt can be offset through compensatory   
  
  
142 
 improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility of remaining Green Belt land.   
This policy is only expected to be used in connection with the allocations in this plan that 
entail the removal of the allocated site from the Green Belt. 
 The policy sets out the mechanism for achieving compensation through a sequential 435.431.
approach based on the proximity of improvements to the land being removed. The last 
option to pay a commuted sum will be acceptable only if it is demonstrated that none of the 
other sequential options is available. Most compensatory improvements are not expected to 
require planning permission. Where this is not the case, and the development would amount 
to inappropriate development in the Green Belt, then compliance with this policy can assist 
towards the very special circumstances needed to justify such development. It would also be 
in accordance with paragraph 141 of the NPPF, which encourages LPAs to plan positively to 
enhance beneficial use of Green Belt. 
 There are a range of potential improvements that can be pursued to fulfil this 436.432.
requirement and the following are provided as examples, but it is recognised that there may 
be others: 
 new or enhanced green infrastructure; 
 woodland planting; 
 landscape and visual enhancements (beyond those needed to mitigate the immediate 
impacts of the proposal); 
 improvements to biodiversity, habitat connectivity and natural capital; 
 new or enhanced walking and cycle routes; and 
 improved access to new, enhanced or existing recreational and playing field 
provision. 
 In developing the required compensation, prospective applicants may also wish to 437.433.
review other Council strategies ( ege.g. Local Cycling & Walking Implementation Plan) to 
seek to review whether existing opportunities have already been identified.  This should 
include Neighbourhood Development Plans and prospective applicants may also wish to 
approach relevant Parish Councils or Neighbourhood Planning Forums to ascertain if they 
have any priorities for action that could be fulfilled in this way. 
 It should be noted that improvements being b rought forward under this policy will be 438.434.
expected to be beyond those needed to mitigate the immediate impacts of the proposal. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
   
  
 
 14
3 143 Health & Supporting Local 
Communities 
Introduction 
 The built and natural environment is a key determinant of health and wellbeing. The 439.435.
NPPF states that one of the three overarching objectives of the planning system is 
supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities.  It includes specific requirements for 
planning policies and decisions to promote healthy, inclusive and safe places.  The Health 
and Social Care Act (2012) gave local authorities new duties and responsibilities for health 
improvement and requires every local authority to use all the levers at its disposal to improve 
health and wellbeing, and the Local Plan is one such lever. 
 The health of Solihull residents is generally good and is getting better. However, 440.436.
good health is not consistent across the borough, and the health of some of our residents, 
particularly in the most deprived neighbourhoods, is significantly below an acceptable level. 
The numbers of older age residents within Solihull is increasing and the need to address the 
challenges of climate change has been intensified.   
 Ever-increasing research indicates that the environment in which we live is 441.437.
inextricably linked to our health across the life course. The role of the built and natural 
environment in shaping the social, economic and environmental circumstances that 
determine health is increasingly recognised and understood. 
 A healthy community is one which supports healthy behaviours and enhances 442.438.
people ’s physical and mental health. Many health conditions such as obesity, heart disease, 
stress and poor mental health have been linked to the environments in which people live and 
work, whilst contact with the natural environment enhances both physical and mental health. 
 The Local Plan provides opportunities to increase and enhance facilities and enable 443.439.
greater participation in physical activity including play, sport and recreation, as well as 
improving a network of high quality provision across the Borough. Wider community use of 
sports and recreation provision on new school sites will be promoted to make an efficient use 
of land and locate facilities in the most accessible places. 
 The Council is committed to improving health and wellbeing in Solihull and the Local 444.440.
Plan has a key role to play in implementing strategies to help people lead healthier, active 
lifestyles. Many of the policies in the Local Plan will have an impact on health and wellbeing 
and in drafting the local plan policies, this has been given due consideration to ensure that, 
the overall impact of any new development should result in positive health outcomes. 
 The Local Plan contributes to supporting communities and promotes health through 445.441.
its spatial strategy and policies.  These include policies relating to the location of new 
development, sustainable development, infrastructure, provision of new homes, jobs, town 
centres and sustainable travel (promoting public transport, walking and cycling).  These 
policies demonstrate that improved health outcomes are integral to the local plan and 
meeting its vision and objectives. 
    
  
  
144 
 Policy P18 Health and Wellbeing  
1. The Council will, with its partners, creat e an environment, which supports positive 
health outcomes and reduces inequality.  
2. All new developments will be expected to promote, support and enhance physical 
and mental health and wellbeing. Healthy lifestyles will be enabled by:  
  i. Facilitating o pportunities for formal and informal physical activity, exercise 
   opportunities, recreation and play through access to well - maintained open 
   spaces, that take account of the different needs of the diverse population;  
  ii. Delivering high quality, inc lusive and attractive environments which minimise 
   and mitigate against potential harm from risks , such as pollution and  
   obesogenic environments, and promoting health and wellbeing , and  &  
    opportunities for social interaction;  
  iii. Increasing opportunities for active travel,  including walking, cycling and  
   encouraging more sustainable travel choices .; 
  iv. Improving the quality and access to the strategic and local green   
   infrastructure network in the Borough and accessible open spaces,  including 
   playing pitches, particularly in areas where accessible green spaces and  
   infrastructure is identified as lacking .;  
  v. Supporting safe and inclusive design , that discourage s crime and anti -social 
   behaviour, and encourage s social cohesion .; 
  vii. Delivering new and improved health services and facilities in areas accessed 
   by sustainable transport modes (facilities for primary medical care should be 
   identified and planned for);  
  viii. Supporting initiatives which enable , or impr ove access to , healthy food.  For 
   example, provide opportunities for growing local produce and encouraging 
   people to make healthy food choices;  
  viiiix. Encouraging initiatives to promote the energy efficiency of new and existing 
   housing;  
  ix. Retain ing, increasing and enhancing  green infrastructure within developments 
   including green spaces, planting, trees , open spaces and soft surfaces,  in 
   order to secure a variety of spaces for residents, visitors or employees to use 
   and observe.  
Hot Food Takeaways  
3. Proposals for hot food takeaways , or premises which will provide an element of hot 
food takeaway alongside other supporting uses, should not lead to an over -
concentration of such uses within any one individual locality , by overly dominat ing the 
street scene or hav inge an adverse impact on the standard of amenity for existing 
and future occupants of land and buildings. It is also appropriate to control the 
number of outlets where there are concerns regarding levels of obesity.  
4. Applications for hot food takeaways will be based on the following factors:   
  
 
 14
5 145   i. Within the three main town centres, no more than 15% of the units will be in 
   use as a hot food takeaway;  
  ii. Within local centres and local parades, no more than 10% of t he units will be 
   in use as a hot food takeaway;  
  iii. At all locations , no more than 2 hot food takeaways should be located  
   adjacent each other.  
5. Applications for hot food takeaways will not be granted within a 400m radius from an 
entrance to a primary or secondary school, youth centre , or similar location.  
 Health Impact Assessment (HIA)  
6. All development proposals that may have a significant impact on health and 
wellbeing will be required to submit a n assessment of the potential health impact s. 
The extent of the assessment undertaken will depend on the type, scale and location 
of the proposed development.   
7. HIA Screening should be completed for:  
  i. Developments which include uses for education, health, leisure and/or  
   community facilit ies;  
  ii. Changes of use to Pubs and Drinking establishments, Hot food takeaways, 
   C1 (Hotels), C2 (Residential Institutions), C2A (Secure Residential  
   Institutions), betting offices/shops and pay day loan shops;  
  iii. Proposals that may affect sen sitive or vulnerable populations;  
  iv. Other relevant proposals as requested by the local authority.  
8. A Rapid Health Impact assessment (HIA) should be undertaken for:  
  i. Major residential (C2 and C3) developments where the provision of dwelling  
   houses is 50 or more;  
  ii. The provision of a non -residential building , or buildings , where the floor space 
   created by the development is 1,000 square metres or more;  
  iii. Waste development and the winning and working of minerals , or the use of 
   land for mineral working deposits;  
  iv. Proposals for hot food takeaways (as defined by the Town and Country  
   Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended));  
  v. Other relevant proposals as requested by the local authority.  
9. A Full Health Impact Assessment should be undertaken for:  
  i. Major residential (C2 and C3) developments where the provision of dwelling  
   houses is 150 or more;    
  
  
146 
   ii. The provision of a non -residential building or buildings where the area of  
   development exceeds 5 hecta res;  
  iii. Other relevant proposals as requested by the local authority.  
10. All HIAs and HIA Screening shall be undertaken in accordance with the Council’s 
Health Supplementary Planning Document. The HIA and HIA Screening will be a 
material consideratio n in the determination of the planning application. Where  
significant negative impacts  on health and wellbeing are identified, the Council will 
require  applicants to mitigate for  such impacts , in order to make the proposal 
acceptable , Tthe Council may use planning conditions and/or developer contributions 
to achieve this , and also to ensure any significant positive identified impacts are 
realised.  
Justification 
 The Marmot Review (February 2010) highlighted that socio-economic inequalities, 446.442.
including the built environment, have a clear effect on the health outcomes of the population. 
One of the key policy objectives aimed at reducing the gap in life expectancy between 
people of lower and higher socio-economic backgrounds, is to “create and develop healthy 
and sustainable places and communities”. In February 2020 The Institute of Health Equity 
published The Health Foundation: 'Health Equity in England: The Marmot Review 10 Years 
On', the report highlights that poor health is increasing, the health gap has grown between 
wealthy and deprived areas and that place matters to health. 
 The NPPF (updated February 2019) promotes the role of planning to create healthy 447.443.
and safe communities by supporting local strategies to improve health, social and cultural 
wellbeing for all. It also encourages applicants to engage early and proactively with the 
community and other consultees. It states that planning policies and decisions should aim to 
achieve healthy, inclusive and safe places , which promote social interaction, are safe and 
accessible and enable and support healthy lifestyles. 
 Additional guidance in the NPPG Healthy and Safe Communities (updated November 448.444.
2019) highlights the importance of planning in improving health and wellbeing. The Guidance 
states that the Director of Public Health should be consulted on any planning applications 
that are likely to have a significant impact on the health and wellbeing of the local population 
or particular groups within it. Also that a health impact assessment is a useful tool to use 
where there are expected to be significant impacts. 
 The Solihull Council Plan for 2020- 2025  sits in the context of the Solihull Health and 449.445.
Wellbeing Strategy and the Covid-19 Economic Recovery Plan. The plan is based on the 
belief that economic development, environmental sustainability and health and wellbeing 
must go hand in hand. This is reflected in the nine priorities of the plan set within the themes 
of economy, environment and people and communities. These priorities are all linked to 
improving health and wellbeing within the Borough and a particular focus is the need to focus 
on health inequalities in Solihull and the actions that can be taken. 
 The Solihull Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2019-22) is published by the Solihull 450.446.
Health and Wellbeing Board. The main purpose of the Board is to provide a forum in which 
key leaders from the local health and care system work together to improve the health and 
wellbeing of their local population from pre-birth to end of life. The Strategy is developed 
using various sources of information, including the JSNA and focuses on a small number of 
priorities. 
 Planning has a key role in shaping the wider determinants of health and wellbeing; at 451.447.
a local and strategic scale. A wide range of social, economic and environmental factors, over  
  
 
 14
7 147 which individuals often have little control, influences a person’s health. This is summarised in 
the diagram below (reproduced with permission from Barton & Grant). 
 
 The Council recognises the positive benefits that access to green infrastructure, 452.448.
physical activity, exercise opportunities, recreation and play have on both physical and 
mental health, as well as child development.  The availability of a variety of high quality and 
accessible open spaces and play, sports and leisure facilities is vital to enabling 
opportunities for formal and informal sport and recreation, both indoor and outdoor, in order 
to improve health and wellbeing. The multi-functional benefits of green infrastructure extend 
beyond a place for outdoor pursuits and enjoyment of visual amenity. It can create a 
healthier environment by filtering pollutants, attenuating noise pollution, decreasing the 
urban heat island effect, reducing flood risk impacts and providing opportunities to interact 
with nature. 
 Evidence from the Solihull Joint Strategic Needs Assessment highlights that more 453.449.
affluent areas of the Borough tend to be less physically active through ‘lifestyle activities’ 
such as walking and carrying shopping, partly due to higher car ownership levels and car 
  
  
  
148 
 use. An increased emphasis on walking and cycling, in addition to providing opportunities for 
physical activity, also contributes to improved air quality.  
 In order to assess potential health impacts early in the development process, 454.450.
significant proposals should include a Health Impact Assessment or equivalent. This could 
include supporting evidence where requirements are being explicitly met through some other 
means, such as a sustainability statement or environmental impact assessment (EIA). 
Where significant adverse impacts are identified and unavoidable, measures to mitigate or 
compensate for these will be provided.  
 Poor quality 455.451.
neighbourhoods can impact 
negatively on the health and 
wellbeing of those who live in 
them and the quality and design 
of the built environment and 
wider public realm has an 
impact on whether and how 
people use a place. High quality 
and well-designed buildings 
and spaces which have safe, 
attractive and convenient 
access can encourage social 
interaction, reduce crime and 
fear of crime and influence 
travel mode, thereby having a 
positive effect on health and 
wellbeing. 
 The provision of appropriate, well designed, secure, affordable and energy efficient 456.452.
housing is essential in securing improvements to people’s health and wellbeing. Solihull’s 
ageing population is likely to lead to increasing problems with ill-health from poorly insulated 
and damp properties whichproperties, which  are expensive to heat.  In conjunction with 
Policy P4 ‘Meeting Housing Needs’ and Policy P15 ‘Securing Design Quality’, developments 
which address these issues and mitigate some of the health impacts of an ageing population 
will be supported. Provision of and access to health facilities and services has a direct effect 
on health. It is therefore crucial to ensure that health care is available and accessible to 
those who need it. 
 Poor diet is a significant factor in obesity and associated poor health. Some parts of 457.453.
Solihull, particularly in the northern part of the Borough, have high levels of obesity amongst 
children and adults and also have a high proportion of certain food and drink uses, which can 
detract from a diversity of services in those areas. In particular, a high concentration of hot 
food takeaways in certain areas, or proposals that are not appropriately located, can result in 
an undue influence on poor choice of diet that in turn contributes to a wide range of health 
issues (e.g. obesity, diabetes, etc.).  In additionaddition,  such proposals can lead to 
increased levels of environmental health issues (odour and litter issues; and anti-social 
behaviour). 
 In parades or frontages whichfrontages, which  have fewer than 10 commercial units, 458.454.
one hot food takeaway use may be permitted subject to meeting other policy considerations, 
e.g. where there is no adverse impacts on the amenity of residents or neighbouring 
business. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy  
A Mitigating and adapting to climate change 
 
  
 
 14
9 149 C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
 
Policy P19 Range and Quality of Local Services   
Designated district and& local centres.  
1. These include: Knowle, Dorridge, Castle Bromwich, Marston Green, Balsall 
Common, Hobs Moat, Kingshurst Village Centre, Smiths Wood Village Centre, 
Chelmund’s Cross Village Centre, Dickens Heath, Hatchford Brook, Shelly Farm, 
Meriden and Olton.  
2. Proposal s within these centres should reflect the scale, character and nature of the 
centre’s role and function in serving local needs. Proposals should provide an 
opportunity to reduce the need to travel ,; sustain  the economic viability and vitality of 
the centre , and make effective and efficient use of existing premises or land.  . 
3. All new development will need to be sensitive to local character and enhance the 
public realm.  
Parades and Local Shops  
4. Whilst Llocal parades and shops may not form part of district or local centres, they do 
provide an important community resource for local people. As such , proposals which 
result in the loss of local shops, without appropriate alternative provision , will not be 
supported, unless it is has been demonstrated th at there is no reasonable prospect 
of the use being retained.  
Other Community and Social Infrastructure  
5. Proposals which result in the loss of community and social infrastructure, without 
appropriate alternative provision, will not be supported, unless : 
  i. It has been demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the use  
   being retained ; 
  ii. There is evidence that the premises is no longer needed to support  
   community activity;  
  iii. The loss of the facility is demonstrated to be part of  a strategic approach to 
   service rationalisation and improvement in the quality of offer.  
6. Proposals for the delivery of new social and community infrastructure should be 
focused towards designated centres , or alongside existing community assets such as 
schools, health centres or community halls. This will support the creation of 
community hubs, encouraging linked trip, community cohesion and reducing the 
need to travel.    
  
  
150 
 7. Standalone proposals will be considered on a case - by- case basis , having rega rd to 
the wider policies of this Pplan with a specific focus on:  
  i. The availability of parking provision and wider highway impacts;  
  ii. Accessibility by a range of transport modes, including sustainable and active 
   travel routes;  
  iii. Expected noise generation from the facility;  
  iv. Any other impacts on the amenity of surrounding residential properties or  
   commercial operations.  
Justification  
 District Centres provide services and goods to their local communities and in the 459.455.
hierarchy of town centres are second tier to the main town centres of Solihull, Shirley and 
Chelmsley Wood. Castle Bromwich has been identified as the only District Centre in the 
Borough, the centres in Knowle, Dorridge, Balsall Common, Kingshurst Village, Smiths 
Wood Village and Chelmund’s Cross Village function as ‘local centres’ which service the 
communities immediately around them and reduce the need to travel for staple purchases. 
 Local Centres typically include a convenience shop or a small supermarket; they may 460.456.
also have newsagents, pharmacy, local café/restaurants, hot food takeaways, small office 
and may also be a popular location for independent retailers.  
 In terms of function, local centres add considerably to the quality of life, and the 461.457.
Council considers it is important to retain the vitality of the local centres, even though 
permitted development rights mean the Council now has limited control over changes of use. 
 
 Solihull has a number of local centres of varying size which act as a focus and 462.458.
provide key services for the communities they serve (which can also include the surrounding 
rural area of those centres outside the conurbation). 
 While shopping habits change and evolve, the Council will enable a broad range of 463.459.
facilities of a suitable scale in local centres and will expect good design that respects local 
character and enhances the local public realm.   
 
  
 
 15
1 151  There are numerous local parades and freestanding small shops throughout the 464.460.
Borough. Local parades and shops provide for the day to day needs, as well as offering a 
place for informal interaction and thereby contributing to health and wellbeing of the 
community. The Council will seek to sustain and encourage these valued facilities and 
services, particularly in rural areas where this would reduce the ability of the community to 
meet its day to day needs.  
 Small scale local shops and services providing for local needs on a daily basis can 465.461.
be particularly important in rural areas where access to larger centres may be more difficult 
without car access. 
 Where proposals are submitted that would lead to the loss of local facilities without 466.462.
there being appropriate alternative provision, it will be expected that applicants will 
demonstrate that there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained.  This may 
include demonstrating that the premises have been appropriately marketed to retain the 
existing use. 
 The provision of facilities will be expected to support sustainable development 467.463.
principles and meet the requirements of other relevant parts of the plan, including Policy P15 
that seeks to secure design quality. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
 
Policy P20 Provision for Open Space, Childrens Play, Sport, 
Recreation and Leisure  
1. Existing public open space, children’s play, sports and recreational facilities : 
2. The Council recognises the value of public open space for the health and wellbeing 
of communities, as integral to the character and visual amenity of local areas , and for 
their contribution to the natural capital of the Borough. The Council will support 
proposals which will contribute towards a network of high quality provision as new 
and/or  enhance d recreational facilities ,; children’s play and open space.  
3. Existing facilities that are of value to the local community for recreation, play, sports, 
visua l amenity, nature conservation or that make an important contribution to the 
quality of the natural and historic environment or network of green infrastructure will 
be protected, unless:  
  i. it can be evidenced clearly that the open space or facilities ar e surplus to  
   requirements and are no longer required to meet local need;  
  ii. the land does not fulfil a useful purpose in terms of its appearance, landscape 
   quality, recreational use, wildlife value or climate change    
   mitigation/adaptation;    
  
  
152 
   iii. the land does not host an element of semi -natural habitat useful in creating a 
   stepping stone,  or wildlife corridor to another habitat , or any other feature of 
    value to wildlife to a greater extent than would be the case if it was 
planted as    a garden. In some cases, the continued protection of the land 
as open,     natural garden land and type of enclosure may be 
regulated by conditions;  
  iv. the proposed development provides equivalent or better replacement open 
   space, sport, or recreat ion facilities in size, quality and accessibility within an 
   accessible location for existing and potential new users; or   
  v. the development results in a substantial community, recreational, play or  
   sports  benefit that clearly outweighs the harm resulting from the loss of the 
   existing open space/facilities.  
4. Where existing provision is not being protected , then the Council will require 
appropriate compensatory measures. The alternative provision shoul d be at least the 
equivalent in terms of size, quality, accessibility, use, visual amenity, natural capital 
value, and supported by a management plan to ensure ongoing viability of provision. 
The creation of new and/or Eenhancement  of open space or buildin gs shall be in 
accordance with Policy P15 – Securing Design Quality and Policy P10 – Natural 
Environment.  
5. The Council supports the principle of designating land as Local Green Space, 
including designation within Neighbourhood Plans. Where designation wo uld be 
appropriate, necessary and where the open space meets the criteria outlined in 
national guidance.  
6. In this pPlan, the following sites (as shown on the pPolicies Pplan) are designated as 
Local Green Spaces:  
  i. Land between Old Waste lLane and Was te Lane, Balsall Common  
  ii. Land south of Shirley . 
Provision of new public open space, children’s play, sports and recreational facilities :  
7. New housing developments will be required to provide , or contribute towards , new 
open spaces , or the improvement of existing provision in the area, in line with the 
minimum standard of 3.57ha per 1,000 population. .  
8. The Council will seek to secure well -designed new and improved open space and 
their maintenance as an integral part of new residen tial (including care homes), 
commercial (over 1ha or 1,000  sqm) or mixed - use development.  
9. New housing developments will be required to provide , or contribute towards , new 
open spaces , or the improvement of existing provision in the area, unless financi al 
unviability is clearly demonstrated.  
10. In areas where an existing local open space provision shortfall is identified, new or 
improved provision to accommodate the needs of the new and existing population 
should accord with the local standards and prio rities for action outlined in the adopted 
Green Spaces Strategy (reviewed 2014) and future revisions, the Indoor Sports  
  
 
 15
3 153 Facilities Strategy and Playing Pitch Strategy (including the Playing Pitch Mitigation 
Strategy) and any future revisions thereof.  
11. Where the minimum standard for children’s play and youth facilities is already met, 
developments will be expected to provide additional enhancements as a result of 
development.  
12. To ensure a high quality living environment for all new residential developm ent, 
including supported housing schemes [(for the elderly and those with disabilities )], 
provision should be made for on -site amenity space that is well designed and in 
accordance with Policy P15 – Securing Design Quality. Proposals for family housing 
will be expected to provide opportunities for safe children’s play , in accordance with 
the Design for Play and the Free Play Network’s 10 Design Principles.  
Provision of new indoor sports and leisure facilities  
13. The Council will support proposals for n ew or improved indoor sports and leisure 
facilities providing that the development:  
 i.  Addresses any shortfall in provision outlined in relevant Council strategies 
 and policies (e.g. the Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy or the adopted Green 
 Spaces S trategy (reviewed 2014))  (or any relevant national sporting  
 federation strategy ) and accords with Sports England’s Active Design  
 guidance;  
 ii.  Reflects the ‘town centre first’ principle outlined in national guidance and is of 
 a scale and size ap propriate to the hierarchy of Town Centres as defined in 
 Policies P1 – Support Economic Success, P2 – Maintain Strong Competitive 
  Town Centres, and P19 – Range and Quality of Local Services;  
 iii. Is situated within an accessible location as defined in Policy P7  –.   
   Accessibility, where the development is easily accessible to the local  
   community and is well served, or is capable of being well served, by public 
   transport, walking and cycling; and  
  iv. Accords with Policies P14 and& P17. – Amenity, P16 – Conservation of 
Heritage    Assets and Local Distinctiveness , and P17 – Countryside and 
Green Belt.  
14. Subject to the above criteria, the Council will support proposals for shared sports 
facilities at educational centres, where the facility  also serves the local area.  
Waterways  
15. The Council will support proposals that encourage greater recreational and leisure 
use, such as walking and cycling ,; and enhancement of the river and canal network , 
providing that the development safeguards the h istoric and natural environment and 
purposes of the Green Belt, in accordance with Policies P10 – Natural Environment, 
P16 – Conservation of Heritage Assets and Local Distinctiveness , and P17 – 
Countryside and Green Belt.  
Justification   
  
  
154 
  Open space is defined in the glossary of the NPPF as “all open space of public value 468.464.
including not just land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) 
which offer important opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity.” 
 Open spaces include green spaces such as parks and allotments, natural habitats, 469.465.
playground and amenity space.  
 Publically accessible open spaces are a key component of the Borough’s 470.466.
multifunctional green infrastructure network. They have many roles including providing for 
recreation and physical activity; encouraging social interactions; promoting physical and 
mental health and wellbeing and quality of life; providing facilities for a child’s development; 
encouraging walking and cycling; reducing flood risk; and safeguarding biodiversity.  They 
are essential to promoting and facilitating healthy lifestyles, benefitting wellbeing and a key 
component of the quality and visual amenity of the local character of areas. Furthermore, 
open spaces, in particular natural green spaces, are a vital part of the Borough’s natural 
capital and key feature of the biodiversity and ecology of Solihull. 
 The loss 471.467.
of open spaces can not 
only lead to longer 
journeys for sports and 
recreation, potentially 
limiting the health 
benefits of open spaces 
and opportunities for the 
community to meet and 
participate in local life 
but may adversely 
impact on creating 
strong, vibrant 
communities, and affect 
inward investment into 
an area.  
 The Open Space Assessment recommends a minimum standard of 3.57ha of open 472.468.
space per 1,000 population, that is accessible and of high quality. Further detail on open 
space provision associated with development sites will be contained within the Council’s 
forthcoming Open Space SPD. 
 National Planning Guidance is clear that existing open spaces, sports and 473.469.
recreational buildings or land should not be built on unless development proposals meet the 
exceptions set out in the NPPF.  Policy P20 advocates strong protection of open space, 
sports and recreational facilities, and where proposed development would result in the loss 
of a facility or area of open space, the policy requires appropriate compensation for the loss. 
Such compensatory measures could include re-provision or the enhancement of existing 
open space or facilities, and be in accordance with the priorities for action outlined in 
adopted Council strategies such as the Green Spaces Strategy (reviewed 2014). Playing 
Pitch Strategy (2019) and Mitigation Strategy (2020).  The Mitigation Strategy has identified 
the potential of new sports hubs in the Borough to mitigate the loss of existing playing pitch 
capacity as a result of a number of the housing allocations in the Local Plan. This work is 
ongoing and the Council is working in partnership with Sport England, Governing Bodies, 
local clubs, landowners and site promoters.  
 Local Green Space (LGS) designation in the NPPF allows local communities to 474.470.
identify areas of local green space whichspace, which  should be provided special protection. 
LGS can only be designated when a Local Plan or Neighbourhood Plan is prepared or 
reviewed. The existing Local Plan seeks to protect open space, which has specific 
 
  
 
 15
5 155 importance to a local community and development will be restricted on such land unless 
exceptional circumstances are provided.  Where land is designated as LGS, it will need to be 
consistent with the wider planning policy for the area and look to complement investment in 
the provision of news homes, employment and other services.  
    
  
  
156 
  The following sites have been designated as Local Green Spaces in accordance with 475.471.
paragraph 100 of the NPPF: 
 Land between Old Waste Lane and Waste Lane, Balsall Common 
 Land south of Shirley 
 The importance of these sites has been highlighted through their proximity to sites 476.472.
being allocated for development, or previously considered for such.  This list will be kept 
open and there is opportunity for future plan reviews to include other sites (including those 
areas of open space being provided within site allocations), or for Neighbourhood Plans to 
identify such sites.  Any proposals for development of these sites will be judged by the Green 
Belt policies of the NPPF and Policy P20 of this plan in accordance with paragraph 101 of 
the NPPF. 
 The policy also seeks to ensure that new development integrates open space, sports 477.473.
and recreational facilities into the design of the scheme to ensure a high quality environment 
or contributes to the Green Infrastructure network. In particular, and to address issues with 
childhood obesity within the Borough, proposals for family housing will be expected to 
provide opportunities for safe children’s play, such as gardens and enhance existing play 
and youth facilities. Proposals for new indoor sports and leisure facilities should address any 
existing shortfalls in provision and be directed to centres and the most accessible locations 
within the Borough. In order to make the best use of community assets, new and enhanced 
sports provision in schools should be made available for wider community use where 
feasible. 
 The major rivers within the Borough, alongside the canal network, have an important 478.474.
role in the Borough’s local distinctiveness, biodiversity, adaptation to climate change, leisure 
and recreation and tourism potential. The rivers and canals can be a particular draw for 
people, both residents and visitors, who are looking for quite enjoyment of them, with 
pastimes like narrow boating, fishing, walking or wildlife observation.  While development 
near to these water courses will be restricted, since much of the watercourses are located 
within the Green Belt, proposals, sensitive to the local character and that encourage greater 
recreational use and enhancement of the ‘blue’ network will, where appropriate, be 
considered favourably. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
   
  
 
 15
7 157 Delivery & Monitoring  
Introduction 
 In setting the Vision and Strategy for sustainable development in the Borough over 480.476.
the next fifteen years, the Local Plan is both aspirational and realistic. It is important to 
demonstrate that it is deliverable and to show how the challenges have been addressed.  
Going forward, policies need to be monitored to assess how successful they are over time, 
and evaluate how they may be improved in the future. 
 Delivery may be enabled through a number of ways, including (but not limited to): 481.477.
 Developer Contribution Policy 
 Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
 Planning Process 
 Partnership working, including the West Midlands Combined Authority 
 Urban Growth Company 
 In recognising that it cannot deliver the Local Plan strategy alone, the Council will 482.478.
work with public, private and voluntary sector organisations to draw together the necessary 
resources.  
Policy P21 Developer Contributions and Infrastructure Provision  
1. Major Development will be expected to provide, or contribute towards , provision of:  
  i. Measures to directly mitigate its impact and make it acceptable in planning 
   terms  
  ii. Physical, social, green and digital infrastructure to support the needs  
   associated with the development . 
2. Infrastructure and mitigation measures will be provided in a timely manner to support 
the objectives of the Local Plan.  
3. The Council will, where appropriate, seek to secure site -specific measures through 
planning obligations. The nature and scale of any planning obligations sought will be 
related to the form of development and its potential impact on the site and 
surrounding area. The cumulative impact of developments will also be taken into 
account.  
4. The Plan ha s been subject to a Viability Assessment , to ensure the policies are 
deliverable. In the exceptional circumstances where site  -specific issues generate 
viability concerns, applicants should discuss these with the Council at the earliest 
possible stage in t he development process. Proposals that are unable to comply with 
the Plan’s policies on viability grounds must be accompanied by a detailed Viability 
Assessment.  
5. Developer contributions in the form of the Community Infrastructure Levy will 
contribute to wards strategic infrastructure required to support the overall 
development in the Local Plan .   An element of CIL will, where appropriate, also be   
  
  
158 
 utilised to deliver local infrastructure requirements in accordance with Neighbourhood 
Plans,  in accordance w ith CIL legislation . 
6. Contributions secured through planning obligations may be pooled to address need 
  or cumulative impacts arising from more than one development proposal.  The 
Infrastructure Funding Statement will inform decision making on the use of  planning 
obligations.  
7. The Council will work in partnership with infrastructure providers and other delivery 
  agencies in updating the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
8. Whilst minor developments are less likely to contribute towards developer  
  contributions , requests may still be sought where the proposal has a specific impact 
  upon local infrastructure that requires mitigation in order to make it acceptable  in 
   planning terms.  
Justification 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
 Planning for infrastructure is an essential element in delivering the local plan. 483.479.
Infrastructure in this sense is not just the physical infrastructure such as roads and pipes, but 
also the, social, green and digital infrastructure (e.g. health care, open spaces, community 
facilities etc.) required to enable sustainable development. 
 The 2020 Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) provides a baseline of the existing 484.480.
infrastructure capacity and needs in the Borough, including a gap analysis.  The IDP aims to: 
 Set out the existing infrastructure capacity and needs in the Borough with the lead 
delivery organisations and their partners; 
 Assess the impact of the proposed scale and location of development in the Borough 
over the plan period on infrastructure, where this information is available; 
 List the projects which will address existing and future infrastructure needs, where 
possible; and 
 Align the implementation of the IDP with the aims and objectives of other national, 
regional, local or neighbourhood strategies and plans. 
 The Infrastructure Schedule identifies the list of ‘essential’ and ‘desirable’ 485.481.
infrastructure. It is anticipated that developer contributions will not be sufficient to fund, and 
hence deliver all essential infrastructure, particularly major schemes such as strategic 
transport projects. Such infrastructure will be delivered via funding secured from other 
sources, e.g. from the WMCA. 
Delivering Development 
 New development will be expected to meet its own physical infrastructure needs, 486.482.
such as on-site provision of utilities or a new road junction to access a site. Where new 
development puts pressure on social or green infrastructure, or creates a need, e.g. for new 
community facilities or open space, then provision will also have to be made for these. 
Where necessary and viable, these will be secured through developer contributions. Early 
consideration of infrastructure needs and integration into the design will reduce the end-
costs of provision. It will also be expected that the cost of affordable housing will be met by 
development.  
  
 
 15
9 159  The site policies for each of the allocations set out the likely infrastructure 487.483.
requirements for each of the sites the Council has identified.   
 Developer contributions may be sought as Section 106 obligations, Section 278 488.484.
agreements or through the adopted Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Charging 
Schedule. 
 Statutory agencies, such as water companies, are also responsible for meeting their 489.485.
statutory obligations and responding to growth. 
 There will be a need for both public and private sector investment in capital 490.486.
infrastructure and revenue streams to support development. The Council will carry out its 
statutory duties and work with lead delivery partners to optimise the use of its assets and bid 
for public sector funding from national, regional, strategic and local grants.  
Viability 
 Information regarding the expected contributions associated with this Policy is set out 491.487.
in the Planning Obligations and Standards of this Local Plan. This has been subject to 
scrutiny through the Local Plan Viability Study and meets the requirements of the national 
Planning Practice Guidance. National guidance is clear that where up- to-date policies have 
set out the contributions expected from development, planning applications that comply with 
them should be assumed to be viable.  
 However, there may be exceptional circumstances which mean the planning 492.488.
obligations and polices render a development, which otherwise positively contributes to the 
delivery of the Local Plan, unviable. In these cases, applicants will be expected to 
demonstrate how planning obligations and policies result in the development being unviable 
by preparing a Viability Assessment.  
 The weight given to any viability assessment submitted alongside a planning 493.489.
application will be a matter for the Local Planning Authority and will only be considered 
where there are costs associated with a particular site which could not have been envisaged 
at the Plan-making stage or where circumstances have changed since the plan was brought 
into force. 
 The Viability Assessment should be undertaken in accordance with the RICS 494.490.
Guidance Note on “Financial Viability in Planning” or any updates of this guidance. The 
Viability Assessment will be reviewed by the Council, however where conflicting views 
remain an independent viability specialist may be appointed by the Council at the applicant’s 
expense in order to reach an agreed position. 
Section 106 obligations 
 Planning obligations or ‘Section 106 agreements’ may be entered into by developers 495.491.
as part of the development process. They are used to mitigate the impact of development, to 
compensate for the loss of or damage to specific features, or to prescribe the form of 
development and will be: 
 Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms 
 Directly related to the development; and 
 Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development 
 Planning obligations will continue to be used to ensure the site specific mitigation 496.492.
measures required in connection with a proposed development are properly and timely 
secured. The pooling restriction on planning obligations has been lifted through the 2019 
amendment to the CIL Regulations. The Infrastructure Funding Statement (see below) sets 
out the priorities for Section 106 obligations and CIL.   
  
  
160 
 Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
 The Council adopted its CIL Charging Schedule in 2016 and relevant planning 497.493.
permissions that are now granted are liable to the levy.  As part of the viability work for the 
Local Plan Review, the CIL charging schedule is under review to ensure the levy supports 
the viability of site delivery. 
 CIL will contribute to the provision of strategic infrastructure and that which arises 498.494.
from a larger number of incremental developments.  CIL will also have an important role to 
play in assisting local communities to fund the infrastructure projects they wish to prioritise.  
This will be achieved through the proportion of the levy being collected being passed on to 
the communities concerned in parished areas and elsewhere via the Council’s approach to 
distributing Neighbourhood CIL (NCIL). 
Infrastructure Funding Statement 
 The Infrastructure Funding Statement (IFS) is intended to help local communities and 499.495.
developers understand how contributions have been spent and understand what funds will 
be spent on in the future. Infrastructure Funding Statements should cover both S106 
contributions and receipts from the Community Infrastructure Levy. Local Planning 
Authorities should publish data on the contributions received and spent on at least an annual 
basis to ensure transparency and accountability. This will give communities a better 
understanding of the developments that have funded infrastructure provision in their area, as 
well as the Local Authority’s spending priorities for the future. 
 Spending priorities for infrastructure and affordable housing should reflect relevant 500.496.
up-to-date or emerging plan policies. The role of the IFS is to demonstrate and shed light on 
how developer contributions seek to deliver relevant strategic policies, including specific 
infrastructure projects, as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. This enables 
transparency throughout any given plan period, understanding how infrastructure needs 
change with development over an extended time.  
Partnership Working 
 The Council has a ‘Duty to Co-operate’ and often works in partnership with other 501.497.
bodies and the local communities to determine and deliver these and other services. It has 
been working with, and will continue to work with other statutory delivery agencies to enable 
delivery of the Local Plan objectives.  
 Partnership working has involved working with (but not limited to):  502.498.
 Developers, landowners, business and community interests to secure deliverable 
development.  
 Neighbouring authorities 
 Local parish councils, communities and neighbourhood forums 
 West Midland Combined Authority 
 GBSLEP 
 Clinical Commissioning Group 
 Statutory agencies such as the Environment Agency, Highways England, Homes 
England, Forestry Commission and Sport England. 
Service Delivery 
 Solihull MBC has a pivotal role as service and infrastructure provider. Some of the 503.499.
Council’s duties include that as:  
  
 
 16
1 161  Local Highways Authority 
 Local Education Authority 
 Local Housing Authority 
 Waste and Minerals Authority 
 Adult and Children’s Social Care 
 Lead Local Flood Authority 
 In preparing the Local Plan, the Council has considered the requirements of other 504.500.
public service providers. Delivering many of these services will be critical to delivering the 
Local Plan objectives. The Council will work these service providers in delivering the Local 
Plan.  
Planning Applications 
 A key role for the Council is as the local planning authority and the determination of 505.501.
planning applications.  Planning decisions will be made by the Council in line with the 
policies in this plan, which reflect the vision and objectives set out in the Local Plan and 
other supporting documents. 
Further policy development (Plan-making) 
 Site allocations in the Local Plan have been based on an up- to-date “Strategic 506.502.
Housing & Economic Land Availability Assessment” (SHELAA) for the Borough, as well as 
Viability Assessment and evidence gathering for concept masterplans to ensure robustness 
of delivery. 
 The Employment Land Review confirms that allocated employment sites are suitable 507.503.
and deliverable over the plan period. 
 For some local plan policies further details may need to be set out in other supporting 508.504.
documents such as Supplementary Planning Documents. Where necessary, the Council will 
prepare these to provide additional guidance to applicants.   
Neighbourhood Planni ng 
 Neighbourhood Plans can be produced by Parish Councils or in the absence of a 509.505.
Parish Council by Neighbourhood Forums. They can identify how an area should grow and 
change. While Neighbourhood Plans provide another opportunity for local people to 
influence what is built in their area – it should be noted that these need to be in conformity 
with the strategic policies of the Local Plan and can only provide for equal or additional 
growth. A Neighbourhood Plan becomes part of the statutory plan for Solihull, and its policies 
will be afforded full weight once the Neighbourhood Plan is adopted. 
 We will proactively work with local communities to bring forward Neighbourhood 510.506.
Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders. 
 As part of the Community Infrastructure Levy, a proportion of CIL collected is 511.507.
apportioned for spending in specific neighbourhood areas. The Neighbourhood proportion of 
CIL works as a way for local communities to help address the demands of a new 
development on the local area. In Solihull, the approach for apportioning is either on a ward 
or parish area. Where a Neighbourhood Plan is in place, parishes or neighbourhood forums 
will receive 25% of all funds collected from development in an area. Where no 
Neighbourhood Plan is adopted, areas will receive 15% of all funds collected (capped at 
£100 per Council Tax dwelling). 
 The process of spending the Neighbourhood Proportion lies either with the Parish 512.508.
Council or the Collecting Authority (SMBC) if the area is unparished. In areas without a   
  
  
162 
 Parish Council, the Council will allocate funds to communities through a grant allocation 
process. The Neighbourhood Proportion can be spent on a wider range of projects and 
services than the main, strategic proportion. This allows for communities to address the 
specific needs of the area impacted by development. 
Challenges and Objectives Addressed by the Policy 
A Mitigating and adapting to Climate Change 
B Meeting housing needs across the Borough, including the Borough’s own needs and, 
where possible, assisting with accommodating the HMA wide shortfall. 
C Sustaining the attractiveness of the Borough for people who live, work and invest in 
Solihull 
D Securing sustainable economic growth 
E Protecting key gaps between urban areas and settlements 
F Reducing inequalities in the Borough  
G To maintain a supply of gypsy and traveller sites. 
H Increasing accessibility and encouraging sustainable travel 
I Providing sufficient waste management facilities and providing for sand and gravel 
aggregates 
J Improving health and well being 
K Protecting and enhancing our natural assets 
L Water quality and flood risk 
M Maximising the economic and social benefits of the High Speed 2 rail link and 
Interchange 
N Mitigating the impacts of High Speed 2 and the growth associated with the 
Interchange area 
Monitoring  
 Monitoring is an essential component of an effective planning system. Under the 513.509.
plan-monitor-manage approach, monitoring plays an important role in evaluating policy 
performance, understanding policy implications and formulating robust policies.  
 The purpose of the local plan monitoring framework is to: 514.510.
 Assess the performance of the plan in delivering the spatial vision and objectives 
 Establish whether policies have unintended consequences 
 Identify a need for additional, amended or deletion of policies or supplementary 
planning documents  
 Establish whether targets are being achieved; and establish whether assumptions 
and objectives behind policies are still relevant; and 
 Demonstrate the plan is deliverable in the plan period. 
 The outcome of the monitoring may result in: 515.511.
 A review or partial review of the local plan (where policies have been identified as not 
performing); or   
  
 
 16
3 163  Providing for the preparation of supplementary planning documents or other 
supporting evidence/documents 
 A schedule of monitoring indicators is set out in an appendix. 516.512.
    
  
  
164 
 Settlement Chapters 
   
  
 
 16
5 165 Balsall Common 
The Settlement Now 
 Balsall Common is largely a post-war suburban village bisected by the A452 which 517.513.
links east Birmingham, the NEC and Birmingham airport with Kenilworth and beyond to the 
south east.  It is located in the ‘Meriden Gap’ just 2km from the boundary with Coventry43. 
 The settlement straddles the parish boundary between Balsall & Berkswell parishes, 518.514.
with most of the settlement being located within Balsall parish.  Beyond the main settlement 
are the smaller villages of Berkswell and Temple Balsall; both of which have primary schools 
but otherwise only a very limited range of facilities.  The combined population of the parishes 
is around 9,700 in some 3,900 households44 – the majority of which are located within Balsall 
Common itself. 
 The settlement is characterised by popular, low density residential areas with an 519.515.
open plan, cul- de-sac style layout.  The village has a small but thriving local centre astride 
the A452 with a range of shops, facilities and services, although there are some 
oppor tunities to improve the Centre.  A recently constructed medical centre is located on the 
north east side of the village. 
 The Heart of England secondary school (which accommodates over 1,200 pupils) is 520.516.
located in the settlement, as is Balsall Common Primary School which has three forms of 
entry.  Its restricted location together with its size does result in congestion around school 
drop off/pick up times. 
 Berkswell railway station to the north-east of the village provides access to London, 521.517.
Birmingham and Coventry via the West Coast mainline.    It has a small car park which fills up 
rapidly in the morning with commuter parking resulting in overspill parking in roads nearby. 
 
 The Berkswell Neighbourhood Plan was formally ‘made’ by the Council in September 522.518.
2019. The Balsall Neighbourhood Plan was independently examined toward the end of 2019 
and will now go to referendum when the current covid-19 related restrictions preventing 
referendums are lifted ... 
                                                           
43 And it is noted that there have been and will be further developments in Coventry on its western outskirts close to 
the Borough boundary. 
44 Unless otherwise stated, the population and number of households in the settlement chapters relate to figures from 
the 2011 census. 
  
  
  
166 
 The Settlement in the Future 
 Balsall Common is one of two rural settlements in the Borough that has a full range 523.519.
of facilities including both secondary & primary schools, health services and a range of retail 
and associated facilities.  As such it is well placed to accommodate levels of growth in 
excess of just its own local needs.  This is recognised in the Greater Birmingham and Black 
Country Housing Market Area Strategic Growth Study, 2018, which provides evidence 
identifying a shortfall in provision for new housing and considers ways in which the shortfall 
might be addressed. The study identifies 11 broad growth locations worthy of further 
analysis, including Balsall Common as one of four new or expanded settlements around the 
Greater Birmingham housing market area.  
 Although Balsall Common is of a size that caters for many residents day- to-day 524.520.
needs, it does not have significant areas of employment uses, other than service uses. Many 
of the village’s economically active residents travel beyond the settlement for employment. 
The Jaguar Land Rover vehicle operations base and test track is located to the south of 
Balsall Common at Fen End. 
  The settlement falls into Growth Option G – New Settlements, Large Scale Urban 525.521.
Extensions or Significant Expansion of Rural Villages /Settlements, as considered in the 
Scope Issues and Options. This option performed reasonabl ye well in the Interim 
Sustainability Appraisal, although there are a range of outcomes. The rail station provides 
sustainable travel opportunities to major centres and employment areas, though the 
Appraisal recognised that expansion of Balsall Common may operate against the objective 
of reducing the need to travel due to the lack of employment in the settlement. 
 The A452 will continue to provide an important part of the highway network enabling 526.522.
vehicles to travel from Kenilworth and beyond up towards east Birmingham (including the 
UKC Solihull Hub area).  The road carries much through traffic (e.g. over 80% of traffic 
passes through the village during the am peak time without stopping) and now is the 
opportunity to use new development to complete the highway network so that there is a 
functioning by-pass enabling through vehicles to avoid using the village centre.  This in turn 
will allow for environmental improvements (including cycle lanes) to be undertaken along the 
Kenilworth Road within the village as it would no longer need to accommodate the same 
levels of through traffic. 
 The HS2 rail link enters the Borough in the south east corner of Berkswell parish and 527.523.
for this initial stretch it uses the line of the Greenway (the now disused rail link to Kenilworth) 
before reaching the west coast main line.  Here the HS2 line crosses over the existing rail 
line (just to the south of Berkswell station) and continues north westwards on a line roughly 
parallel to the west coast mainline before entering Hampton in Arden.  To accommodate the 
crossing of the existing rail line, the new high speed line will necessitate the construction of a 
viaduct some 250m long and 10m high.  Initial enabling works in the vicinity of Balsall 
Common commenced in January 2019 with the line expected to be open between 2029-
33with the main works due for completion by 2025, ready for the line to open in 2026 .  
During this period there will be a focus of construction traffic in and around the Balsall 
Common area as many vehicles will access the construction zones having travelled south 
east along the A452 from the A45 and into the settlement. 
What is Required for the Settlement in the Future? 
 Development in and around the settlement is not only an opportunity for it to play a 528.524.
major part in accommodating both Borough and wider area needs, but also to accommodate 
a scale of development that is capable of supporting significant infrastructure provision that 
can help play a part in dealing with existing issues and provide the necessary facilities for  
  
 
 16
7 167 future residents.  In particular the following areas have been identified and should be taken 
forward: 
 Balsall Common Relief Road  – Evidence shows that there is a need for a bypass to 529.525.
serve Balsall Common currently, and that the additional growth proposed in this Plan will 
make its early delivery necessary to facilitate development and HS2 activity. It also indicates 
that continuing the line of Hall Meadow Road around the eastern side of the village, crossing 
Waste Lane to the west of Little Beanit Farm and joining up with the A452 around the Meer 
End Road junction is the preferred route.  The design of the road would be single 
carriageway with few direct access points thus being attractive to through traffic as an 
alternative to using Kenilworth Road through the centre.  However, the road would be 
expected to provide the main vehicular access into the Barratt’s Farm development, and will 
need to be phased early in the development and as such it could also provide construction 
access for HS2 traffic.   Delivery of the road will comprise of direct on site delivery, coupled 
with potential CIL funding and grant funding opportunities that may be available through, for 
instance, the WMCA. 
 An Enhanced Centre  – Although the centre provides for a range of retail services, it 530.526.
is rather limited in scope and given the level of growth proposed it provides an opportunity 
for additional residents to support new facilities.  Furthermore, the environmental 
improvements along Kenilworth Road made possible through the provision of a by-pass will 
also provide a catalyst for enhancements to the centre.  Most of the centre is located within 
Balsall parish, but areas in Berkswell may also be included.  The Council will work with both 
parishes to agree an appropriate way forward, e.g. through a village centre masterplan. 
 Station Parking  – The northern part of the Barratt’s Farm development can be used 531.527.
to provide parking facilities for station users.  This would be a short walk from the station and 
would seek to address the issue over commuter parking. 
 Improved Public Transport  – A higher population gives greater potential for 532.528.
improved public transport services to be viable, e.g. better frequency of bus services and as 
HS2 starts to operateoperate,  the existing main line has the potential to provide for greater 
local commuter services. 
 New Primary School  – Based on the sites allocated for development, a new two 533.529.
form entry primary school is to be accommodated on the Barratt’s Farm development.  
Funding for the school will be expected via developers contributions associated with the 
development of the allocated sites. 
 Secondary School – Heart of England School is located in Balsall Common but 534.530.
serves a far wider area, including a significant number of pupils living outside of Solihull.  
The School will be able to cater for pupils from the proposed developments from within its 
existing capacity, however this will need to be kept under review as more detail on housing 
numbers becomes clear.  If expansion is required at the School this shou ld be funded 
through developers contributions 
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – Presently Balsall Parish Council will directly 535.531.
receive 15% of the levy collected in the area, although this will increase to 25% once its 
Neighbourhood Plan is made. Berkswell Parish Council already has a made Neighbourhood 
Plan and will receive the higher amount.  This will provide a significant source of funding that 
can be used to take forward appropriate projects that the community have identified as 
priorities.  This can include simple relatively low cost actions (e.g. further traffic regulation 
orders) through to more substantial projects.  It will be for the parish council to decide how 
this ‘local’ element of the CIL receipts is to be spent and there is potential for partnership 
working to maximise the use of monies from this source. 
 Concept Master Plans  – Concept masterplans have been prepared for each of the 536.532.
site allocations proposed in the settlement.  These identify the key existing features of the   
  
  
168 
 site that may need to be retained, and show at a high level where development is envisaged 
within the wider site.  This is to ensure that when development proposals move to the 
planning application stage, there is certainty about the important elements of the 
development, e.g. appropriate green infrastructure & other requirements.  Whilst this may 
result in a lower gross to net developable area, this is to ensure a quality development is 
provided and that efficient use can be made of the net developable area so that the density 
of these areas will generally average at c35dph. 
 Green Belt Enhancements  – The NPPF makes provision for environmental and/or 537.533.
access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development, and this is required by Policy P17.  
This provides an opportunity for not only additional accessible open space, but also for wider 
Green Infrastructure improvements, such as new parkland and woodland planting.  This is 
especially important in the context of the Barratt’s Farm development and provides an 
opportunity to reinstate the historic hedgerow pattern and to link up with the Greenway 
(which is now to be extended further by HS2 to link to the station) and the wider public right 
of way network. 
Proposed Approach 
 Balsall Common is identified for significant housing growth. The settlement has a 538.534.
broad range of facilities including the rail station with links to Birmingham, Coventry and the 
UK Central Solihull Hub Area, schools, medical practice, library, retail and recreational 
facilities. The HS2 rail line will form a significant barrier on the east side of the settlement. 
 The Green Belt boundary around Balsall Common will need to be amended to 539.535.
accommodate the level of growth proposed for the settlement.  To provide a logical, strong 
and defensible new eastern boundary it is proposed to use the west coast main45 line as the 
new boundary from where Kenilworth Road crosses the line to the north of the settlement to 
the point the HS2 line crosses the existing railway just to the south of Station Road; then the 
line of HS2 will be used as the boundary to the point where it crosses Waste Lane.  
Thereafter the boundary will be drawn close to the eastern edge of site BC4 before following 
the line of Windmill Lane to the southern point of site BC3 where it then cuts across to 
Kenilworth Road.  .  Development opportunities through the ‘call for site’ process within this 
line will form the basis for the bulk of the allocated sites. 
 In addition to the principal allocated sites that would then fall within the settlement 540.536.
boundary, there are a number of smaller sites that may then also be considered appropriate 
for development as they would also be within the settlement boundary.  These sites are not 
being allocated as part of this plan but are being highlighted as they have been promoted for 
development by the landowner/developer and would no longer be subject to Green Belt 
policy.  The principle as to whether development would be allowed on these sites would be 
established through the planning application process.  This would include the following sites 
(using the call for site references and the SHELAA for potential indicative capacity): 
 1 – Springhill, 443 Station Road (capacity 21) 
 36 Land adjacent to Oakwood House, Lavender Hall Lane (capacity 7) 
 43 – Land adjacent to Old Lodge Farm, Kenilworth Road (capacity 40) 
 333 – 2 Lavender Hall Lane (capacity 1) 
                                                           
45 With the exception of that part of the line adjacent to Lavender Hall Farm.  At this point the Green Belt boundary 
would extend north-eastwards beyond the railway line so that DLP site 21 (r/o Lavender Hall Farm) can be included as 
an allocation.  
  
 
 16
9 169  A further call for sites submission reference 101, Land at Old Waste Lane/Waste 541.537.
Lane relates to land that has been identified as a Local Green Space (under Policy P20), so 
is not suitable for allocation. 
 Reflecting the comments made during the Draft Local Plan consultation and 542.538.
guidance in the NPPF, brownfield sites previously discounted as they were not immediately 
adjacent to the settlement boundary or are located within larger parcels that make a greater 
contribution to the Green Belt, have been included. The bulk of the housing provision will 
take place on Barratt’s Farm, close to the rail station and bounded by HS2. This site provides 
an opportunity for car parking to serve the station and the new primary school required. 
 Some of the sites, in particular Barratt’s Farm, due to its contribution towards 543.539.
maintaining a rural character to the approach to the settlement , have multiple and potential 
complex land assembly issues.  It is imperative that sites such as this are considered in a 
comprehensive manner to avoid piecemeal developments occurring.  This needn’t 
necessarily preclude a phased approach where one parcel of land or part of a site may be 
available for development in advance of another, but this should be in accordance with an 
approach agreed by the Council and all relevant landowners/development promoters.  This 
will include joint responsibility for the provision of infrastructure, and this latter point will also 
be relevant to other sites around the village which also need to ensure they contribute 
towards the provision of the required infrastructure. 
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 544.540.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older 
people will be provided in the settlement. This will seek to align the types and sizes of homes 
to be made available and the needs of the community. However, there will need to be a 
careful balance struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the 
character of the local area. 
 Balsall Common is one of the Borough’s communities that will be more acutely 545.541.
affected by HS2, both during the construction phase and with the impact upon the landscape 
of the line itself.  Phasing of the proposed allocations close to the line, particularly Barratt’s 
Farm will be important to mitigate the impact of HS2 work. It is anticipated that the plan will 
need to reflect this by phasing much of the Barratt’s Farm development until later in the plan 
period.  This will also provide an opportunity for the by-pass to be pursued early to address 
the needs of both through traffic and HS2 construction traffic. 
Existing Allocation 
SLP Site 19 – Riddings Hill/Hallmeadow Road (capacity 65) 
 The adopted Solihull Local Plan (2013) allocated this 1.6ha site off Hallmeadow 546.542.
Road/Riddings Hill for development of approximately 65 dwellings.   As an adopted allocation 
this remains to be b rought forward and is not affected by this plan. 
Proposed Allocations 
Policy BC1 - Barratt’s Farm, Balsall Common  
1 The site is allocated for 875 dwellings  which are expected to be developed in the 
plan period  
2 Development of this site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept 
Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i.   Retention of important landscape features, including trees and hedgerows;    
  
  
170 
   ii.   Protection of the setting of heritage assets within and adjacent the site;  
  iii. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones;  
  iv.  Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  v. Securing biodiversity net gain;  
  vi. Housing shall be phased to avoid coinciding with construction of the HS2 rail 
   line in this vicinity;  
  vii.  Access from a limited number of access points from the Relief Road;  
  viii. Higher density housing along the Relief Road and HS2 corridor, with medium 
   and lower densities elsewhere;  
  ix. Provision of public open space around the watercourse and the heritage  
   assets;  
  x. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities.  
  xi. On site accommodation for older people in accordance with Policy P4 E 
  xii. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
32. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Provision of a new 2 form primary school and nursery;  
  ii. Financial con tribution to secondary education provision as required by the 
   Local Education Authority;  
  iii.  Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG.  
  iv. The existing  culvert running from the northern boundary to the watercourse 
   shall be naturalised to reduce flood risk and enhance wider benefits;  
  v. Provision of linear conveyance S UuDS and downstream flood alleviation  
   utilising the open space;  
  vi. Provision  of the section of the Balsall Common Relief Road between Station 
   Road and Waste Lane as the first phase of the development;  
  vii. Provision of enhanced park ing facilities to serve the rail station;  
  viii. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance s ustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Berkswell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre and Balsall Common health centre;   
  
 
 17
1 171   ix. Provision of new playing pitches and contributions to enhancement of existing 
   recreational facilities, to accord with the requirements identified in the Playing 
   Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
43. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Provision of a substantial new green infrastructure network, which maximises 
   connectivity opportunities and includes  new wetland habitat and woodland 
   copse planting;  
  ii. Reinstatement of the historic hedgerow pattern north of the Balsall Common 
   Relief Road;  
  iii.  Enhancement of the public right of way network, including new walking a nd 
   cycling routes connecting to the wider network and the Kenilworth Green Way 
   to the north.  
54.  The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work  that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site BC1 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not  compromised.  
Justification 
 This allocation focuses on Barratt’s Farm but also includes other land holdings 547.543.
nearby.  It would include land extending from the current edge of the settlement up to the line 
of HS2 which is considered would provide a strong defensible boundary at this point. The 
capacity has increased from the Draft Local Plan 2019 to reflect the higher density housing 
between the Relief Road and HS2. 
 The western part of the site is lower performing Green Belt, although the eastern part 548.544.
falls within a higher performing broad area in the Green Belt Assessment, 2016.  The line of 
HS2 will cut off the higher performing land from the main part of the broad area to the north 
and east and will reduce its contribution to Green Belt purposes. 
 Barratt’s Farm is located in an area with low capacity to accommodate change in the 549.545.
Landscape Character Assessment, 2016 and is well located, in accessibility terms, to public 
transport, the village centre and doctors surgery.  This site will accommodate the new 
primary school that is required to serve the settlement. 
 The Sustainability Appraisal offers mixed outcomes, with significant positive effects 550.546.
for access to health and leisure facilities, but significant negative effects due to its size, 
impact on historic assets and distance to the key economic assets. The Heritage Impact 
Assessment for Site 1 identifies potential harm to the settings of Pool Orchard and Barratt’s 
Farm, and recommends mitigation by leaving the fields between these two listed buildings 
and between Barratt’s Lane and Meeting House Lane largely undeveloped. Much of the 
latter land provides amongst the best opportunity for biodiversity enhancement for the site as 
well.  
 The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment includes this site. Development shall 551.547.
be limited to those parts of the site outside flood zones 2 and 3, with green infrastructure 
provided in the higher flood zones. Whilst the Relief Road will need to cross the watercourse, 
the river crossing will need to be designed to be free spanning to ensure conveyance is not 
impeded. The east-west culvert will be naturalised to reduce potential flood risk and provide   
  
  
172 
 wider environmental benefits. Developers will also be expected to provide linear conveyance 
SUuDS to reduce reliance on sewers, and t o utilise the open space requirements to provide 
downstream flood alleviation to Balsall Common. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 552.548.
the policy.    
Policy BC2 - Frog Lane, Balsall Common  
1. The site is alloca ted for 110 dwellings  
2. Development of this site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Retention of rural character of Frog Lane;  
  ii. Minimising biodiversity loss by protecting western field as open space;  
  iii. Biodiversity off -setting to compensate for loss of semi -improved grassland 
   and deliver biodiversity enhancement;  
  iv. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  v. Retention of existing playing fields and  allotments;  
  vi. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities.  
  vii. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
 3. Likely infrastr ucture requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care serv ices in the wider CCG:  
  iii. Dispersed S UuDS shall be provided to avoid a singular feature adjacent the 
   highway. At source infiltration drainage shall be provided where feasible as a 
   preferred solution to reduce burden on the drainage network;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Berkswell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre and Balsall Common health centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Provision of improvement s to Holly Lane recreation ground;   
  
 
 17
3 173   ii. Enhancement of Frog Lane corridor.  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be ca rried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site BC2 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site includes the land at the rear of the dwellings fronting Balsall Street East and 553.549.
up to the boundary with Frog Lane.  The site to be allocated for development will exclude the 
playing fields/allotments at the eastern end of the site.  The new Green Belt boundary will 
use Frog Lane and Holly Lane as strong defensible and well defined boundaries. 
 The site lies in a lower performing parcel in the Green Belt Assessment, 2016 with 554.550.
low capacity to accommodate change in the Landscape Character Assessment, 2016. It is 
well located with regard to the existing primary school, but less so for other facilities, with 
overall medium accessibility. 
 The Sustainability Appraisal offers mixed outcomes, with significant positive effects 555.551.
for access to primary school and leisure facilities, but significant negative effect due to the 
distance to the key economic assets. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 556.552.
the policy. 
Policy BC3 - Kenilworth Road/Windmill Lane, B alsall Common  
1. The site is allocated for 120 dwellings  
2. Development of this site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Conservation or enhancement of heritage assets and  their settings; Protection 
of the setting of heritage assets adjacent the site;  
  ii. Provision of low density housing, and where relevant single storey housing to 
   protect the setting and functionality of Berkswell Windmill;  
  iii. Conserving important ecological habitats and the great crested newt  
   corridors;  
  iv. Provision of above ground S uUDS features;  
  v. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities.  
  vi. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided  in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;    
  
  
174 
   ii. Developer contributio ns to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Surface water shall be discharged to the open space to the south of the  
   development to reduce flood risk and wetland S uUDS provi ded within the  
   great -crested newt corridors;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Berkswell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre and Balsall Common he alth centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Creation of a significant area of public open space to the south of site to  
   complement the setting of Berkswell Windmill;  
  ii. Enhancement of the public right of way network, including new   
   walking and cycling route s connecting to the wider network.  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application sta ge,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site BC3 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site is bounded by the settlement edge to the north and Kenilworth Road and 557.553.
Windmill Lane as far south as the existing development allocated in the SLP 2013. In the 
Draft Local Plan and Supplementary Consultation this site was proposed for 200 dwellings. 
Evidence has indicated that this level of development would have a significant adverse 
impact on the ecological quality of the site and the setting of the adjacent heritage asset, 
Berkswell Windmill. As a result, the capacity has been significantly reduced and the southern 
part of the site excluded from development. 
 Although the site is located a greater distance from the centre of the settlement than 558.554.
others, this did not prevent the SLP Inspector concluding that the area was not so remote 
that it would justify the omission of the two sites in this parcel b rought forward under the SLP 
2013. The proposed allocation now extends no further south than the existing housing. 
 In Green Belt terms no other parcel of land around the settlement performs less well 559.555.
as identified by the Green Belt Assessment, 2016.  At least in part this is due to the 
development and encroachment that has already taken place in the parcel. The site is 
located in an area with low capacity to accommodate change in the Landscape Character 
Assessment, 2016. 
 Whilst the site does not perform well in the Sustainability Appraisal, with twice as 560.556.
many negative effects as positive, including one significant negative effect due to the 
distance to the key economic assets, much of the adverse effects relating to ecology, 
landscape, green infrastructure, historic assets and amenity can be mitigated with the more 
modest capacity now proposed. The Heritage Impact Assessment for Site BC3 identifies  
  
 
 17
5 175 potential harm to the setting of the Ggrade II* Berkswell Windmill and recommends 
mitigation by leaving undeveloped the paddocks adjacent Windmill Lane and any areas 
where development would adversely affect the functionality of the Windmill or the view cone 
from the south-west. Evidence from the Berkswell Mill Wind Flow Study 2019 indicates that 
the parts of the site closest to the Windmill would be subject to significant height constraints. 
Excluding the southern part of the site, protecting areas of ecological value and restricting 
the height of development where necessary elsewhere will ensure that the development 
does not result in harm. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 561.557.
the policy. 
Policy BC4 - Pheasant Oak Farm, Balsall Common  
1. The site is allocated for 200 dwellings  
2. Development of th is site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Protection of the setting of heritage assets adjacent the site;  
  ii. Safeguarding the rural character of Hob Lane, Waste Lane and Windmill  
   Lane;  
  iii. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  iv. Provision of a significant area of public open space forming a buffer to Waste 
   Lane and to the Relief Road , including a play area and allotments;  
  v. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities.  
  vi. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements wi ll include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Provision of a cut off drain and S UuDS to the south -east of the site to reduce 
   flood risk to properties in Hob Lane;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity  towards Berkswell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre and Balsall Common health centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:    
  
  
176 
   i. Creation of a significant corridor of public open space between the  
   development and the Relief Road;  
  ii. Enhancement of the public right of w ay network, including new walking and 
   cycling routes connecting to the wider network.  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the c
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may n eed 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage, any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site BC4 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised . 
Justification 
 This site is focussed on the farm complex (most of which has been included on the 562.558.
BLR), but also including adjacent land between the existing settlement and the site. A strong 
and logical new Green Belt boundary will be formed along the eastern boundary of the site .  
The northern part of the site and land to the east between the site and the Relief Road will 
be public open space. 
 The western part of this site is in a Green Belt parcel that doesn’t perform well in the 563.559.
Green Belt Assessment, 2016 and although the site extends further east into a highly 
performing broad area, this is so that the previously developed land can be fully utilised. The 
Relief Road will also cut off the higher performing land from the main part of the broad area 
to the north and east and will reduce its contribution to Green Belt purposes. 
 The site is located in an area with low capacity to accommodate change in the 564.560.
Landscape Character Assessment, 2016. Whilst the site has low accessibility, there is an 
opportunity to provide a pedestrian/cycling link to the station and the proposed site for the 
new primary school via Site BC1. 
 Whilst the site does not perform well in the Sustainability Appraisal, with twice as 565.561.
many negative effects as positive, including two significant negative effects due to the 
distance to the key economic assets and convenience stores or supermarket, there are 
opportunities to enhance green infrastructure and amenity. The negative effect relating to 
minerals no longer applies as the Minerals Safeguarding Area for Coal is not being carried 
forward in this Plan. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 566.562.
the policy. 
Policy BC5 - Trevallion Stud, Balsall Common  
1. The site is allocated for 230 dwell ings 
2. Development of this site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Provision of medium density housing close to Kenilworth Road, and low  
   density closer to Wootton Gr een Lane;  
  ii. Provision of public open space to provide a buffer to south -west and Wootton 
   Green Lane, including a doorstep  play space;  
  iii. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;   
  
 
 17
7 177   iv. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities.  
  v. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provisi on as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Provision of linear S uUDS within the central open space area and adjacent 
the    western boundary to deliver multi -functional benefits;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Berksw ell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre and Balsall Common health centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements ident ified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Creation of a significant area of public open space to the south of the site;  
  ii. Enhancement of Wootton Green Lane corridor;  
  iii. Enhancement of the public right of way network, including new walking and 
   cycling routes connecting to the wider network.  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work t hat may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage , any  significant departure from the 
  principles outlined will need to be justified and demonstrate that the overall objectives 
  for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site is focussed on the land associated with the stud farm, but it also includes 567.563.
some adjacent parcels, much of which is previously developed and included on the BLR. 
The area to be removed from the Green Belt would be that bounded by Kenilworth Road and 
Wootton Green Lane. It would use strong, defensible boundaries to establish the extent of 
the Green Belt. 
 Although this is in a wider parcel assessed in the Green Belt Assessment as making 568.564.
a moderate contribution to Green Belt purposes, it is considered that due to the presence of 
built development and encroachment in this part of the parcel that this smaller area actually 
performs less well in its own right.  A large part of this area is included on the Council’s BLR. 
 The site is located in an area with very low capacity to accommodate change in the 569.565.
Landscape Character Assessment, 2016, although as it is substantially brownfield, its   
  
  
178 
 contribution to the character of the landscape area is more limited. It has overall medium 
accessibility, with very high accessibility to a food store. 
 The Sustainability Appraisal offers mixed outcomes, with a significant positive effect 570.566.
for distance to convenience store or supermarket. There are opportunities to mitigate 
adverse effects relating to landscape, green infrastructure and amenity.  
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 571.567.
the policy. 
Policy BC6 - Lavender Hall Farm, Balsall Common  
1. The site is allocated for 80 dwellings  
2. Development of this site should be consistent with the principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Protection of the setting of heritage assets adjacent the site;  
  ii. Provision of medium density development,  with lower density close to  
   heritage assets;  
  iii. Provision of a buffer between new housing and both the existing railway line 
   and HS2;  
  iv. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  v. Provision of public open space, including a doorstep play  space, with  
   contribution to Lavender Hall Park;  
  vi. Provision of a pedestrian bridge over the railway line and a crossing point on 
   Hall Meadow Road;  
  vii. Facilitating easy access by walking and cycling to the rail station and other 
   facilities, including the link through the Fishery.  
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health servi ces in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Surface water flows shall be managed in conjunction with the existing fishing 
   lake operators to avoid any detrimental impact on water quality or quantity;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Berkswell rail 
   station, Balsall Common centre , Berkswell Primary School  and Balsall 
Common health centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.   
  
 
 17
9 179 4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Improvements to the footpath access to Health Centre, station and bus stops 
   for both pedestrians and cyclists;  
  ii. Enhancement of the public right of way network, including new walking and 
   cycling routes connecting to the wider network.  
5. The Co ncept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site BC5 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site is focussed on the previously developed land part of the site that sits behind 572.568.
Lavender Hall Farm itself, to the north-west of the fishing lakes. 
 Although the site sits in a highly performing broad area parcel within the Green Belt 573.569.
Assessment, 2016 the HS2 line will provide a new feature separating the site from the wider 
Green Belt that will remain to the north east.  It is considered that, due to the presence of 
built development and encroachment in this part of the parcel, this smaller area actually 
performs less well in its own right.  A large part of this area is included on the Council’s BLR. 
 The site is located in an area with very low capacity to accommodate change in the 574.570.
Landscape Character Assessment, 2016, although as it is brownfield, its contribution to the 
character of the landscape area is more limited. It has medium high accessibility, with 
footpath access to the rail station and medical practice. 
 The Sustainability Appraisal offers mixed outcomes, with a significant negative effect 575.571.
for distance to the key economic assets. There are opportunities to mitigate adverse effects 
relating to landscape, green infrastructure and historic assets. The negative effect relating to 
minerals no longer applies as the Minerals Safeguarding Area for Coal is not being carried 
forward in this Plan. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 576.572.
the policy. 
    
  
  
180 
 Blythe 
The Area Now 
 For the purposes of this chapter, the Blythe area comprises the parishes of Dickens 577.573.
Heath, Cheswick Green and Tidbury Green, which lie to the south of Shirley and the 
Stratford Road; and west of the M42. 
 This area consists of distinct villages set within, and separated by, attractive 578.574.
countryside and Green Belt, which gives each village a sense of remoteness. The landscape 
is characterised by smaller hedged fields and numerous hedgerow trees of Arden pasture 
with the River Cole to the west and River Blythe SSSI from the south. Small ponds and 
pockets of ancient woodland punctuate the landscape.  There are no Conservation Areas, 
but several farmhouses are Grade II listed buildings within a farmland setting. 
 Tidbury Green comprises predominantly inter-war linear development along key 579.575.
roads. New residential developments at Tidbury Green Farm and Lowbrook Farm are 
providing a greater mix of housing types and much needed affordable housing to the area. 
Tidbury Green primary school has been expanded to provide additional capacity for the 
pupils arising from these new developments. Wythall train station, which has services to 
Birmingham and Stratford upon Avon, is within walking distance from the centre of the 
village, but bus services are poor. The south of the Parish borders the popular Earlswood 
Lakes and Clowes Wood SSSI. There is a train station with limited services at Earlswood, 
but few amenities.  Tidbury Green parish contains 1,130 residents in 432 households. 
 
 Cheswick Green is predominantly a planned new village from the 1970s and consists 580.576.
almost entirely of post-war development characterised by cul- de-sac, open plan layouts. 
There are a number of key local facilities, including a one-form entry primary school, GP 
surgery, village hall, pub and local shops. Public transport is via the bus service 
whichservice, which  runs to Shirley and Solihull. It is proposed that the school will be 
enlarged to two-form entry to accommodate pupils from new housing development at Blythe 
Valley Park and Mount Dairy Farm, subject to normal statutory processes. The hamlet of 
Illshaw Heath lies to the south.  Cheswick Green has a population of 2,197 residents in 891 
households. 
 
  
 
 18
1 181  The modern, multi-award winning village of Dickens Heath was ‘created’ in the late 581.577.
1990s and, guided by an architect-led masterplan. It has since undergone rapid expansion 
with a variety of architectural styles of development and a village centre. Whilst housing 
densities are higher around the village centre, the area has an attractive, mature woodland, 
a Country Park and canalside setting, with a few early cottages adding sporadic visual 
interest. 
 The centre has a range of community facilities including a two-form entry primary 582.578.
school, library, GP surgery, shops and services. Due to limited land availability the school 
does not currently have scope to expand on-site. There is a railway station close to the 
village at Whitlock’s End, which benefits from a car park and three services per hour to 
Birmingham, however pedestrian and cycling access needs to be improved.  Dickens Heath 
has a population of 3,992 residents in 1,757 households. 
 Blythe Valley Park comprises a modern campus style commercial development 583.579.
within an attractive parkland setting. There are several award winning signature buildings 
providing a contemporary and sustainable working environment. Planning permission has 
been granted for  750  homes and a care home at the southern end of the park whichpark, 
which  will create a new community and increase the diversity of housing types and tenures 
in the area. Close to Junction 4 of the M42, there is excellent access to the strategic road 
network, but limited bus services. 
 As a whole, the villages benefit from some key facilities and Whitlock’s End Station 584.580.
has been upgraded with 3 services per hour to Birmingham and Stratford. However, the 
wider sub-area suffers from poor public transport provision with limited bus services between 
settlements, which perpetuates travel by private car. 
The Area in the Future 
 The area will be provided with affordable homes and market housing for a range of 585.581.
people such as families, young professionals and those wishing to down-size.  
 Significant new development at Dickens Heath, Cheswick Green, and Blythe Valley 586.582.
Park will add to the vibrancy and vitality of the settlement, whilst retaining the intrinsic 
character of distinctive villages separated by open countryside. 
 New and existing communities will be integrated and benefit from increased 587.583.
infrastructure provision and enhanced access to natural green spaces and the canal 
network. 
 Blythe Valley Park will have become a mixed and sustainable community and 588.584.
aspirational place to live, work and play, amplified by its exemplar standard of design and 
construction and distinctive sense of place. Improvements to local facilities, services and 
public transport will have been realised, encouraging more sustainable travel patterns and 
improved connectivity to surrounding communities. 
 It is recognised that this area of the Borough has a complex pattern of settlements 589.585.
that are located both in close proximity to each other, but also close to the urban edge.  Each 
has its own sense of identity and this is reinforced by maintaining a reasonable separation 
between each settlement and/or the urban edge.  It is important that adequate separation 
continues to be provided between these settlements to avoid them coalescing.  Whilst some 
development is proposed in this area it does mean that the gaps between settlements that 
will remain are now more sensitive to change and it is important that they are protected so 
that they still provide an adequate separating function.  
What is Required for the Area in the Future?   
  
  
182 
  Improved Public Transport  – A higher population gives greater potential for 590.586.
improved public transport services to be viable, e.g. better frequency of bus services.  
 Pedestrian and Cycling Connectivity  – Cycling and walking links to Whitlock’s End 591.587.
station, village centres, local services and Shirley town centre will be improved to facilitate 
active travel and reduce car dependency, especially for short journeys. 
 Highway improvements  – It is likely that highway improvements will be required at 592.588.
various locations in the settlement, as well as capitalising on highway improvement initiatives 
along the Stratford Road. These could include speed reduction measures, access and 
junction improvements around development sites, highway capacity improvements or 
adjustments to traffic priority arrangements. 
 Parking Improvements  – The provision of appropriate additional off-street parking 593.589.
may be considered in Dickens Heath. 
 New Primary School  – Pupils arising from Site 4BL1 will be accommodated at the 594.590.
recently expanded Tidbury Green Primary school. A new two-form entry primary school, 
however, will be required to serve sites BL2, BL3 and the approved development at The 
Green (former site 11)Sites 11, 12 and 265 . The draft concept masterplans show the school 
situated on Site 12BL2 .  Funding for the school will be expected via section 106 agreements 
associated with the development of the allocated sites. 
 Health provision  – The Council is working with the Clinical Commissioning Group to 595.591.
establish the impact of new development on local GPs and other services, and how this can 
be addressed. 
 Sports and Recreation  - Replacement of any lost recreation / sports provision as a 596.592.
result of development will be required to an equivalent or better standard, including access 
and use by the wider community where appropriate. Several sites have been shortlisted in 
the vicinity of the existing clubs West of Dickens Heath, and an enabling policy for 
replacement pitches and facilities is incorporated within Policy P20. 
 Play and Open Space  - Provision of play and areas of open space within potential 597.593.
development sites will be required. There is also a need to ensure that best use is made of 
existing green and blue infrastructure assets within development sites, together with 
provision for linkages to the surrounding area. 
 Concept Master Plans  – Concept masterplans have been prepared for each of the 598.594.
site allocations proposed in this area, in accordance with planning policy and best practice 
guidance. The plans that accompany this consultation, for the principal sites, include a draft 
concept masterplan. They seek to identify the key existing features of a site that may need to 
be retained, and show at a high level where development is envisaged within the wider site.  
This is to ensure that when development proposals move to the planning application stage, 
there is certainty about the important elements of the development, e.g. appropriate green 
infrastructure and other requirements.  Whilst this may result in a lower gross to net 
developable area, this will demonstrate that a quality development can be provided which 
makes efficient use of land and respects local character.  
 Green Belt Enhancements  – The revised NPPF makes provision for environmental 599.595.
and/or access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development.  This provides an opportunity for 
additional accessible open space and green infrastructure, wider access to the countryside, 
as well as maximising biodiversity net gain. These enhancements will be situated particularly 
in the area south of the existing urban edge and between the new urban extensions and the 
rural settlements (Dickens Heath & Cheswick Green). 
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – Presently the parish councils will directly receive 600.596.
15% of the levy collected in the area. This will increase to 25% once any Neighbourhood  
  
 
 18
3 183 Plans are adopted.  This will provide a significant source of funding that can be used to take 
forward appropriate projects that the community have identified as priorities.  This can 
include simple relatively low cost actions (e.g. further traffic regulation orders) through to 
more substantial projects.  It will be for the parish councils to decide how this ‘local’ element 
of the CIL receipts is to be spent and there is potential for partnership working to maximise 
the use of monies from this source. 
 Affordable Housing  – Affordable housing will be required on development sites in 601.597.
accordance with adopted planning policy. 
Proposed Approach 
 Given that the opportunities to develop on previously developed land in Blythe are 602.598.
extremely limited, Green Belt release will be required and a redefined Green Belt boundary 
will need to be established. In accordance with national planning policy, such boundaries 
should be defined clearly, using physical features that are readily recognisable and likely to 
be permanent. Sites that are close to the existing settlement or are / can be well-served by 
public transport will be preferable, subject to their performance against the purposes of 
including land Green Belt as supported in the Green Belt assessment and any other 
evidence base and constraints.  
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 603.599.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older 
people will be provided in the area. This will seek to align the types and sizes of homes to be 
made available and the needs of the community. However, there will need to be a careful 
balance struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the character of 
the local area. 
 It is important that sites are considered in a comprehensive manner to avoid 604.600.
piecemeal developments occurring.  This needn’t necessarily preclude a phased approach 
where one parcel of land or part of a site may be available for development in advance of 
another, but this should be in accordance with an approach agreed by the Council. 
Proposed Allocations 
Policy BL1 - West of Dickens Heath  
1. The site is allocated for 350 dwellings.  
2. Development of the site should be broadly consistent with the principles as shown in 
  the concept masterplan below, which include:  
  i. A pedestrian link north of the hedgerow along Tythe Barn Lane is proposed in 
   order to provide  a safe route to Whitlocks End Station. Likewise opportunities 
   to connect to the public footpath over the Stratford Canal are promoted.  
  ii. Connection to proposed Dickens Heath to Solihull town centre cycle route.  
  iii. Provision of 2.3ha of public o pen space, including children’s play.  
  iv. Relocation of the existing sports provision south of Tythe Barn Lane to a  
   suitable site in the vicinity;  
  v. Retention of Local Wildlife Sites, with potential for enhancement and  
   appropriate buffer to Ty the Barn Coppice ancient woodland.    
  
  
184 
   vi. Retention of trees and hedgerows within the site and along Tythe Barn Lane  
   to conserve the character of this approach into Dickens Heath;  
  vii. Provision of suitable S UuDS and flood risk management;  
  viii. On s ite accommodation for older people in accordance with Policy P4 E 
  ix. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG.  
  iii. Relocation of the e xisting sports provision;  
  iv. Highway improvements as required including speed reduction measures and 
   access improvements along Tilehouse Lane and Tythe Barn Lane.  
  v. Provision of above ground S uUDS features and deculverting of existing  
   watercourse through site where feasible.  
  vi. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Dickens Heath, 
   Whitlocks End Station and the Stratford upon Avon Canal towp ath in 
   accordance with the Council’s LCWIP.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Enhancement of public right of way towards canal towpath.  
  ii. Positive management of Local Wildlife sites  
  iii. Replacement sports provision with enhanced facilities  
5. To support sustainable development within the area, the site should be promoted in a 
  comprehensive basis supporting the positively planned relocation of the existing  
  sports facilities south of Tythe Barn Lane to alternative locations wit hin the  
  surrounding area. Until such time as these facilities are appropriately relocated or 
  robust plans have been confirmed to secure a timely relocation that would prevent 
  the closure of any associated clubs (either for a short period of time or permanently), 
  development of the site will not be supported.  
6. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at  the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site 4 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the overall 
  objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.   
  
 
 18
5 185 Justification 
 This allocation comprises two parcels of land to the west of the existing village. The 605.601.
smaller parcel extends along the north of Tythe Barn Lane and bounded by the Stratford-
upon-Avon canal to the north, and hedgerow to the west. The larger site is bounded by 
Tilehouse Lane to the west, Tythe Barn Lane to the north and Birchy Leasowes Lane to the 
south.  
 The smaller northern site is an existing arable field with few constraints. Views onto 606.602.
and access to the Stratford- upon -Avon canal will be enhanced, whilst retaining its important 
function as a wildlife corridor and key piece of green infrastructure. 
 The larger site is currently occupied by Highgate United FC, Wychall 607.603.
WanderersLeafield FC and Old Yardleians Rugby Football Club, and re-provision will be 
required for these sports pitches. Tythe Barn Meadows Local Wildlife Site (LWS) to the west 
will be retained, as will the integrity of Little Tyburn Coppice, a remnant ancient woodland.  
Tyburn Farm pastures have been confirmed as a LWS as part of the Local Plan Review 
process, it is the area north of Tythe Barn Lane running up to the canal.  The LWSs are 
expected to impact upon the ability to re-provide the playing fields within the site and 
therefore alternative options for their re-provision is being pursued. Development proposals 
could include options that sees the retention of the existing garden centre, or it could be 
redeveloped to provide residential accommodation. 
 The sites are opportunely located in very close proximity to Whitlock’s End Station, 608.604.
which has 3 train services per hour to the centre of Birmingham with a short journey time of 
20 minutes. Furthermore, local services and shops in Dickens Heath village centre will be 
easily accessible by foot or bicycle, and it is important that convenient links are provide d. 
 The Landscape Assessment (2016) states that the Blythe area has medium 609.605.
landscape value but high overall sensitivity to new development. As such, the concept 
masterplan proposes to retain historic landscape features, such as hedgerows and standard 
trees, and the meadows and woodland designated as Local Wildlife Sites. 
 Highway improvements will be required to the surrounding roads, and a 610.606.
pedestrian/cycling link north of the hedgerow along Tythe Barn Lane is proposed to provide 
a safe route to Whitlocks End Station. 
Policy BL2 - South of Dog Kennel Lane  
1. The site is allocated for 1 ,000 dwellings  
2. Development of the site should be broadly consistent with the principles as shown in 
  the concept masterplan below, which include:  
  i. Respecting the setting of the Grade II Listed Light Hall Farm. Development 
   should be set back from the immediate locality to avoid harm. Only if harm 
   cannot be avoided should mitigation be considered, and then it should be fully 
   justified and demonstrated to be successf ul in reducing harm;  
  ii. Provision of 8.2ha of public open space and a range of play areas for children 
   and young people.  
  iii. Multi -modal access routes from Dog Kennel Lane that respond to those  
   already established at the development at the Green.    
  
  
186 
   iv. Enhancement of bridleway access from Cheswick Green through the site as a 
   pedestrian route and key green infrastructure link.  
  v. Trees and hedgerows along Dog Kennel Lane should be retained to protect 
   the character of the highway . 
  vi. On site accommodation for older people in accordance with Policy P4 E 
  vii. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. New 2-form primary school and early years;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG  catchment . 
  iii. Flood alleviation measures in the form of above ground SUD Ss features and 
   potential betterment for the Mount Brook tributary of the River Blythe;  
  iv. Highway improvements as required including and access improvements  
   along Dog Kennel lane.  
  v. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including bus services improvements and pedestrian and cycle  
   connectivity towards Dickens Heath, the Stratford Road and Shirley Town 
   Centre, in accordance with the Council’s LCWIP.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Country Park to south of development extending to edge of Cheswick Green. 
   Will provide greater access to the countryside, green infrastructure provision 
   and opportunities to maximise biodiversity net gain.  
5. The Concept Masterplans document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplan may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site 12 will  need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 The site extends south of Dog Kennel Lane from Dickens Heath Road to the fields 611.607.
east of Creynolds Lane. Site BL2 is within a parcel of moderately performing Green Belt, and 
given the existing field structure, does not have a clear contiguous defensible Green Belt 
boundary to the south. To address this, the detailed design of the resulting development will 
be expected to utilise internal estate roads to form the new Green Belt boundary.  This will 
be achieved by an estate road being provided on the southern (outer) edge of the 
development with dwellings only on its northern side.  This will have the result that the new 
development fronts onto the open space/Green Belt rather than back gardens. 
 As with Site BL1, the concept masterplan proposes to retain historic landscape 612.608.
features, such as hedgerows, standard trees and ponds. Any development around the Grade  
  
 
 18
7 187 II listed building will be sensitive to its historic setting. There will be legible and accessible 
pedestrian and cycling links going north to redevelopment of The Green, and west towards 
Shirley town centre, and south towards the Country Park. New development will avoid Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and betterment will be sought where possible to alleviate flood risk 
downstream. 
 The concept masterplans propose situating a new primary school in the heart of Site 613.609.
BL2, to reduce journey times for pupils from Site BL2 and potentially The Green. 
Policy BL3 - Whitlock’s End Farm  
1. The site is allocated for 300 dwellings  
2. Development of the site should be broadly consistent with the principles as shown in 
  the concept masterplan below, which include:  
  i. Respecting the setting of the  Grade II Whitlocks End  Farm.  
  ii. Provision of 2.3 ha of public open space and a range of play areas for  
   children and young people.  
  iii. Enhancement of public rights of way through the site as a pedestrian route 
   and key green infrastructure lin k. 
  iv. Trees and hedgerows along bridleway and public rights of way to be retained.  
  v. On site accommodation for older people in accordance with Policy P4 E. 
  vi. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D. 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Developer contributions to new 2 -form primary school and early years  
   provision at Site BL2; 
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vici nity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG  catchment . 
  iii. Provision of above ground S UuDS features  
  iv. Avoidance of flood risk areas to north –west of site and potential for flood  
   alleviation measures to benefit the wider area;  
  v. Highway improvements as required including access improvements on Bills 
   Lane.  
  vi. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including improvement of bus services and pedestrian and cycle 
   connec tivity towards Shirley railway station, the Stratford Road and Shirley 
   Town Centre in accordance with the Council’s LCWIP.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:    
  
  
188 
   i. Public open space in the wider site and accessibility and green infrastructure 
   connections to the Local Green Space located to east  as designated under 
   Policy P20 . 
5. The Concept Masterplans document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the
  concept masterplan may be subject to change in light of further work that may need  
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site 26 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 Site BL3 will extend towards the western edge of the Borough where the boundary is 614.610.
marked by the Stratford railway line, and being on an embankment at this point the rail line 
itself will help provide visual separation between the new development and the built up area 
of Major’s Green to the west (which is in Bromsgrove District). 
 The site is located within easy walking distance of Shirley station, and is accessible 615.611.
to Shirley Town centre by walking and cycling. 
 Site BL3 provides for a narrower front of the amended Green Belt boundary where 616.612.
only the minimum separation between the urban edge and Dickens Heath is provided (by 
shifting development to the west thus being ‘off set’ from the built up area of Dickens Heath).  
FurthermoreFurthermore,  it avoids further development in the gap between the urban edge 
and Dickens Heath along Dickens Heath Road whichRoad, which  is the principal route south 
from the urban edge to the village – as suchsuch,  this is where the perception of the gap 
should be at its greatest. 
 The land to the east of the site, formerly proposed as allocation ‘Site 13’, is now 617.613.
being proposed as Local Green Space for the existing communities in South Shirley (and the 
new community at Site BL3) and will be a location for woodland tree planting.  
 Although this site now includes land in a Green Belt parcel that scores highly, it is 618.614.
considered that this represents a trade off with the higher accessibility of the site being 
located on the urban edge close to where need arises. 
 Most forms of development in this area will reduce the gap between the urban edge 619.615.
and Dickens Heath.  This will be reduced to approximately 300m (from 600m) and this 
should be seen as the minimum necessary to provide a meaningful gap provided it only 
occurs over a narrow front (i.e. just a pinch point) rather than over a broad front that simply 
results in a uniform corridor like gap between the urban edge and Dickens Heath.   
 Pursuing an urban extension in this from is expected to result in the following 620.616.
advantages over site 13 as proposed in the DLP: 
 Site BL3 provides for a narrower front where only the minimum separation between 621.617.
the urban edge and Dickens Heath is provided (by shifting more of the development to the 
west thus being ‘off set’ from the built up area of Dickens Heath).  Furthermore it avoids 
further development in the gap between the urban edge and Dickens Heath along Dickens 
Heath Road which is the principal route south from the urban edge to the village – as 
suchsuch,  this is where the perception of the gap should be at its greatest. 
 Development under site BL3 would also allow the retention of more land as open and 622.618.
accessible space south of Woodloes Road, so that it can connect with open countryside 
further south.  This could form part of the Green Belt compensation enhancements in that 
access improvements and habitat creation in this area would help offset the loss of Green 
Belt to the west.  
  
 
 18
9 189  Shifting the focus of vehicular traffic movements away from the congested Dickens 623.619.
Heath Road to Bills Lane/Haslucks Green Road. 
    
  
  
190 
 Hampton- in-Arden 
The Settlements Now 
 The parish area includes the rural settlements of Hampton- in-Arden and Catherine- 624.620.
de-Barnes, both of which are small villages east of Solihull whichSolihull, which  are located 
in close proximity to major transport links joining Birmingham with Coventry. The settlements 
are divided by the M42 motorway and are broadly bounded by the A45 and A452 trunk roads 
to the north, by the River Blythe to the east and south and by the Grand Union Canal, 
Hampton Coppice and the A41 to the west. 
 The settlements are situated within the largely pastoral and historic Arden 625.621.
Landscape. This area of Green Belt which separates the wider Birmingham conurbation from 
CoventryBelt, which separates the wider Birmingham conurbation from Coventry,  is known 
as the ‘Meriden Gap’. 
 The central part of 626.622.
Hampton- in-Arden was first 
designated as a Conservation 
Area by Warwickshire County 
Council in order to preserve the 
historic core of the settlement. I n 
2015, Solihull MBC completed a 
review of the Conservation Area 
and expanded its boundaries to 
include other notable parts of 
Hampton- in-Arden. 
 A neighbourhood plan for 627.623.
the parish was adopted in August 
2017.  
 The parish currently covers the village itself and associated hinterland, and by virtue 628.624.
of boundary changes that took effect in April 2019, the parish boundary was extended 
westwards up to the urban edge and all of Catherine- de-Barnes is now included in the 
parish. 
 The village of Hampton- in-Arden is located to the eastern side of the Parish whilst the 629.625.
smaller settlement of Catherine- de-Barnes is located to the western side. Between them, the 
settlements have a range of facilities including a primary school, a library, doctor’s surgery 
and a number of shops including a post office and chemist together with recreational 
facilities. 
 Hampton- in-Arden has a train station on the West Coast Mainline which provides 630.626.
access to London, Birmingham and Coventry. The station has a car park accommodating 
some 72 vehicles. A bus service runs through the village which connects Hampton- in-Arden 
to Meriden, Catherine- de-Barnes and Solihull 
The Settlements in the Future 
 Given the limited ranges of services, it is considered that development options are 631.627.
restricted to what would be limited and proportionate extensions to the settlement. A key 
aspect to this is to ensure that the existing infrastructure supporting the village, especially the 
school, is not overwhelmed from additional demands that may occur from larger expansions. 
 
  
 
 19
1 191  The M42, which separates Hampton- in-Arden and Catherine- de-Barnes, will continue 632.628.
to provide an important part of the strategic highway network. The planned improvements to 
Junction 6 of the M42 will result in a new road linking the motorway to the A45 via a new 
junction to be located where Solihull Road currently crosses the motorway. 
 The HS2 line will run through the parish. To accommodate the crossing of the River 633.629.
Blythe (and its floodplain), a viaduct of some 480m in length and over 10m above ground 
level will be constructed. 
What is Required for the Settlements in the Future? 
 The parish area of Hampton in Arden will require protection from excessive 634.630.
development that may impact upon the character and attractiveness of the village; and the 
services it provides. Where development is provided, the following issues will need to be 
addressed. 
 Concept Master Plans  – The plans that accompany this consultation for the 635.631.
principal sites include a draft concept masterplan. These seek to identify the key existing 
features of a site that may need to be retained, and show at a high level where development 
is envisaged within the wider site.  This is to ensure that when development proposals move 
to the planning application stage, there is certainty about the important elements of the 
development, e.g. appropriate green infrastructure and other requirements.  Whilst this may 
result in a lower gross to net developable area, this will demonstrate that a quality 
development can be provided which makes efficient use of land and respects local 
character.  
 Constraints & Opportunities  – The Conservation Area, historical environment and 636.632.
Local Wildlife Site provide constraints to the west, whilst the River Blythe, which is a Site of 
Special Scientific Interest, and its flood zones are constraints to the east. The former 
ammunition depot, currently in use for storage is a brownfield site which could be developed 
alongside the existing allocation (site 24 in the Solihull Local Plan 2013), providing 
alternative provision is made for open space. Opportunities in Catherine de Barnes are 
limited, but Oak Farm south of Hampton Lane is previously developed land that could be 
developed to meet needs for older persons accommodation in the Borough. 
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – The parish council will directly receive 25% of the 637.633.
levy collected in the area that is covered by the adopted neighbourhood plan, and 15% 
elsewhere. This will provide a source of funding that can be used to take forward appropriate 
projects that the community have identified as priorities.   The CIL levies for the parish will 
also include those from site SO1 which although not covered in this chapter is a site that falls 
within the parish.  
 Green Belt Enhancements  – The NPPF makes provision for environmental and/or 638.634.
access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development, and this is required by Policy 17A . 
This new requirement of the NPPF provides an opportunity for additional accessible open 
space and views which would be welcomed from both site promoters and residents.  
Proposed Approach 
 Other than a limited and proportionate expansion of the villages, no other large scale 639.635.
development is considered appropriate.   This reflects the sensitive environmental nature of 
the area, the character of the villages and the need to manage the capacity and viability of 
local infrastructure. 
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 640.636.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older   
  
  
192 
 people will be provided in the settlement. There will need to be a careful balance struck 
between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the character of the local area. 
 Hampton- in-Arden is one of the Borough’s communities that will be more acutely 641.637.
affected by HS2, both during the construction phase and with the impact upon the landscape 
of the line itself. 
Existing Allocation 
SLP Site 24 – Land off Meriden Road, Hampton- in-Arden 
 The adopted Solihull Local Plan (2013) allocated this site off Meriden Road for 642.638.
development of approximately 110 dwellings.  As an adopted allocation this remains to be 
brought forward and is not affected by this plan. 
Proposed Allocations 
Policy HA1 - Meriden Road, Hampton in Arden  
1. The site is allocated for 1 00 dwellings  
2. Development of this site should be broadly consistent with the principles of the  
  Concept Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Retention of TPO trees and established hedgerows;  
  ii. Provision of public open space and play facilities at the heart of the  
   development;  
  iii. Protection of the local landscape, ecology and drainage assets;  
  iv. Perimeter block  development to maximise natural surveillance and encourage 
   active streets and views over the countryside;  
  v. Higher density housing reducing towards the edge of the green belt;  
  vi. Facilitating easy access by walking through the site and into the countryside.  
  vii. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones  
  viii. Provision of above ground S UuDs features  
  ix. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB second ary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Give consideration to realigning the surface water flood risk within the site to 
   continue in a west to east direction through the POS to the receiving  
   floodplain;   
  
 
 19
3 193   iv. Appropriate measures to promote and e nhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Hampton in  
   Arden rail station, shops and health centre;  
  v. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of  existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitigation Strategy.  
4. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  Concept Masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site HA1 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and i ts wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site sits adjacent to that allocated in the SLP 2013 and they should ideally be 643.639.
developed together in a comprehensive manner. This will help improve connectivity between 
the new developments and maximise the effectiveness and efficiency of new infrastructure.  
It provides an opportunity to re-use the former ammunitions depot whichdepot, which  is a 
brownfield site (and is included on the Council’s BLR). Open space provision serving the 
development as a whole will be an important consideration. 
 The parcel of land immediately east of the village is a lower performing parcel in 644.640.
Green Belt terms, partly as a result of the existing use, with low capacity to accommodate 
change in the Landscape Character Assessment, 2016. The site has medium accessibility, 
but is close to the rail station. A large part of this area is included on the Council’s BLR. 
 Whilst the site performs relatively poorly in the sustainability appraisal, with a 645.641.
significant adverse effect due to the distance to a convenience store/supermarket, there are 
a number of shops in the village meeting basic needs, including a general store. The Level 2 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment identifies surface water flood risk within the site and 
highlights the opportunity for realigning the flood risk east to west through the area of green 
infrastructure.   
Policy HA2 - Oak Farm, Catherin e-de-Barnes 
1. The site is allocated for 95 dwellings. The site may also be suitable  for specialist  
  provision in accordance with policy P4 E ‘Housing for Older and Disabled People’.  
2. Development of this site should be broadly consistent with the principles of the  
  Concept Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Retention of historic and mature hedgerows and trees to help provide a semi -
   rural setting  for future development and which enhance s the ecological  
   potential of the site  provid ing an amenity for future residents ;  
  ii. An integrated landscape, ecol ogical and drainage strategy for the site to  
   promote a place -making approach;  
  iii. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones;  
  iv. Provision of above ground S uUDS features;    
  
  
194 
   v. Vehicular access to the development will be taken off Friday Lane as a single 
   site access. Development proposals should extinguish the access at  
   Hampton Lane;  
  vi. Encouragement of safe active travel to local amenities. A new pedestrian and 
   cycle access should be formed to Hampton Lane and link to the canal  
   towpath ; 
  vii. Public open space should be provided in the centre of the site to create  
   opportunities for ‘place making’. Where specialist provision is provided a  
   different approach may be appropriate.  
  viii. Creation of a new defensible green belt boundary through the use of the  
   Grand Union Canal, Friday Lane and a strongly reinforced hedge line  to the
   south of the site.  
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will inc lude:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Highway improvements to encourage pedestrian use across Hampton Lane  
   to the surrounding roads , including the provision of a new pedestrian  
   crossing;  
  iv. Highway modifications to Friday Lane.  
  v. Drainage will need to mitigate surface water floo d risk on the southern part of 
   the site ; 
  vi. Financial contribution to provision of new playing pitches and contributions to 
   enhancement of existing recreational facilities, to accord with the   
   requirements identified in the Playing Pitch Mitig ation Strategy.  
4. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  Concept Masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site HA2 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This allocation measures approximately 3.4 hectares. The site lies within the Arden 646.642.
landscape character area and is on the urban fringe. The site is well screened to the 
boundaries so views in are screened by existing vegetation although glimpses can be seen 
through the tree cover especially in the winter months 
 The site slopes gently uphill to the north and is situated between the Grand Union 647.643.
Canal to the west and Friday Lane to the east and lies on the south side of Hampton Lane 
(the B4102). The northern site boundary wraps around the garden area of a residential 
property on Hampton Lane.  A horticultural nursery is at the south of the site and at the north  
  
 
 19
5 195 east corner is the 4-arm roundabout which connects with Friday Lane, Catherine- de-Barnes 
Lane and Solihull Road. 
 The Oak Farm site currently contains a number of businesses comprising B1, B2 and 648.644.
B8 uses which occupy a variety of small buildings on the site. There are a total of 22 
buildings including two dwellings on the site. The existing buildings are proposed for 
demolition. 
 This site is higher performing in the Green Belt Assessment, although l being a 649.645.
brownfield site adjacent to a settlement, with low capacity to accommodate change in the 
Landscape Character Assessment. It is of low to medium accessibility with only a limited 
range of facilities available nearby, and is mainly neutral in the sustainability appraisal, 
although there are 2 significant positive benefits, and green infrastructure can be enhanced 
within the site.  
 The site is located in the village of Catherine de Barnes which is 2.5 miles to the east 650.646.
of Solihull town centre where a full range of shops and services are available. The village 
has a public house, a restaurant, a cricket club and a village hall and shop in addition to the 
number of small businesses based around Oak Farm.  Birmingham Airport and the NEC lie 2 
miles to the north of Catherine de Barnes. The A45 and M42 motorway provide convenient 
road links close by. 
 Any development must take account of proximity to gas governor sites and gas main 651.647.
pipes, the position of overhead electric lines, the proximity to the Grand Union canal, the 
ecology of the site and environmental impact of development. 
 The site has no history of flooding from ground or surface water, sewers, the Grand 652.648.
Union Canal or rivers. It is within Flood Zone 1 (low risk of flooding) on the Environment 
Agency’s indicative flood plain map. The site is therefore suitable for all land uses including 
residential and residential institutions development.  
Site SO1 – East of Solihull 
 Whilst this site is located within the Parish boundary of Hampton- in-Arden and 653.649.
Catherine- de-Barnes, it functions as part of the urban area rather than as an expansion of 
one of the parish’s villages.  It is therefore not included within this chapter and is dealt with 
under the Solihull chapter. 
 The capacity from this site, together with other allocations in this plan, and the site 654.650.
that remains to come forward from the SLP, will see over 1,000 dwellings being 
accommodated within the parish on allocated sites. 
    
  
  
196 
 Hockley Heath 
The Settlement Now 
 Hockley Heath village is a largely inter and post-war small settlement formed by 655.651.
ribbon development. It is bisected by the A3400 Stratford Road, which is a key connection to 
Junction 4 of the M42 to the north and Stratford-upon-Avon to the South.  
 Located within Hockley Heath 656.652.
Parish, near the boundary with Stratford 
and Warwick Districts, this semi-rural 
settlement lies to the far south of the 
Borough. The population of the parish is 
2,038 in some 794 households with the 
majority of residents in the parish 
residing within the village of Hockley 
Heath.  
 The settlement is characterised 657.653.
by low-density residential areas, many 
dwellings of detached or semi-detached 
form. The settlement has a small village 
centre, which provides a range of shops 
and restaurants. However, it lacks key 
services such as a Doctor’s surgery.  
 The village of Hockley Heath is 658.654.
inset in the Green Belt, which separates 
it from neighbouring Knowle, Dorridge 
and Bentley Heath and gives it a sense 
of remoteness. The Green Belt is also 
valuable in the settlement’s overall 
environmental quality and contributes to 
its semi-rural setting. Hockley Heath 
Recreation Ground provides valuable 
green space for residents to use within the village. The settlement also benefits from 
significant blue infrastructure in the form of the Stratford-Upon-Avon Canal, which provides a 
linear heritage asset with a village wharf. 
 The area has a high quality residential environment and a good, popular school 659.655.
(Hockley Heath Academy). This small, one-form entry primary school accommodates some 
250 pupils. However, secondary education needs are met outside of the Parish.  
 Hockley Heath has an infrequent bus services running through the village connecting 660.656.
Birmingham Solihull and Stratford and a more frequent service linking to Dorridge/Solihull & 
Cheswick Green/Shirley.  Rail access is limited, with Dorridge home to the closest railway 
station, connecting the settlement to Birmingham and London.   
The Settlement in the Future 
 The A3400 will continue to provide an important part of the highway network enabling 661.657.
vehicles to travel from Stratford- upon -Avon, and to travel to the north, connecting Hockley 
Heath to Blythe Valley Park and the M42. 
 Due to the proximity to the Borough boundary, future expansion of the settlement 662.658.
within Solihull Borough is limited and largely restricted to the north and west of the village. 
 
  
 
 19
7 197  Given the limited ranges of services and the less accessible nature of the settlement, 663.659.
it is considered that development options are restricted to what would be limited and 
proportionate extensions to the settlement.  A key aspect to this is to ensure that the existing 
infrastructure supporting the village, especially the school, is not overwhelmed from 
additional demands that may occur from larger expansions. 
What is Required for the Settlement in the Future? 
 Hockley Heath will require protection from excessive development that may impact 664.660.
upon the character and attractiveness of the village; and the services it provides.   Where 
development is provided, the following issues will need to be addressed:  
 Concept Master Plans  – The plans that accompany this consultation for the 665.661.
principal sites include a draft concept masterplan. These seek to identify the key existing 
features of a site that may need to be retained, and show at a high level where development 
is envisaged within the wider site.  This is to ensure that when development proposals move 
to the planning application stage, there is certainty about the important elements of the 
development, e.g. appropriate green infrastructure and other requirements.  Whilst this may 
result in a lower gross to net developable area, this will demonstrate that a quality 
development can be provided which makes efficient use of land and respects local 
character.  
 School Parking  – Congestion around school pick up and drop off times currently 666.662.
occurs in School Road.   Through development of the School Road site there is opportunity to 
seek access/parking arrangements and routes for pedestrians that takes this into account, 
and the increase in traffic associated with Blythe Valley Park. 
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – Presently the parish council will directly receive 667.663.
15% of the levy collected in the area.  This will increase to 25% once any Neighbourhood 
Plans are adopted.  This will provide a significant source of funding that can be used to take 
forward appropriate projects that the community have identified as priorities.  This can 
include simple relatively low cost actions (e.g. further traffic regulation orders) through to 
more substantial projects.  It will be for the parish council to decide how this ‘local’ element of 
the CIL receipts is to be spent and there is potential for partnership working to maximise the 
use of monies from this source.  
 Pedestrian and Cycling Connectivity – Enhancements to encourage and promote 668.664.
walking and cycling in the settlement, particularly towards the local centres, schools and 
public transport will be required. Developments will be expected to ensure that walking and 
cycling connectivity is provided both within and beyond the site boundary, linking in with the 
existing and proposed cycle and walking networks identified in the Council’s Cycling and 
Walking Strategy, as well as routes for recreation. 
 Green Belt Enhancements  – The NPPF makes provision for environmental and/or 669.665.
access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development, and this is required by Policy P17.  
This provides an opportunity for not only additional accessible open space, but also for wider 
Green Infrastructure improvements, such as new parkland and woodland planting.   
Proposed Approach 
 Hockley Heath is identified for limited and proportionate expansion of the village, no 670.666.
other large scale development is considered appropriate.  This reflects the sensitive 
environmental nature of the area, the character of the villages and the need to manage the 
capacity and viability of local infrastructure.   
  
  
198 
  The Green Belt boundary around Hockley Heath will need to be amended to 671.667.
accommodate the level of growth proposed for the settlement.  To provide a logical, strong 
and defensible new southern boundary it is proposed to use the Stratford- upon-Avon Canal.  
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 672.668.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older 
people will be provided in the settlement. This will seek to align the types and sizes of homes 
to be made available and the needs of the community. However, there will need to be a 
careful balance struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the 
character of the local area. 
 In addition to the site south of School Road that would then fall within the settlement 673.669.
boundary, if the Green Belt boundary were amended as described above, there are also two 
smaller sites that may then be considered appropriate for development as they would then 
also be within the settlement boundary.  These sites are not being allocated as part of this 
plan but are being highlighted as they have been promoted for development by the 
landowner/developer and if the Green Belt boundary is changed they would no longer be 
subject to Green Belt policy.  The principle as to whether development would be allowed on 
these sites would be established through the planning application process.  These are as 
follows (using the call for site references and the SHELAA for potential indicative capacity): 
 49 Land adjacent to 84 School Road (capacity 21) 
 328 land at and to the rear of 84, 86 & 90 School Road (capacity 30) 
Proposed Allocation 
Policy HH1 - Land South of School Road, Hockley Heath  
1. The site is allocated for around 90 dwellings  
2. Development of this site should be broadly consistent with the principles of the  
  Concept Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Conserve and enhance the setting of the canal towpath;  
  ii. Retention of trees and hedgerows to conserve the semi -rural character of  
   School Road and Sadlerswell Lane;  
  iii. Provision of 0. 76ha of public open space;  
  iv. Provision of suitable S UuDS and flood risk management which should be  
   incorporated into ecological enhancements;  
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Financial contribution to educatio n provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Highway improvements as required including speed reduction measures and 
   access improvements along School Road  
  iii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vici nity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG  catchment   
  
 
 19
9 199   iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Hockley Heath.  
  v. Pedestrian safety i mprovements including a crossing point on School Road  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Enhancement of public access to the canal towpath  
  ii. Access improvements to the wider Green Belt beyond the site boundary  
5. The Concept Masterplan docum ent should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage, any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for S ite HH1 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall vision and objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 The site proposed for development off School Road is considered to perform well in 674.670.
that it is a limited and proportionate expansion adding some 90 or so dwellings (about a 12% 
increase in the size of the settlement). The development should provide highway mitigation 
proposals that will also help alleviate and address the congestion issues in the vicinity of the 
school, through careful design of the site frontage and access, alternative drop off/pick up 
arrangements for the school can be provided. 
 The allocation lies beyond the Green Belt boundary and it is immediately adjacent to 675.671.
the built up area of the settlement and would represent a continuation of the existing 
developed area. The site sits in a Green Belt parcel that extends around the western side of 
the village and is judged, through the Green Belt Assessment as a lower performing area. 
The site is relatively well-contained and a defensible Green Belt boundary could be provided 
using the Stratford- upon -Avon Canal. 
 The Landscape Assessment (2016) states that Hockley Heath has medium 676.672.
landscape value and high overall sensitivity to new development. Therefore, the concept 
masterplan proposes to retain the historic landscape including the rural character of School 
Road and the adjoining canal. Development will need to consider these assets in the design 
of any future scheme. Given the change that will be required to the Green Belt boundary to 
accommodate the above site, it is considered that the existing ribbon development on the 
north side of the road that has Green Belt ‘washed over’ it should be reviewed.  The existing 
built development that is largely continuous without significant gaps and does not contribute 
towards the existing values of Green Belt policy. It therefore appears logical and justified for 
this run of development to be removed from the Green Belt. 
    
  
  
200 
 Knowle, Dorridge & Bentley 
Heath 
The Settlement Now 
 Lying around 3 miles south east of Solihull Town Centre, Knowle, Dorridge and 677.673.
Bentley Heath (KDBH) is the Borough’s largest rural settlement with a combined population 
of around 19,800 in some 8,000 households. It is inset in the Green Belt which separates it 
from the main urban area of Solihull and the surrounding rural villages. 
 Whilst Knowle, Dorridge and Bentley Heath are essentially three villages, the 678.674.
significant post-war development in the area means that they are now physically and 
functionally linked such that they form one built up area. It is not obvious where one village 
ends and another one begins and there are strong links between each community as they 
share many local services and facilities. However, each village has its own shopping 
provision, park, primary school, community/village hall and churches which help to underpin 
the sense of individual village identity. 
 The historic medieval core of Knowle is centred on the High Street and the church of 679.675.
St. John the Baptist, St. Lawrence and St. Anne, at the junction of two historic routes. This 
area is protected by Conservation Area designation and includes 53 statutory listed buildings 
and a number of locally listed assets. Knowle has a thriving and well used local centre with 
an extensive range of shops, facilities and services.  
 Similarly, development from the later Victorian and Edwardian periods around and 680.676.
near to Dorridge railway station (Station Approach and Granville Road) also benefit from 
Conservation Area status. The dated shopping parade  in Dorridge has been redeveloped to 
provide up-dated modern facilities and a new public realm that enhances the centre as a 
whole. It includes food and drink outlets, small business, shops and services. 
 Bentley Heath has a smaller range of shops and services providing more for the day 681.677.
to day convenience needs of residents. 
 Overall, the settlement 682.678.
benefits from an attractive 
residential environment with 
leafy green streets, access to 
a number of parks, open 
spaces and green spaces 
within the area, and links to the 
countryside beyond. Green 
and blue infrastructure is a 
valuable attribute, with local 
wildlife sites and local nature 
reserves, as well as the canal 
which provides an important 
environmental and recreational 
feature. 
 KDBH is served by four primary schools (including a Catholic primary school) and the 683.679.
Arden Academy and Sixth Form Centre secondary school which has a current capacity of 
around 1,850 pupils. However, the recent housing developments in the area along with a 
fluctuating birth rate, is creating pressure on primary school places.  
 
  
 
 20
1 201  The area is valued by residents for the wide range of community services and 684.680.
facilities that are enjoyed and used extensively. These include Knowle Library, Knowle and 
Dorridge scout huts, sports and recreation facilities, local allotments and commercial 
premises such as post offices, chemists and public houses that are a vital part of village life. 
The settlement is also well served in terms of health facilities with 3 GP surgeries and 5 
dental surgeries. 
 The settlement as a whole has a high proportion of detached dwellings and low 685.681.
density residential development is a characteristic of some parts of the settlement. House 
prices are amongst the most expensive in the Borough and affordability continues to be an 
issue for those seeking access to housing, as does the need to provide a more appropriate 
range of housing types and sizes to meet future needs. 
 The area has good links to key employment sites at Blythe Valley Park and Solihull 686.682.
Town Centre. The north west of the settlement is crossed by the M42 with junction 5 
providing access to motorway network. The main A road through the area is the A4141 
running from Solihull through Knowle, on to Chadwick End and out of the Borough towards 
Warwick.   
 The settlement is well served by public transport with bus services running 687.683.
throughout the area with routes to Solihull, Balsall Common and Coventry. Regular train 
services from Dorridge Station in the centre of the village provide links to Kidderminster, 
Solihull, Birmingham, Leamington Spa and London. However, whilst Dorridge Station car 
park can accommodate over 100 vehicles, this well used station quickly reaches capacity in 
the mornings with commuter parking resulting in overspill parking in residential roads nearby. 
This also affects the availability of parking for local shoppers. 
 The 2013 Solihull Local Plan identified land for housing at 3 sites in the settlement. 688.684.
These were Four Ashes Road, Bentley Heath; Hampton Road, Knowle; and Middlefield, 
Knowle. The sites at Four Ashes Road and Hampton Road are complete and have delivered 
a total of 211 dwellings including 51 extra care units, with the site at Middlefield Road 
providing 110 dwellings. Like other areas in the Borough, there have also been a number of 
windfall developments in the settlement.  
 In April 2019 the Knowle, Dorridge and Bentley Heath Neighbourhood Plan was 689.685.
‘made’ by the Council. It is therefore part of the statutory Development Plan for Solihull and 
sets out the objectives and vision for the area as it develops in the future. Further 
development within the Neighbourhood Area will therefore be expected to support this vision 
and objectives, and planning applications should be in accordance with the relevant policies 
of the Neighbourhood Plan, where there is no conflict with the Local Plan.  
The Settlement in the Future 
 Knowle, Dorridge and Bentley Heath is one of two rural settlements in the Borough 690.686.
that has a full range of facilities including both secondary & primary schools, health services 
and a range of shops, services and facilities.  As such it is well placed to accommodate 
growth in excess of just its own local needs. Given that the area is mainly residential, the 
opportunities to develop on previously developed land in KDBH are extremely limited and 
Green Belt release around the settlement has been required to accommodate new 
development. However, maintaining separation of KDBH from Solihull and other settlements 
will continue to be important to preserve the character and context of the villages.  
 Although the settlement does not have significant areas of employment uses (other 691.687.
than service uses) and many of the area’s economically active residents travel out to work, 
there is good access to the motorway and wider road network. Whilst the main road through 
the centre of Knowle will continue to provide an important link in this regard, it can be 
congested at peak times and is likely to experience increased vehicle movements in the   
  
  
202 
 future, in any event. Given that the historic medieval core of Knowle is centred on the High 
Street and is protected by conservation area status, it will be important to mitigate 
congestion in this area in order to maintain the village character of this part of the settlement. 
Similarly, other roads in the area such as Station Road, principally around school drop off 
and pick up times, see the free flow of traffic interrupted and notable parking difficulties. 
However, by relocating the school further away from Station Road and changing the access 
to Warwick Road ,  there is an opportunity for the school related traffic congestion and 
parking issues currently experienced to be alleviated, resulting in associated benefits to 
highway safety. 
 The area is however well served by public transport and it will be important to retain 692.688.
and where possible improve the public transport offer. Dorridge railway station will continue 
to provide an important facility for local commuters. Opportunities for enhancing existing 
walking and cycling routes and creating new routes will continue to be explored, particularly 
where these would provide access to schools, local centres and the railway station. 
 It will also be important to ensure that the local centres remain economically strong, 693.689.
vibrant and continue to provide, support and enhance the variety of services and facilities for 
the local population.  
 The historic core of Knowle will continue to be protected and enhanced and the local 694.690.
character and distinctiveness of the settlements conserved, particularly, the Victorian and 
Edwardian development around Dorridge railway station.  
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 695.691.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older 
people will be provided in the settlement. This will seek to align the types and sizes of homes 
to be made available and the needs of the community. However, there will need to be a 
careful balance struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the 
character of the local area.  
 Education facilities in the area will remain successful. Pressure on primary schools 696.692.
will be alleviated through the provision of an additional school and secondary school facilities 
will be significantly improved to ensure that the available capacity and full potential of the 
Arden Academy can be maximised.  
What is Required for the Settlement in the Future? 
 Development in and around KDBH is not only an opportunity for the settlement to 697.693.
play a major part in accommodating the wider needs of the Borough, but also to 
accommodate a scale of development that is capable of supporting infrastructure provision 
that can help play a part in dealing with existing issues and provide the necessary facilities 
for future residents.  In particular the following areas are identified:  
 Improved Public Transport  – A higher population gives greater potential for 698.694.
improved public transport services to be viable, e.g. better frequency of bus services.  
 Parking Improvements – The provision of appropriate additional off-street parking 699.695.
may be considered in centres. In addition, decked parking at Dorridge railway station could 
be considered in order to increase capacity and alleviate the impact of commuter parking on 
surrounding roads. 
 Highway Improvements – The Council’s highway evidence highlights that traffic in 700.696.
the settlement is set to increase over the Plan period, even without any new development.  
Additional traffic growth as a result of site allocations is likely to exacerbate this situation and 
highway improvements will be required at various locations. Whilst evidence indicates that 
traffic lights would provide a technically acceptable solution to traffic flows through the 
settlement, additional work will be undertaken to seek to identify alternative highways  
  
 
 20
3 203 solutions that do not include traffic lights.  The Neighbourhood Forum will be engaged in this 
process and views will be invited on what options are considered to be available and 
appropriate, using an evidenced based approach. Such options can then be tested through 
pre-application engagement with local communities and the highways authority to test 
alternatives to reach the most reasonable approach. 
 Pedestrian and Cycling Connectivity – Enhancements to encourage and promote 701.697.
walking and cycling in the settlement, particularly towards the local centres, schools and 
public transport will be required. Developments will be expected to ensure that walking and 
cycling connectivity is provided both within and beyond the site boundary, linking in with the 
existing and proposed cycle and walking networks identified in the Council’s Cycling and 
Walking Strategy, as well as routes for recreation. 
 New Education Provision  – Given the existing pressure on primary school places 702.698.
and the additional pressure that will be generated as a result of further development in the 
settlement, a new primary school will be required in Knowle. Whilst the provision of 
secondary school places is theoretically sufficient, the current infrastructure constraints of 
Arden Academy affect how efficiently it can be used in the future. It is recognised that the 
academy has some up- to-date and modern teaching space; however, it’s supporting 
infrastructure including kitchens/dining space and other supporting facilities does not match 
this and the secondary school places that may be available cannot be accessed without 
these supporting facilities.   It is therefore proposed that a new purpose built and modern 
facility must be provided for the academy within the allocation site.  Additional primary school 
provision is also required to support the level of growth in the settlement and this can be 
provided as a stand-alone school with shared facilities, or as part of an ‘all-through’ school 
with the academy..  
 To achieve appropriate efficiencies the primary school with be constructed as a two 703.699.
form entry, but that facilities for the second form entry of which need not be fitted out on 
opening.  Rather that monitoring of housing numbers is used to trigger the fitting out and 
occupation of the second form of entry when it is demonstrated that demand for places is 
such that it would not prejudice the continued viability of other primary schools in the 
settlement. 
 Play and Open Space – Provision of play and areas of open space within potential 704.700.
development sites will be required. There is also a need to ensure that best use is made of 
existing green and blue infrastructure assets within development sites, together with 
provision for linkages to the surrounding area. 
 Sport and Recreation  – Replacement of any lost recreation / sports provision as a 705.701.
result of development will be required to an equivalent or better standard, including access 
and use by the wider community where appropriate.  New sports pitch provision is proposed 
on land off Hampton Road should redevelopment of the existing Knowle Football Club take 
place. 
 Concept Master Plans  –Concept masterplans have been prepared for each of the 706.702.
site allocations proposed in this settlement, in accordance with planning policy and best 
practice guidance. They seek to identify the key existing features of a site that may need to 
be retained, and show at a high level where development is envisaged within the wider site.  
This is to ensure that when development proposals move to the planning application stage, 
there is certainty about the important elements of the development, e.g. appropriate green 
infrastructure and other requirements.  Whilst this may result in a lower gross to net 
developable area, this will demonstrate that a quality development can be provided which 
makes efficient use of land and respects local character.  
 Green Belt Enhancements  – The NPPF makes provision for environmental and/or 707.703.
access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to   
  
  
204 
 compensate for land that is taken up for development.  This provides an opportunity for 
additional accessible open space and also for wider Green Infrastructure improvements (e.g. 
parkland/woodland).  
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – As the area is covered by ‘made’ Neighbourhood 708.704.
Plan, 25%  of the levy collected will be spent in the area. The Local Authority will engage 
with the local community and agree with them how best to spend the funding, which could be 
used to take forward appropriate projects that the community have identified as priorities 
through the Neighbourhood Plan for example.   This can include simple, relatively low cost 
actions (e.g. further traffic regulation orders) through to more substantial projects. 
 Affordable Housing and Smaller Market  Homes  – Affordable housing will be 709.705.
required on development sites (in accordance with the Local Plan) and smaller market 
homes for younger people wishing to stay in the area will be sought. 
Proposed Approach 
 Knowle, Dorridge and Bentley Heath is a rural settlement identified for significant 710.706.
expansion.  Given that the opportunities to develop on previously developed land in KDBH 
are extremely limited, Green Belt release will be required and a redefined Green Belt 
boundary will need to be established. In accordance with national planning policy, such 
boundaries should be defined clearly, using physical features that are readily recognisable 
and likely to be permanent. Sites that are close to the existing settlement or are / can be 
well-served by public transport will be preferable, subject to their performance against the 
purposes of including land in Green Belt as supported in the Green Belt assessment and any 
other evidence base and constraints. 
 Some of the sites, in particular the land south of Knowle, have multiple and potential 711.707.
complex land assembly issues.  It is important that sites such as this are considered in a 
comprehensive manner to avoid piecemeal developments occurring.  This needn’t 
necessarily preclude a phased approach where one parcel of land or part of a site may be 
available for development in advance of another, but this should be in accordance with an 
approach agreed by the Council and all relevant landowners/development promoters.  , 
Work will be undertaken on a collaborative and comprehensive basis to ensure a quality 
development is delivered.  This will include joint responsibility for the provision of 
infrastructure, and this latter point will also be relevant to other sites around the village which 
also need to ensure they contribute towards the provision of the required infrastructure. 
Proposed Allocations 
Policy KN1 - Hampton Road, Knowle  
1. The site is allocated for 180 dwellings.  
2. Development of the site should be consistent with the principles as shown in the  
  concept masterplan, which include:  
  i. Preserving the setting of the Grade 1I Listed Grimshaw Hall. Development 
    should be set back from the immediate locality to avoid harm. Only if 
harm    cannot be avoided should mitigation be considered, and then it should 
be fully    justified and demonstrated to be successful in reducing harm;  
  ii. Provision of 1.4ha public op en space. Any formal play features will need to be 
   sympathetic to the historic setting of Grimshaw Hall;   
  
 
 20
5 205   iii. Retention of trees and hedgerows along Hampton Road to conserve the  
   character of this approach into Knowle;  
  iv. Retention of Local Wild life Sites and provision of an appropriate buffer to  
   Purnells Brook Woodland Local Wildlife Site. No development will be  
   permitted on the Local Wildlife Site.  
  v. Provision of suitable S UuDS and flood risk management. Development 
should    be loca ted outside of the areas identified as being higher risk flood 
zones.  
  vi. Pedestrian and cycle connectivity within and beyond the site boundary  
  vii. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
  viii. Relocation of the existing sports pitches currently occupied by Knowle  
   Football Club;  
3. The land currently accommodating Knowle Football Club has been identified as a 
  potential site for the development of a care village or ret irement complex. Subject to 
  other policies in the Plan, the principle of older persons’ accommodation in this  
  location would be supported.  
4. Replacement sports provision:  
  i. The current site of Knowle Football Club will not be available for   
   redevelopment until the existing pitches have been reprovided and are ready 
   for use, within the vicinity of the existing site.  
  ii. Appropriate facilities associated with the provision of outdoor sport will be  
   permitted in the Green Belt, provided t hey preserve the openness of the  
   Green Belt and do not conflict with purposes of including land within it .  
  iii. The preferred site for the relocation of the existing playing pitches is between 
   the new development and the canal, as shown on the concept masterplan.   
5. Infrastructure requirements should include:  
  i. Financial contribution to new and improved education provision in Knowle, as 
   proposed on Site Allocation KN2 South of Knowle (Ar den Triangle);  
  ii. Reprovision of the existing sports  pitches;  
  iii. Highway improvements as required including speed reduction measures and 
   access improvements along Hampton Road, and highway capacity  
   improvements at the A4141 junction;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of   
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Knowle village 
   centre and the Grand Union Canal towpath.  
6. Green Belt enhancements should include:    
  
  
206 
   i. Woodland planting ; 
  ii. Improved landscaping;  
  iii. On site green and blue infrastructure that is multifunctional and accessible  
  iv. Public open space  
  v. Access improvements to the wider Green Belt beyond the site boundary  
  vi. Delivery of, and access to replacement  sports provision  
  vii. Biodiversity enhancements  
  viii. Any other compensatory improvements that are considered acceptable  
7. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change  in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage, any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site KN1 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and i ts wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This allocation comprises two areas of land either side of Hampton Road. The 712.708.
smaller site to the south of Hampton Road includes the current ground of Knowle Football 
Club. The larger site to the north is agricultural land. 
 The southern part of the allocation is immediately adjacent to the built up area of the 713.709.
settlement and would represent a continuation of the existing development along Hampton 
Road. The site is relatively well-contained and a defensible Green Belt boundary is provided. 
 The site currently accommodates Knowle Football Club, which is seeking to relocate 714.710.
in order to secure better facilities. This land is identified as a potential site for a care village 
or retirement complex which would be acceptable in principle in this location.  The site 
performs very well in overall accessibility terms and there is good access to all key facilities 
in Knowle.  
 The current playing pitches will need to be reprovided and available for use prior to 715.711.
the redevelopment of the existing football club site.  The preferred area of relocation is on 
land between the new development and the canal, as shown on the Concept Masterplan. 
Whilst the relocation proposals may contain elements that would amount to inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt as defined by the NPPF, the existing sports pitches will be 
used to bring forward sustainable residential development in this accessible location. It will 
allow for new and improved sporting facilities to be provided in the immediate vicinity that 
could serve the wider community. Sports pitch provision in this location will also facilitate 
accessibility to land retained in the Green Belt and enhance its beneficial use by providing 
opportunities for outdoor sport and recreation in accordance with paragraph 141 the NPPF. 
 The Council therefore believe that ‘very special circumstances’ will need to be 716.712.
demonstrated exist to support the relocation of the sports pitches and associated facilities. 
Notwithstanding this, development proposals should be sympathetic to its Green Belt 
location, local context and character, in accordance with other policies in the plan  
 The larger part of the allocation to the north of Hampton Road also lies immediately 717.713.
adjacent to the built up area of the settlement, with residential development already present  
  
 
 20
7 207 on two sides. The allocation constitutes a 'rounding- off' of the settlement in a logical manner 
by continuing the Green Belt boundary on from the rear of the properties along Wychwood 
Avenue, down to Hampton Road.  
 The northern part of the site is located immediately opposite the front elevation of the 718.714.
Grade I listed Grimshaw Hall.  Evidence from the Council’s Heritage Impact Assessment 
recognises the significance of this important heritage asset and identifies potential harm to 
its setting as a result of development in the immediate vicinity. It is therefore recommended 
that development should be confined to the western part of the site (as shown on the 
Concept Masterplan) between the former hedge lines (now removed) and Purnell’s Brook. 
The areas between Hampton Road and limits of any new development should be 
landscaped as amenity areas to enhance the setting of the Hall. In making the 
recommendations, the guiding principle is to ensure that development cannot be seen from 
within the grounds of Grimshaw Hall and the concept masterplan for the site 8 seeks to 
reflect this. 
 The site is subject to some further constraints including Purnells Brook Woodland 719.715.
and Purnells Brook Meadows Local Wildlife Site s, (although the former which, which runs 
along the extreme north western edge of the site ,) as well as a number of significant trees. 
These will need to be carefully considered in the design of any future scheme. No 
development will be permitted on the Purnells Brook Meadow LWS and an appropriate buffer 
should be provided to the Purnells Brook Woodland LWS.   The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment has identified significant fluvial and surface water flood risk along Purnell’s 
Brook. Development should therefore be limited to those parts of the site that are located 
outside the higher flood zones. 
 . The site performs very well in overall accessibility terms and there is good access to 720.716.
all key facilities in Knowle. Development on both the northern and southern parts of the site 
will be expected to build on this and ensure that walking and cycling connectivity is provided 
both within and beyond the site boundary, linking in with the existing and proposed cycle and 
walking networks identified in the Council’s Cycling and Walking Strategy. Measures to 
promote and enhance sustainable modes of transport such as the provision of pedestrian 
and cycle connectivity towards Knowle village centre and the Grand Union Canal towpath 
will be expected. 
 The allocation as a whole is in an area with medium landscape character sensitivity 721.717.
and low visual sensitivity. The landscape value of the area is medium with an overall low 
landscape capacity to accommodate new development. Development of Site  8 KN1 at 
Hampton Road is consistent with Option G of the Spatial Strategy for the significant 
expansion of rural villages. 
Policy KN2 : South of Knowle (Arden Triangle)  
1. The site is allocated for 600 dwellings together with the redevelopment of the Arden 
  Academy secondary school and  new primary school to provide an ‘all through’  
  school.  
2. Development of the site should be consistent  with the principles as shown in the  
  concept masterplan, which include:  
  i. Retention of important landscape features and the setting of heritage assets;  
  ii. A site layout designed to give priority to pedestrians and cyclists, providing 
   safe and direct routes throughout the development linking to existing and  
   proposed footway/footpath/cycleway networks;    
  
  
208 
   iii. Provision of suitable S UuDS and flood risk management. Careful design  
   consideration should be given to the opportunities to reduce flood risk within 
   the site boundary. Deculverting the watercourse passing through the site will 
   be required to provide flood alleviation and  environmental benefits;  
  iv. Provision of 4.9ha of open space. Doorstep, Local and Neighbourhood Play 
   areas will be required. Public open space should provide a green link to the 
   neighbouring Middlefield Development;  
  v. Retention of the Local Wildlife Site. No development will be permitted on the 
   Local Wildlife Site;  
  vi. Biodiversity off - setting for the loss of semi -improved grassland;  
  vii. Retention of the MIND Garden;  
  viii. On site accommodation for older pe ople in accordance with Policy P4E  
  ix. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Infrastructure requirements should include:  
  i. Financial contribution to the provision of an  ‘all through’ school to provide a 
   facility for both primary and secondary education on the site;  
  ii. Highway improvements as required  
  iii. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycl e connectivity to the surrounding area
    including  Knowle village centre, Dorridge Railway Station and the wider  
   Green Belt.  
4. Green Belt enhancements should include:  
  i. Woodland planting;  
  ii. Improved landscaping;  
  iii. On site green and blue infrastructure that is multifunctional and accessible;  
  iv. Public open space;  
  v. Access improvements to the wider Green Belt beyond the site boundary;  
  vi. Biodiversity enhancements  
  vii. Any other compensatory improvements that are considered accept able.  
5. The Concept Masterplans document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplan may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departur e from the 
  principles outlined for Site KN2 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.   
  
 
 20
9 209 Justification 
 The site lies immediately adjacent to the settlement. It is well contained by Warwick 722.718.
Road and Grove Road, which provides a new robust and defensible Green Belt boundary.  
 The site is allocated for 600 dwellings, the redevelopment of Arden Academy and a 723.719.
new primary school to create an ‘all through’ school.  
 The new school will meet the educational needs of both primary and secondary 724.720.
pupils in the settlement in a single location, utilising shared and modern facilities, many of 
which are not often available to primary school children. 
 The KDBH Neighbourhood Plan also includes aspirations for facilities such as 725.721.
schools to be available for use by the wider community. The all-through school will deliver 
improved and modern infrastructure that will not only support education and increase 
opportunities for pupils at all stages of their learning, but also provide facilities that can be 
used and enjoyed by the wider community. 
 The new school will be located away from Station Road and will not be accessed 726.722.
from it. Whilst there will be pedestrian and cycling connectivity from both within and through 
the site to the schools, the main access will be taken off Warwick Road. This will result in 
existing school traffic being displaced from Station Road, allowing for more free-flowing 
traffic in this area of the settlement, and thereby reducing congestion. It will also provide an 
opportunity for higher density residential development to take place on one of the most 
accessible parts of the Site, which will facilitate more sustainable access to the village 
centres and public transport links, as well as reducing car use in and around this part of the 
village. Funding for the school will be expected via section 106 agreements associated with 
the development of the allocated sites. 
 In accordance with the Council’s standards, 4.9ha of open space will be required on 727.723.
site. Doorstep, local and neighbourhood play areas should be provided and the public open 
space should include a green link to the neighbouring Middlefield development to support 
and encourage connectivity and permeability. 
 The site as a whole includes a number of constraints including a Local Wildlife Site, 728.724.
protected trees and other valued landscape features. The Grade II listed Rotten Row Farm 
also lies adjacent to the site, with the site providing some of its setting. These issues wil l 
need careful consideration in the design of any future scheme. Development will also incur 
the loss of semi-improved grassland on the site and biodiversity off-setting will therefore be 
required.  
 The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment includes this site. It highlights that 729.725.
fluvial and surface water flood risks are present along the route of the Cuttle Brook and 
tributaries within the site boundary. Public Open Space within the site could be utilised to 
provide flood alleviation benefits and the deculverting of the watercourse passing through the 
site could provide significant environmental benefits. Areas identified as being at risk from 
fluvial and surface water flooding should be integrated into green infrastructure, which 
presents wider opportunities to improve biodiversity and amenity as well as climate change 
adaptation. An integrated drainage, landscape and ecological strategy should be developed 
for the site and a Flood Risk Assessment will be required at the detailed design stage. 
 The areas of the site closest to the settlement perform very well in terms of 730.726.
accessibility to all key services and facilities, as well as public transport. Additional measures 
to promote and enhance sustainable modes of transport both within and beyond the site 
boundary will be required.  Development should include permeable and attractive walking 
and cycling links to encourage sustainable access and connectivity to Knowle village centre, 
Dorridge Railway Station, and the wider settlement and Green Belt beyond. It will be 
expected that safe and convenient routes will be provided throughout the site and link in with   
  
  
210 
 existing and proposed cycle and walking networks, including those that are identified in the 
Council’s Cycling and Walking Strategy.   
 The site is in an area with medium landscape character sensitivity and low visual 731.727.
sensitivity. The landscape value of the area is medium with an overall low landscape 
capacity to accommodate new development. Development of the site would be consistent 
with Option G of the Spatial Strategy for the significant expansion of rural villages. 
Meriden 
The Settlement Now 
 Meriden is located approximately 9km to the east of Solihull Town Centre and the 732.728.
wider parish forms the north-eastern corner of Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council, 
bordering Coventry to the east and North Warwickshire to the north. It lies in the rural ‘gap’ 
between the Coventry and Birmingham conurbations (known as the ‘Meriden Gap’). 
 The main settlements within the Parish are 733.729.
Meriden Village itself (where approximately two 
thirds of the population of the Parish live), Millison’s 
Wood (approximately 1.5km to the east of Meriden 
Village) and Eaves Green. The population of the 
parish at the last Census (2011) was around 2,800 
with some 1220 households. This has increased by 
approximately 130 households with post 2011 
developments (notably at land to the east of 
Maxstoke Lane and development at Ley Lane). 
 The A45 (Birmingham to Coventry Road) 734.730.
crosses through the Parish just to the north of 
Meriden Village. It is located approximately 2.5km to 
the east of junction 6 of the M42 and the entrance to 
the National Exhibition Centre (NEC), Birmingham 
International Airport and Birmingham International 
Rail Station. There is a frequent bus service to 
Coventry and Birmingham , which becomes less 
frequent in the evenings , and an hourly daytime only 
service to Solihull. 
 The settlement derives its special character 735.731.
from its rural setting and its historical roots. There 
are two conservation areas: Meriden Green 
Conservation Area (including the village green at 
the centre of the settlement and the ‘old’ village 
located on Meriden Hill with its cluster of listed 
buildings including the church of St Laurence.  
 The area surrounding the village of Meriden 736.732.
is predominantly Green Belt. It is a mix of 
agricultural land and woodland (parts of the former 
Forest of Arden) with some large sand and gravel 
extraction quarries to the west. 
 The village has a small local centre around the village green with a range of shops 737.733.
and services including a recently developed sports and play facility on the south west side of 
the Green and a the Meriden Practice GP surgery.  The village also accommodates a 
 
  
 
 21
1 211 primary school which accommodates approximately 220 pupils.  The nearest secondary 
school is Heart of England Secondary School located in Balsall Common. 
 The Meriden Neighbourhood Plan has recently been examined and is expected to 738.734.
proceed to referendum when covid-19 related restrictions preventing referendums are lifted. 
The Settlement in the Future 
 The moderate impact on the Green Belt to the west and the accessibility of the 739.735.
village indicate that this settlement is suitable for consideration for limited growth, which 
could be focussed in an area to the west close to services and public transport. However, the 
distinctive historic character of the settlement will need to be conserved and where possible 
enhanced, particularly the Meriden Green and Meriden Hill Conservation Areas.  
 Meriden is generally accessible with sites being of medium to high accessibility in the 740.736.
Accessibility Mapping Study and also supports a range of facilities.  Any additional facilities 
should be focused in towards  the Vvillage centre so as to be sustainable and cater for the 
needs of the population. 
 The main constraints to development are the surrounding Green Belt, the Borough 741.737.
boundary (located immediately to the north of Meriden Village) and the mineral safeguarding 
area (sand and gravel) to the west. The Solihull Strategic Green Belt Assessment Report 
(July 2016) rates areas to the west of the settlement as the area performing most poorly, 
with land to the north and east performing moderately. 
 Meriden Parish Council submitted the Meriden Parish Neighbourhood Development 742.738.
Plan Submission Draft to Solihull MBC in March 2020. Following consultation, an 
independent examination will take place later in 2020 and then a referendum before the Plan 
can be ‘made’.   It will then form part of the Development Plan for Solihull. The 
Neighbourhood Plan includes a Local Housing Needs Assessment whichAssessment, which  
should inform any housing proposals for the settlement.  
 The High Speed 2 (HS2) route will be approximately 3km to the west of Meriden 743.739.
leading into the new Interchange Station located adjacent to the NEC/Birmingham 
International Airport. The new Interchange station will be approximately 4km to the north 
west of Meriden. Enabling and construction works have now commenced ready for the line 
to open in 2029- 33. During this period there may be an increase in construction traffic 
around the settlement and once operational, due to the close proximity of the new 
Interchange station, there may be extra demand on services and housing. 
What is Required for the Settlement in the Future? 
 Any development within the village is not only an opportunity for the settlement to 744.740.
play its part in accommodating the Borough and wider area needs but also to assist in 
supporting local area needs with regards to housing mix, any infrastructure requirements and 
local environmental improvements. 
 Concept Master Plan – The concept masterplans that accompany this Plan include 745.741.
the 3ha site located to the west of Meriden at the junction of Maxstoke lane and Birmingham 
Road. The masterplan indicates the overall site could accommodate around 100 dwellings 
with an area of public open space provided around the existing pond in the centre of the site. 
The Masterplan sets out the opportunities for the site to create a gateway development into 
Meriden.   
 Local Infrastructure Requirements – The settlement has a good provision of local 746.742.
services to meet local needs. However, any development would need to include assessment 
of this infrastructure. In particular of school capacity and local medical facilities.    
  
  
212 
  Pedestrian and Cycling Connectivity – Enhancements to encourage and promote 747.743.
walking and cycling in the settlement, particularly towards the local centres, schools and 
public transport will be required. Developments will be expected to ensure that walking and 
cycling connectivity is provided both within and beyond the site boundary, linking in with the 
existing and proposed cycle and walking networks identified in the Council’s Cycling and 
Walking Strategy, as well as routes for recreation. 
 Local Aspirations – The emerging Meriden Neighbourhood Plan will set out the 748.744.
current aspirations of local people for the future of the settlement. Comments on the Draft 
Local plan highlight the Parish Council’s desire to maintain Green Belt and rural 
communities, have improvements to public transport and infrastructure (particularly with the 
developments associated with the HS2 Interchange Station), reduce air pollution and 
increased provision of smaller homes for the elderly and affordable homes.  Local 
aspirations can also be evidenced in the Meriden Parish Plan (2009), Meriden Parish Design 
Statement (2011), Meriden Parish Council’s straw poll results to the Call for Sites, Meriden 
Neighbourhood Plan Survey 2016.  
 Local Housing Need – Guidance is available in the emerging Meriden 749.745.
Neighbourhood Plan and Solihull Council is working with the Parish Council and the 
community to bring forward the Plan for adoption. 
 Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) – Presently the parish council’s will directly 750.746.
receive 15% of the levy collected in the area. This will increase to 25% once their 
Neighbourhood Plans are adopted. This will provide a significant source of funding that can 
be used to take forward appropriate projects the community identify as priorities.  
 Green Belt Enhancements – The revised NPPF makes provision for environmental 751.747.
and/or access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development. This provides an opportunity for 
enhancements to existing or additional open space and other enhancements as needed.  
Proposed Approach 
 The settlement is suitable for consideration for limited growth. This reflects the 752.748.
sensitive environmental nature of the area, the character of the villages and the need to 
manage the capacity and viability of local infrastructure. 
 Given that the opportunities to develop on previously developed land in Meriden are 753.749.
extremely limited, Green Belt release will be required and a redefined Green Belt boundary 
will need to be established. In accordance with national planning policy, such boundaries 
should be defined clearly, using physical features that are readily recognisable and likely to 
be permanent. Sites that are close to the existing settlement or are / can be well-served by 
public transport will be preferable, subject to their performance against the purposes of 
including land in Green Belt as supported in the Green Belt assessment and any other 
evidence base and constraints. 
 A mix of market and affordable housing and specialist housing to meet the needs of 754.750.
older people should be provided in the settlement. There will need to be a careful balance 
struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the character of the 
local area 
Policy ME1 - West of Meriden (Between Birmingham Road and 
Maxstoke RoadLane) 
1. The site is allocated for around 100 dwellings.   
  
 
 21
3 213 2. Development of this site should be consistent with t he principles of the Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which include:  
  i. Development to contribute to the creation of gateway into Meriden;  
  ii. Highest density of homes to be on the corner of Maxstoke Lane and  
   Birmingham Road;  
  iii. Proposed layout to maximise natural surveillance and encourage active  
   streets;  
  iv. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones;  
  v. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  vi. 5% of open market dwellings  to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4D   
  vii. Retention of trees and hedgerows across the site to ensure the mature  
   character of the site is safeguarded;  
  viii. Provision of a minimum of 0. 766 ha of Public Open Space to be pr ovided  
   around the pond and the group of significant trees within the centre of the  
   site. 
3. Infrastructure requirements should include:  
  i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. A high quality, fully integrated S UuDS scheme within the open space which 
can    offer maximised multi -functional benefits;  
  iii. Highway improvements as required;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport.  
4. Green B elt Compensation measures should include:  
  i. Woodland planting  
  ii. On site green and blue infrastructure that is multifunctional and accessible  
  iii. Public open space  
  iv. Access improvements to the wider Green Belt beyond the site boundary  
  v. Biodiversity enhancements  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage, any significant departure from the   
  
  
214 
   principles outlined for ME1 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 The site is located to the west of the Maxstoke Lane development and would 755.751.
represent a continuation of development to Maxstoke Lane, as the north western boundary 
of the site; 
 Whilst the site is currently within the Green Belt, it is considered to be ‘lower 756.752.
performing’ in the Solihull Strategic Green Belt Assessment Report (July 2016). 
 The site is within easy walking distance of Meriden village centre and is well located, 757.753.
in accessibility terms, to public transport and other services.  
 The Sustainability Appraisal offers mixed outcomes, with significant positive effects 758.754.
for access to services and transport links. Some minor negative effects are identifies such as 
distance to secondary school and landscape sensitivity and that mitigation will be necessar y. 
 The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment includes this site.  It does identify 759.755.
significant flood risk from fluvial and surface water sources on the northern boundary of the 
site. However, it recommends that all built development is situated outside of the flood risk 
areas and that the layout reflects the local topography and ensures extreme flood flow paths 
are not impeded. The quantum of open space available within the proposed allocation gives 
the opportunity for a high quality integrated S uUDSs scheme which can offer maximised 
multi-functional benefits. 
 Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in 760.756.
the policy. 
   
  
 
 21
5 215 North of the Borough 
The Settlements Now 
Castle Bromwich and Marston Green  
 Castle Bromwich and Marston Green are popular mature residential suburbs which 761.757.
are generally affluent in character with good schools, strong local centres and lower than 
average unemployment levels in the Borough. Both areas are largely characterised by 
relatively high house prices and a shortage of affordable housing. Modern estates within 
both of these suburbs tend to be open plan with a cul- de-sac layout and with a mix of 
predominantly semi-detached and detached properties.  
 Castle Bromwich has had a more historic pattern of development including traditional 762.758.
Victorian and Edwardian development. 
 Marston Green is more mixed in character benefitting from natural areas including a 763.759.
small watercourse and the Green Belt buffer. It is bounded by significant commercial 
development at Birmingham Airport and Birmingham Business Park and has areas occupied 
by more traditional business premises. The railway runs through the edge of the area with 
Marston Green Station providing access to Birmingham International and Birmingham 
stations.  
Chelmsley Wood, Fordbridge, Kingshurst & Smith’s Wood 
 In contrast to the rest of the Borough there is part of North Solihull (covering the 764.760.
wards of Chelmsley Wood, Kingshurst & Fordbridge and Smith’s Wood) that has a high 
proportion of local neighbourhoods within the 10% most deprived in the country and some in 
the bottom 5%. The area is largely characterised by 1960’s housing estates arranged around 
parking courtyards, small green spaces and precinct shopping areas. The separation of 
pedestrian and car access via a mix of subways and dual carriageways has resulted in 
poorly overlooked amenity spaces and pedestrian routes. This has contributed to antisocial 
behaviour, an increased fear of crime and an overall reduction in the quality of environment.  
 Since 2005 the area 765.761.
has been the subject of a large 
regeneration programme. This has 
delivered significant improvements to 
the area providing more than 1,710 
new homes (social and private) on 40 
different sites as well as a range of 
other improvements including two 
new village centres, six new primary 
schools, six parks and improved 
green space and play facilities. 
Development has included the 
demolition of a large amount of 
unsuitable housing stock including 5 
high-rise blocks. Alongside the 
physical regeneration, socio-economic programmes have been developed to support local 
community and voluntary organisations. Important improvements have been secured in Key 
Stage 2 and 4 educational attainment and locally based job creation.  
 The area does benefit from a network of natural spaces including woodlands, nature 766.762.
reserves and parks which make up the setting of the River Cole. These are important 
  
  
  
216 
 features which influence the availability and focus of further opportunities for development in 
the future. 
 The North Solihull area has also been identified as part of the wider UK Central 767.763.
proposals (as one of the four interconnected economic opportunity zones) as an area with 
potential to benefit from the significant development proposed at the adjacent UK Central 
Hub. This will be dependent on addressing accessibility barriers both in terms of transport 
links in and out of the area and a relatively poor skills / training base within the area.  
The Settlements in the Future 
 The residential areas of Castle Bromwich and Marston Green are already largely built 768.764.
up and as such there are limited opportunities for further development without compromising 
the quality of the environment and existing open spaces.  
 In the Marston Green area industrial restructuring may mean brownfield sites 769.765.
currently occupied by traditional employment uses could become available later in the plan 
period however there is considerable uncertainty over this. The NEC and Birmingham Airport 
are significant assets on the edge of the area which together with the UK Central proposals 
including the HS2 interchange station will provide extensive economic growth during and 
beyond the plan period. The wider benefits of the proposals may result in opportunities for 
redevelopment within Marston Green. However it will be necessary to ensure any 
development both within and adjacent to the area is sensitive to the existing residential 
character. The need to ensure an appropriate buffer between neighbouring large scale 
proposals and the existing built form should be incorporated into proposals.  
 In North Solihull the success of the extensive regeneration programme continues to 770.766.
be built upon with schemes being developed to improve existing facilities including 
Kingshurst Village Centre and Chelmsley Wood Town Centre.  The SLP (2013) had a 
particular focus on the North Solihull Regeneration Area and it released a number of Green 
Belt sites to support the regeneration programme, and these have mostly been developed 
out.  As a consequence of this strategy the opportunities that now remain will largely be 
focussed on development of the Simon Digby site, redevelopment opportunities and 
village/town centre redevelopment. 
 Access to employment opportunities, improving the skills base and environmental 771.767.
enhancements will be key issues when assessing potential opportunities.  
What is required for the Settlements in the Future? 
 The suburbs would benefit from opportunities to expand the mix and affordability of 772.768.
housing however the lack of sites opportunities for development will impact on the extent to 
which this can be achieved.  
 Future development  in North Solihull, described above, will provide the opportunity to 773.769.
further address existing issues relating to: 
 Improving the skills base and access to employment – The North Solihull area 774.770.
itself has very limited  employment and commercial floor space and with car ownership lower 
than in other parts of the Borough access to jobs is limited. North Solihull forms one of the 
four zones identified through the UK Central programme which seeks to redistribute the 
benefits of the wider scheme.  
 Improving the mix and quality of housing – Although the regeneration programme   775.771.
brought about significant achievements,  there is still opportunity to seek improvements in 
the quality of the housing stock and to ensure a wider mix in the type and tenure of housing . 
The ability to deliver improvements may be affected by economic viability and require 
different delivery mechanisms .    
  
 
 21
7 217  Improvements to Chelmsley Wood Town Centre and Kingshurst Village Centre 776.772.
– A master plan is emerging to redevelop and enhance the  existing Chelmsley Wood Centre 
whichCentre, which is characterised by older, poorer quality 1960s retail and residential 
units. This may present opportunities for providing additional housing in the area.  A master 
plan is also being prepared for Kingshurst Village Centre to support its redevelopment.  
 Improving access to public transport - The provision of a well-integrated public 777.773.
transport system is key to provide access to jobs and facilities outside the area .  It is 
proposed that as part of the development of the UK Central Hub there will be improvements 
whichimprovements, which  will provide access to the facilities and opportunities presented 
by the new development. 
 Public space enhancements – There are still pockets of the built up area which 778.774.
would benefit from environmental enhancement to improve amenity and sense of place. It is 
important that public realm improvements continue to be pursued as part of the 
redevelopment of the remaining sites and that any further regeneration opportunities do not 
compromise existing public open spaces such as playing pitches, unless the impacts can be 
mitigated.  The supply of open space is already constrained therefore finding replacement 
facilities in the local area will be challenging.  
Proposed Approach 
 There have been no suitable sites identified in Castle Bromwich and any future 779.775.
development is likely to be confined to smaller previously developed infill sites with potential 
limited opportunities to increase the mix and affordability of the housing stock.  These would 
be more likely to come forward as windfall sites. 
 In Marston Green the availability of sites is further constrained by the presence of 780.776.
significant recreation assets , which make up the setting of the settlement.   In addition the 
Green Belt in this area provides an important open space buffer between built up areas and 
commercial premises to the south and east of the area thus preserving the identities of the 
settlements. 
 The proposed developments in North Solihull are focused on the remaining 781.777.
regeneration opportunities largely identified by the North Solihull Regeneration programme.  
These options are mainly on brownfield sites , which support the Council’s strategic vision for 
promoting economic growth, local centres and making best use of previously developed 
land.  
Existing Allocation 
SLP Site 3 – Simon Digby, Chelmsley Wood (capacity 200) 
 This site was an allocation in the adopted 2013 Solihull Local Plan. As an adopted 782.778.
allocation this remains to be b rought forward and is not affected by this consultation. 
Proposed Allocations 
Policy NS1 - Kingshurst Village Centre   
1. The site is allocated for 50 dwellings.  
2. Outline permission for the development of Kingshurst Parade was submitted in July 
  2020. This application is supported by a narrative which provides the rationale behind 
  this master -plan approach which seeks to reinforce the relationship of the Village  
  Centre with is neighbouring community and existing amenities.    
  
  
218 
 3. It is considered that the outline permission is likely to be granted prior to the adoption 
  of the Local Plan therefore the illustrative masterplan proposed will form the design 
  principle to be carried forward at reserve matters application stage.  
4. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy and any  
  significant departure from the principles outlined for Site 17 will need to be justified 
  and demons trate that the overall vision and objectives for the site and its wider  
  context are not compromised.  
Justification 
 This site is subject to a current planning application for the redevelopment of the 783.779.
former Kingshurst Village centre. This will include the demolition46 of the existing retail and 
residential units and redevelopment for mixed use.   Planning permission for the 
redevelopment of the centre was granted in September 2020 and when land supply 
schedules are updated this site will be included in the relevant schedule as a site with 
planning permission. 
  
                                                           
46 The indicated capacity is the number of net additional units as it takes into account the number of units being 
demolished.  
  
 
 21
9 219 Solihull Town Centre & Mature 
Suburbs 
The Area Now 
 Solihull Town Centre is a strong, vibrant and regionally important Centre containing a 784.780.
wide variety of shops, businesses and civic services. The ‘mature suburbs’ area that forms 
part of the urban area includes the largely residential suburbs of Elmdon, Hillfield, Lyndon, 
Monkspath, Olton, Shirley and Solihull. These areas benefit from good schools and strong 
local centres.  
 The Mature Suburbs adjoin Birmingham to the west and north, with countryside that 785.781.
is part of the Meriden Gap and the M42 to the east, and Green Belt to the south. The 
combined population of the Mature Suburbs is just under 100,000 in some 41,000 
households.  
 The Mature Suburbs are characterised by Victorian and Edwardian development, the 786.782.
Grand Union canal and railway network, a tighter urban grain, extensive gardens and parks. 
There are also substantial recreational facilities, such as Olton, Robin Hood and Widney 
Manor golf clubs and Olton Mere. More modern housing estates are characterised by an 
open plan, cul- de-sac layout with on-plot parking and a predominance of detached and semi-
detached properties. Shirley Town Centre provides for much of the needs of the west of the 
area, and has benefitted from significant investment at its heart, whilst there are district 
centres at Hobs Moat, Hatchford Brook, Shelly Farm and Olton. This area is home to a 
variety of employment opportunities located in the Solihull and Fore Business Parks and 
JLR, as well as in the established Cranmore and Monkspath area.  
 Solihull Town Centre is enriched by its attractive historic core of St. Alphege church, 787.783.
the Square and the High Street, and contains retail, commercial and cultural facilities. To the 
north and south of the Town Centre, the more modern retail developments of the 1960s 
precinct style Mell Square and the early 21st Century Touchwood development broaden its 
offer. To the south and east lie Malvern and Brueton Parks, which provide extensive areas of 
land for informal recreation within walking distance of the Town Centre. Tudor Grange Park 
to the south-west provides opportunities for more formal sport and recreation.  
 Both the 2006 UDP and 2013 SLP identified large scale development opportunities 788.784.
for Shirley town centre that made provision for significant new residential development to be 
provided.  The Parkgate scheme opened in 2014 and redevelopment of the Powergen site is 
now complete. 
 There is an extensive educational campus to the south-west of Solihull Town Centre 789.785.
containing Alderbrook, St Peter’s and Tudor Grange secondary schools, together with 
Solihull College. Immediately to the north of the Town Centre is Solihull School. On the edge 
of the Mature Suburbs to the south of the Town Centre is the Sixth Form College. These 
establishments are located within walking distance of Solihull Town Centre. The north of the 
area is catered for by Lode Heath and Lyndon schools, whilst Langley and Light Hall schools 
provide secondary education in the west and south. Many of the schools suffer from traffic 
congestion at opening and closing times.  
 Solihull has a transport interchange at the Western edge of the town centre which 790.786.
has a bus interchange and rail services to Birmingham, Leamington Spa and London, 
together with the Borough’s main bus interchange. This rail line also serves Olton and 
Hillfield/Monkspath at Widney Manor. There is also a rail station west of Shirley with services 
to Birmingham and Stratford.    
  
  
220 
 The Area in the Future 
 The Mature Suburbs are substantially developed with few opportunities for significant 791.787.
growth. Being mainly residential, there are relatively few brownfield land opportunities. The 
Town Centre, which has grown significantly for a generation, is likely to experience some 
restructuring with opportunities for a wider range of uses including residential in the future.  
 Both Solihull rail station and the Town Centre road system are already congested at 792.788.
peak times and are likely to experience increased passenger numbers/vehicle movements in 
the future. The improvements to Junction 6 of the M42, involving a new 2.5km long dual 
carriageway to the west of the motorway that will relieve the pressure on junction 6.However 
this may increase pressures for growth on the green belt land to the east of the Mature 
Suburbs. It is too early to robustly review the impact of this infrastructure or any potential 
safeguarding opportunities it may create however and this will need to be examined further 
as part of later Local Plan reviews. 
What is Required for the Area in the Future? 
 There are limited opportunities for growth in the Mature Suburbs reflecting the built 793.789.
up nature of the area and the importance of maintaining the attractive open spaces that are 
so important to the Borough’s character and wellbeing.  
 Restructuring of Solihull Town Centre  – A refreshed master plan for Solihull Town 794.790.
Centre will highlight opportunities for alternative uses whilst ensuring that sufficient land is 
retained for retail and commercial uses. The masterplan highlights the potential for the 
identified opportunity sites to accommodate significant levels of residential development, and 
there are likely to be other windfall sites that come forward as the town centre evolves.  
 Redevelopment of Solihull Rail Station - Solihull rail station will be redeveloped to 795.791.
provide more modern facilities capable of handling the predicted increase in passengers in 
future years, following the decision not to pursue its relocation to the south-east. 
Improvements to the pedestrian route to and from the Town Centre, some of which have 
already been implemented, will make the redeveloped station more accessible to 
commuters, students and visitors. This will be managed further through the new Town 
Centre Masterplan.  
 Improving accessibility to and around Solihull Town Centre  - A key challenge 796.792.
will be to manage the anticipated increase in traffic in the area, especially around Solihull 
Town Centre and the major road corridors. The Council is undertaking studies looking at key 
junctions within and close to the Town Centre. However, encouraging more people to use 
public transport, cycling and walking, rather than the private car for journeys to the Town 
Centre will be essential. Improving routes to/from the Town Centre and links to the adjacent 
parks for cyclists and 
pedestrians would help to make 
these alternative modes of travel 
more attractive.  
 Development 797.793.
Opportunities in Shirley Town 
Centre  – Following completion 
of the Parkgate development 
and redevelopment of the 
Powergen site there are limited 
opportunities for further large 
scale developments, and 
therefore any further residential 
 
  
 
 22
1 221 dwellings are likely to arise from windfall developments.   
 Re-use of Land allocated for Business/Retail Purposes  – There are areas of 798.794.
older industrial estates that may be recycled for new uses, such as at Cranmore to the west 
and Lode Lane to the north. Most of the available land for business use has been developed, 
and some business areas may be available for alternative uses.  
 Community Infrastructure Levy  – Presently in areas like the Mature Suburbs and 799.795.
Solihull Town Centre which are not covered by a town or parish council, 15% of the collected 
funds will be spent in the area. The Local Authority will engage with the local community and 
agree with them how best to spend the funding. This can include simple relatively low cost 
actions through to more substantial projects.   Site SO1 is dealt with in this chapter as it 
functions as an extension of the urban area, but as noted elsewhere, the area is located 
within Hampton in Arden parish and therefore the Parish Council will receive directly a 
proportion of CIL from the site. 
 Provision of affordable housing  – This will be challenging given the lack of 800.796.
significant opportunities for new housing in the Mature Suburbs. However, opportunities for 
housing will be identified through the refreshed Town Centre Master plan and the urban 
extension to the east, which will provide a proportion of affordable housing.  
 Concept Master Plans – The plans that accompany this consultation for the 801.797.
principal sites include a draft concept masterplan. These seek to identify the key existing 
features of a site that may need to be retained, and show at a high level where development 
is envisaged within the wider site.  This is to ensure that when development proposals move 
to the planning application stage, there is certainty about the important elements of the 
development, e.g. appropriate green infrastructure and other requirements.  Whilst this may 
result in a lower gross to net developable area, this will demonstrate that a quality 
development can be provided which makes efficient use of land and respects local 
character. 
 Green Belt Enhancements - The revised NPPF makes provision for environmental 802.798.
and/or access improvements to be undertaken to land that is to remain in the Green Belt to 
compensate for land that is taken up for development.  This provides an opportunity for 
enhancements to the green belt in the vicinity of Site 16 East of Solihull.  
Proposed Approach 
 Whilst significant retail or commercial growth in the Town Centre is unlikely, retaining 803.799.
the existing Town Centre boundary will provide opportunities for a broader range of uses. 
Given that the Town Centre is the most accessible location in the Borough, it will be 
important that uses that attract significant numbers of visitors will be able to find sites there. 
However, there are likely to be opportunities for significant residential or mixed residential 
and commercial uses. Higher densities can be accommodated as owning a car in this highly 
accessible location will not be essential. The refreshed masterplan will provide the necessary 
evidence for the quantum of growth for different uses.  
 A mix of market and affordable housing, as well as smaller market homes for young 804.800.
people wishing to remain in the area and specialist housing to meet the needs of older 
people will be provided in the settlement. This will seek to align the types and sizes of homes 
to be made available and the needs of the community. However, there will need to be a 
careful balance struck between making the most efficient use of land and respecting the 
character of the local area. 
 Some of the sites, in particular site SO1 (east of Solihull), have multiple and potential 805.801.
complex land assembly issues.  It is important that sites such as this are considered in a 
comprehensive manner to avoid piecemeal developments occurring.  This needn’t   
  
  
222 
 necessarily preclude a phased approach where one parcel of land or part of a site may be 
available for development in advance of another, but this should be in accordance with an 
approach agreed by the Council and all relevant landowners/development promoters.     This 
will include joint responsibility for the provision of infrastructure, and this latter point will also 
be relevant to other sites around the village which also need to ensure they contribute 
towards the provision of the required infrastructure. 
Proposed Allocations  
Policy SO1 - East of Solihull  
1. The site is allocated for 700 dwellings.  
2. Development of this site shou ld be broadly consistent with the principles of the  
  Concept Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Preserving the setting of the Grade II listed Field Farm and 239 Lugtrout  
   Lane. Development should be set back from the immedia te locality to avoid 
   harm. Only if harm cannot be avoided should mitigation be considered, and 
   then it should be fully justified and demonstrated to be successful in reducing 
   harm;  
  ii. Provision of 5.74.6ha of public open space including children’s play. Any 
formal    play features will need to be sympathetic to the historic setting of Field 
Farm    and 239 Lugtrout Lane;  
  iii. Retention of existing sports pitch.  
  iv. On site accommodation for older peop le in accordance with Policy P4 E  
  v. 5% of open market dwellings to be provided in the form of Self and Custom 
   Build Plots in accordance with Policy 4 D 
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:   
  i. Financial contribution to education provi sion as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG catchment.  
  iii. Highway improvements as required includi ng speed reduction measures and 
   access improvements along  Damson Parkway and Lugtrout Lane  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Solihull Town 
   Centre a nd Elmdon.  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Biodiversity enhancements  
  ii. Access improvements to the wider Green Belt beyond the site boundary,  
   including pedestrian access to Hampton Lane.   
  
 
 22
3 223 5. The Concept Masterplan document should be re ad alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site SO1 will ne ed to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall vision and objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
Justification  
 This allocation takes the form of an urban extension close to Solihull Town Centre.  It 806.802.
will be located on land to the rear of the ribbon development that fronts the northern side of 
Hampton Lane.  As a revision to the site put forward in the DLP, the northern boundary of 
the site is now intended to be formed by the Grand Union canal.  This will enable the land 
between Lugtrout lane and the canal to come forward for development.  The eastern 
boundary of the site will be formed by Field Lane.  
 The allocation lies within the Green Belt and it is immediately adjacent to the built up 807.803.
area of the settlement and would represent a continuation of the existing developed area. 
The site lies within a parcel of lower performing Green Belt and is influenced by built 
development either within the site or in the immediate vicinity to the site. The site is relatively 
well-contained and a defensible Green Belt boundary could be provided using the Grand 
Union Canal and Field Lane.  
 The site performs well in terms of accessibility to all key services and facilities, as 808.804.
well as public transport and the scale of any proposed development could see public 
transport improvements secured.  
 The Landscape Assessment (2016) states that the area on the fringe of Solihull has 809.805.
medium landscape value and medium overall sensitivity to new development. Therefore, the 
concept masterplan proposes to retain the historic landscape including the rural character of 
Field Lane. Careful mitigation of Heritage assets is required for the site, including the Grade 
II Listed Field Farm and 239 Lugtrout Lane. Development will need to consider these assets 
in the design of any future scheme.  
 Playing pitches on the site are currently occupied by Coldlands Colts Boys FC and 810.806.
will need to be retained. 
 This site appears in the Solihull chapter as it functions as an extension to the urban 811.807.
area, but it should be noted that it falls within the parish of Hampton in Arden.  
Policy S 02 - Moat Lane Depot  
1. The site is allocated for 90 dwellings.  
2. Development of this site should be broadly consistent with  the principles of the  
  Concept Masterplan for this site, which includes the following:  
  i. Provision of 0.7ha public open space including doorstep and local play  
   facilities.  
  ii. An integrated drainage, landscape and ecological strategy should be   
   developed for the site, which seeks to remedy the drainage is issues on the 
   site as an opportunity to enhance place -making  
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:    
  
  
224 
   i. Financial contribution to education provision as required by the Loc al  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Developer contributions to primary care health services in the vicinity and  
   appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG catchment;  
  iii. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity towards Solihull Town 
   Centre  
  iv. On site doorstep play facilities  
  v. Surface water flood mitigation including an integrated drainage, landscape 
   and ecological strategy, seeking to support pl ace-making on the site.  
4. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carried out at the planning application stage any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site SO2 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall vision and objectives for the site and its wider context are not comprom ised.  
Justification  
 This brownfield site is located in the urban area and is formed from the existing 812.808.
Council depot and industrial estate, which are expected to become available during the Plan 
period.  The site performs well in terms of accessibility to all key services and facilities, as 
well as public transport.  
 The Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment includes this site as surface water 813.809.
flood risks are present, passing through the centre of the site. Any development at this 
location will need careful design consideration to the opportunities to reduce flood risk within 
the site boundary and provide flood alleviation downstream. 
Developments in Solihull Town Centre 
 The Draft Town Centre master plan,  2016 identifies potential for housing 814.810.
development in a number of the Opportunity Sites. The refreshed master plan will update the 
opportunity sites to reflect changes since the original document was prepared. The 
Masterplan will also be maintained as a live document helping to facilitate the delivery of 
regeneration sites and continue shaping the future of Solihull town centre alongside key 
stakeholders.  
   
  
 
 22
5 225 UK Central Hub 
The Area Now 
 The area known as the UK Central Hub is a significant contributor to the wider West 815.811.
Midlands economy and a transport hub for the Midlands Engine. The Hub is focussed on the 
main economic assets located around junction 6 of the M42.  The principal elements are as 
follows: 
 Arden Cross Land including the site of the future HS2 interchange 
 Birmingham Airport 
 The NEC 
 Jaguar Land Rover  
 Birmingham Business Park 
 The Hub forms part of the wider UK Central concept which comprise of four 816.812.
interconnected economic opportunity zones. Together with the UK Central Hub which makes 
up Zone 1 the UK Central also includes:  Zone 2 – North Solihull, Zone 3 – Solihull Town 
Centre and Zone 4 – Blythe Valley Business Park. 
HS2 Interchange – Arden Cross 
 The triangular shaped site that is to accommodate the HS2 Interchange station is 817.813.
currently a largely open parcel of land bounded by the M42, A45 and A452.  Construction of 
HS2 in the 
Borough has 
commenced and 
the HS2 
interchange 
station will be in 
the heart of the UK 
Central Hub on 
land adjacent to 
the NEC. It is 
forecast that the 
first trains to run 
on the route will be 
between 2029- 33, 
at which point the 
journey time from 
London to UK Central Hub will be just 38 minutes. 
 The WMCA Investment Prospectus 2020  and HS2 Connectivity Package  recognise s 818.814.
the opportunity that the HS2 rail link offers to drive economic growth and prosperity, and the 
significance of UK Central, particularly the Hub Area around the Interchange station. 
 Alongside the economic benefits the development of the hub is an opportunity as part 819.815.
of the wider UK Central proposals to improve links with the surrounding area in particular 
North Solihull with the prospect for improved access to employment.  
Birmingham Airport 
 Birmingham Airport is the principal international gateway into the Region and has a 820.816.
major role in the national airports infrastructure.  It is a key economic growth driver, 
  
  
  
226 
 particularly regarding the knowledge economy, high value-added sectors and overseas 
inward investment and international trade. The development of new routes to the Far East, 
America, India and China enabled by the main runway extension, completed in 2014, 
enhance the Airport’s capacity to contribute to local and regional economic growth as a key 
component of UKC. The HS2 Station will improve the accessibility and attractiveness of the 
Airport from further afield, particularly London and the South-East, and eventually the North.  
National Exhibition Centre (NEC) 
 The continued success of the NEC is important to the local and regional economy 821.817.
and is the UK’s largest exhibition centre. The role of the NEC has evolved from its early 
exhibition centre beginnings in the 1970’s to become a major events, tourism and leisure 
venue, serving both business and leisure markets and contributing significantly to Solihull’s 
and the Region’s visitor economy.  The opening of Resorts World (a £150 million mixed use 
leisure development) in 2015 demonstrated the evolving role that the NEC plays; and the 
Local Plan Review should provide a framework to allow the complex to take advantage of 
future opportunities.   It will continue to evolve.  
Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) 
 Jaguar Land Rover is one of the West Midlands’, and UK’s, most important 822.818.
businesses and a key driver of economic recovery, as an advanced manufacturing firm 
developing leading technologies including in low emissions vehicles. The Lode Lane plant in 
Solihull currently provides about 7,300 jobs and is set to increase to more than 9,000 
following substantial new investment in the plant, demonstrating the company’s commitment 
to Solihull.  
 Part of the area beyond the north east of the existing plant has recently been 823.819.
developed to provide a 14ha vehicle despatch area which opened in 2015.  The Council 
considered that there were very special circumstances for allowing this development in the 
Green Belt.  This was to support the operational needs of this internationally significant 
company that needs to remain competitive in the global vehicles market in order to continue 
to support significant numbers of jobs in the Region that rely on the success of JLR.  
Birmingham and Blythe Valley Business Parks 
 Birmingham and Blythe Valley Business Parks have successfully attracted new 824.820.
investment to Solihull and the Region in accordance with their original role of helping to 
modernise and diversify the Region’s economy by attracting knowledge based employment 
and combatting decline in the Region’s manufacturing base. Birmingham Business Park is 
well placed near Birmingham Airport and the NEC to encourage new growth and investment. 
Blythe Valley Business Park is competitive with the south-east and M40 corridor and is 
capable of developing new facilities to promote and support innovation and entrepreneurism.  
 These two high quality, managed business parks have a key role in Solihull’s 825.821.
success in attracting business investment in high value added sectors including ICT, 
business and professional services, creative industries, construction and engineering. It is 
important that these high quality sites continue to attract knowledge economy investment to 
Solihull and the Region, thereby underpinning economic recovery and growth.  This includes 
further realising the potential of Blythe Valley Business Park as a location for innovation uses 
and new enterprise. There is also potential for Birmingham Business Park to play a greater 
role in linking investment and employment opportunities to the North Solihull area.  
 To reinvigorate these sites, the range of acceptable uses on them was broadened 826.822.
under the 2013 Solihull Local Plan in response to changed market conditions. There is 
growing competition from town and city centre locations as occupiers realise the benefits to 
employees of access to a range of facilities and to public transport. Better facilities will be 
needed if they are to continue to secure appropriate investment.   
  
 
 22
7 227 The Area in the Future  
 It is anticipated that the UK Central Hub Area will make a significant contribution 827.823.
towards the delivery of homes and economic development in the Borough during the plan 
period and beyond. The extension of High Speed rail to the West Midlands will be significant, 
reducing journey times to London to 38 minutes and enhancing existing connectivity 
provided via Birmingham Airport and via the region’s extensive road and motorway network. 
As the site of the first railway interchange station outside London, the Hub Area is uniquely 
placed to capture these benefits. 
 The Hub Area is therefore a unique site with the potential to deliver major growth on 828.824.
a nationally significant scale both to meet the economic growth aims of the Borough as well 
as the wider growth aspirations of the Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP and the West 
Midlands Combined Authority.  
 It is clear that co-ordinating the development ambitions of all stakeholders and 829.825.
delivering a range of growth opportunities will provide multiple benefits for the Borough and 
wider area including:  
 The delivery of a significant amount of jobs 
 A greater range and choice of new homes for The Hub, Solihull and the wider 
Housing Market Area 
 New and unique forms of high quality development 
 The creation of healthy neighbourhoods 
 Joined up green infrastructure 
 The delivery of strategic infrastructure 
830. The HS2 Interchange site was included in Policy P1 of the Draft Local Plan for high quality, 
high density mixed use development with the potential to provide 1,000 homes (in the plan 
period). Since then, further work carried out with the UGC has indicated that there is capacity 
for the site to accommodate a higher level of growth.  
 Work undertaken to date is indicating that the residential component will be focussed 831.826.
on two components of the Hub Area, land at Arden Cross and land at the NEC.  
 The NEC Masterplan includes provision for up to 2,500 dwellings on the site and it is 832.827.
anticipated that of these 2,240 will be provided within the plan period. The Arden Cross 
Masterplan anticipates that up to 3,000 homes can be delivered on Site UK1, of these 500 
will be delivered in the plan period, as the site won’t be fully available until after HS2 has 
been completed.These two areas are now expected to provide up to 5,000 homes, with 
2,500 being delivered in the plan period.  The NEC Masterplan includes provision for 2,500 
dwellings and these can start to be delivered earlier (potentially from 2022) than the Arden 
Cross site, which won’t be fully available until after HS2 has been completed.  
 Land is also allocated in this Plan for further employment at Damson Parkway to 833.828.
allow for the future expansion of Jaguar Land Rover, Birmingham Airport, more general 
employment needs and a relocated Household Waste and Recycling Centre and Depot. The 
Local Plan also provides a framework to support the extensive supply chain associated with 
JLR.  
 The Council has developed a vision and set of place making principles with key 834.829.
stakeholders to transform The Hub into a distinct place with a strong sense of identity; 
combining growth aspirations, integrated landscapes, and strategic infrastructure to create a 
connected destination for business, leisure and living. This vision is set in the context of   
  
  
228 
 maximising the benefits of the sites connectivity, provision of green and blue infrastructure, 
optimising land use and excellence of design.  
 Alongside the economic benefits the development of the Hub Area is an opportunity 835.830.
as part of the wider UK Central Solihull proposals to improve links with the surrounding area 
in particular North Solihull with the prospect for improved access to employment.  
 Due to the scale and nature of what is proposed a bespoke approach to planning and 836.831.
delivery at the Hub is required reflecting its complex land ownership and mix of uses. As 
such the UK Central Solihull Urban Growth Company (UGC) was established by the Council 
in 2016 to lead the delivery of the project. Through the UGC the Council has been working 
closely with the range of landowners responsible for the site which reflect both public and 
private interests. There is collective support for the overall vision and a commitment to 
actively working towards delivering it. 
What is required for the settlement in the future 
 Coordinated approach  - The delivery of the site is complex and a coordinated 837.832.
approach by all stakeholders is necessary led by the UGC. The UGC and the Council have 
therefore been working closely with all key stakeholders including: Birmingham City Council, 
the West Midlands Combined Authority (WMCA), Arden Cross Company Limited 
Consortium, the National Exhibition Centre (NEC), Birmingham Airport, Jaguar Land Rover 
Birmingham Business Park, Highways England, relevant utilities companies and HS2 Ltd.  
 The UGC published an updated UK Central Hub Growth and Infrastructure Pla n 838.833.
(January 2018) and an updated Framework Plan (February 2018) to align the growth 
aspirations of all these key stakeholders and provide an overall view of how development 
and infrastructure can be delivered across the Local Plan period. A primary focus of this is to 
ensure that constraints to development such as crucial infrastructure requirements are 
addressed in the early stages to ensure the high economic growth aspirations of the site can 
be delivered.  
 In terms of delivering the vision and objectives for the site and address the key 839.834.
challenges the Hub framework is based on five key place making principles. These have 
been designed to guide a common approach to development across the site: 
 Improve accessibility 
 Establish a high quality green and blue network 
 Create sustainable, high quality communities 
 Leverage land with temporary uses  
 Generate a clear sense of place  
 Garden community  - A funding proposal has been put forward to support the 840.835.
development of The Hub as a garden community. Incorporating garden community principles 
will be key in delivering the overall place making vision for The Hub supporting the 
development of the site as a sustainable high quality environment and ensuring that the 
necessary infrastructure is in place to deliver and support the growth aspirations for the site. 
It will assist in supporting key components of the proposal such as the establishment of a 
network of high quality green and blue infrastructure. Development Principles  - It is 
important that there is an overall place making vision for the Hub based on a clear set of 
development principles to support the creation of a sustainable high quality environment and 
to ensure the necessary infrastructure is in place to deliver and support growth aspirations 
for the site. The Arden Cross Masterplan (2020) has set out a comprehensive set of 
principles for delivering the vision and development of the Arden Cross site. These will be 
key in supporting the development of the Hub Area.   
  
 
 22
9 229  Transport Infrastructure  - A significant amount of transport infrastructure will be 841.836.
required to assist in the delivery of the site. Primary road infrastructure upgrades are already 
being pursued including changes to Junction 4 of the M6, Junction 6 and a new Junction 5A 
of the M42 providing links to the site in preparation for the implementation of HS2.  
 HS2 will be providing an Automated People Mover (APM) connecting the interchange 842.837.
station with the NEC, Birmingham International Station and Birmingham Airport.  A Metro 
tram route is planned from Birmingham City Centre through East Birmingham and Solihull to 
Birmingham Business Park, Birmingham Airport, Birmingham International Station, the NEC 
and HS2 Interchange site.  
 Social and community infrastructure  – It is important that the full range of facilitie s 843.838.
necessary to support the creation of a high quality sustainable community at The Hub are 
provided. These include healthcare and education facilities to serve residents of The Hub but 
also the potential to capture the wider benefits of the scheme by enhancements to 
infrastructure serving the wider community. This also includes improving access to jobs and 
working towards improving the skills base.   During the plan period it is expected that a new 
primary school will be required to serve the new community.  It is recognised that growth will 
continue beyond the plan period and additional social and community infrastructure will be 
needed, and this is likely to include provision of a second primary school and a secondary 
school.  
 Green and blue infrastructure  – It is proposed that a network of green and blue 844.839.
infrastructure will be integrated throughout the development with the intention to provide a 
high quality sense of place  designed around the idea of the Garden community . The 
provision of Green Infrastructure is a particularly important element as it will allow existing 
features to not only be retained, but enhanced as part of an integrated approach.  
Proposed approach 
 The Green Belt boundary will need to be amended to accommodate the land at 845.840.
Arden Cross (140 hectares) in order to deliver the HS2 interchange station and wider 
development at The Hub. This will facilitate the delivery of the site alongside development at 
the NEC which is already outside the Green Belt. These proposals are site specific as they 
are dependent  on the delivery of HS2 and the interchange station and will assist in delivering 
the needs of key economic assets supporting the local and regional economy. The land is 
bounded by main roads that provide strong defensible Green Belt boundaries. The 
exceptional circumstances set out in Policy P1 for releasing the Arden Cross Land from the 
Green Belt are therefore justified.  
 The delivery of The Hub site is complex and the Local Plan may also need to take 846.841.
forward other relevant elements of the wider proposals being developed by the UGC and key 
stakeholders to realise development.  Land at Damson Parkway will also need to be 
released from the Green Belt in order to accommodate expansion at Jaguar Land Rover.  
 It is anticipated that HS2 will be operational from 2029- 33. Subject to the delivery of 847.842.
HS2 the proposals are likely to come forward towards the end of the plan period. It will 
therefore be necessary for the Local Plan to retain a degree of flexibility in dealing with the 
site to take account of the emerging plans. 
 Further work since the Draft Local Plan was published has identified the capacity to 848.843.
bring forward a higher level of housing on the site to better support the level of economic 
development proposed. It is important that this mix is delivered in a co-ordinated way with 
the aim of achieving a high quality sustainable environment.  
 The site will have wide implications in terms of economic growth serving a large 849.844.
geographical area across the Borough’s administrative boundaries. The Council will continue 
to engage with neighbouring authorities as well as other local authorities across the region   
  
  
230 
 as the proposals go forward to understand the impact.   Given the nature of the proposal it is 
important that this is maintained as a fluid process and reflects the importance of ongoing 
engagement and collaborative working as part of the Duty to Cooperate. 
 In bringing forward development at The Hub regard will also be given to proposals 850.845.
affecting the wider site: 
 The National Exhibition Centre (NEC) Master plan (December 2018) – The 851.846.
creation of “NEC City” is proposed through an £8.5 million redevelopment of 75 hectares of 
the wider 175 hectare NEC campus site over the next 20 years. It aims to respond to the 
‘need for the region to have internationally competitive opportunities for investment’. It seeks 
to provide a destination combining entertainment, leisure, exhibition space, and commercial 
and residential floorspace to create an ‘ultimate visitor experience’. It is envisaged that this 
will be achieved via the creation of five components: the Global exhibition centre (NEC), an 
Entertainment Zone, Lakeside, the Commercial gateway, and through creation of a Rapid 
transit loop all underpinned by the development principles of connectivity, activity and 
design. The delivery of the masterplan, as with the wider UK Central Solihull Hub Area, is 
reliant on a coordinated approach to the delivery of infrastructure and the development of the 
site through a phased approach. A key element of the strategy is to release surface car 
parking land for development and re-provide this capacity in on site multi storey car parks. A 
phased replacement plan is being developed to enable the release of land. NEC City has 
been conceived to fit in with the wider aspirations for the UK Central Solihull Hub Area and 
reflect the overall vision for the area.  
 Jaguar Land Rover expansion  – Land at Damson Parkway is being allocated to 852.847.
accommodate employment development, including future expansion at JLR. Whilst it is 
unclear at this stage the exact nature of future proposals, the site will be a key element of the 
UK Central Solihull Hub Area proposals.  
 Birmingham Business Park  – The Park already occupies an important role as a 853.848.
prime employment location. It is important that the wider proposals for The Hub builds upon 
this. 
 Birmingham Airport Masterplan (2018) – The masterplan (published pre Covid-19) 854.849.
for the airport predicts growth in passenger numbers per year from 13 million in 2018 to 18 
million in 2033, and considers the potential for and implications of higher growth levels to 24 
million. It is framed in the context of the national policy to make best use of the existing 
extended runway. It sets out plans for £500 million of new investment to expand the terminal 
building, increase the number of aircraft stands, extend ancillary facilities and interconnect 
with HS2. It highlights a need for more land for ancillary facilities beyond the existing Airport 
area and identifies land near Elmdon and JLR, which includes land allocated for employment 
development at Damson Parkway. This is in the context of maximising the benefits of HS2 
and the wider proposals for UK Central Solihull.  
Proposed Allocations 
Policy UK1 -– Arden Cross and HS2 Interchange  
1. This site is allocated for mixed use development including the HS2 Interchange  
  station and ancillary infrastructure, commercial, residential and  associated retail,  
  leisure and cultural uses.  
2. Development of this site should be consistent with the place making principles set out 
  in the Hub Framework Plan, and the Arden Cross Masterplan, which encompass the 
  following:   
  
 
 23
1 231   i. Improve accessib ility; 
  ii. Establish a high quality green and blue network;  
  iii. Create sustainable, high quality communities;   
  iv. Generate a clear sense of place.  
3. Development should accord with the following Development Principles, as set out in 
  the Arden Cro ss Masterplan:  
  i. A high density activity intensive strategy providing a mix of cultural,  
   commercial, leisure and retail activity around the main transport hub;  
  ii. Movement corridors linking the transport hub to innovation and employment 
   distri cts, higher educational campus outposts with industrial partners, mixed 
   typology homes and natural greenspace with pedestrian permeability;  
  iii. Layout based on facilitating walking, cycling and sustainable movement  
   patterns to enable site wide an d beyond connectivity;  
  iv. Integrated public transport systems across all parts of the site and beyond;  
  v. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones;  
  vi. Provision of above ground S UuDS features;  
  vii. Enhanced landscape, green and b lue infrastructure and biodiversity provision 
   based on Hollywell Brook and other features, including historic landscape  
   features and protection and enhancement of the setting of surrounding  
   heritage assets;  
  viii. Future proofed to ensure development contributes towards the mitigation of 
   greenhouse gas emissions and provides resilience to the impacts of climate 
   change.  
4. Development should also accord with the following requirements to minimise and 
  mitigate  harm to adjacent heritage assets:  
  i. A formal views analysis between Packington Park and the site shall be  
   undertaken as part of a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment to inform 
   development, and proposals should then aim to avoid causing harm t o the 
   significances of heritage assets;  
  ii. Enhance key views to and from Park Farmhouse;  
  iii. Ensure the telecommunications mast does not impinge on key views of Park 
   Farmhouse from Packington Park Pleasure Grounds;  
  iv. Consider appropriate u se of Park Farmhouse and the potential for   
   interpretation.  
5. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:    
  
  
232 
   i. Provision of a new primary school and nursery as required by the Local  
   Education Authority;  
  ii. Provision for primary care health  services in the vicinity and financial  
   contributions for appropriate UHB secondary care services in the wider CCG;  
  iii. Provision of leisure and community infrastructure;  
  iv. The existing culverts within the site shall be naturalised to reduce fl ood risk 
   and enhance wider benefits;  
  v. Any development adjacent to the culvert carrying Hollywell Brook beneath the 
   Chester Road should provide flood alleviation;  
  vi. Water quality discharges from the site shall be improved through the provision  
   of linear conveyance S UuDS to ensure that the status of the River Blythe is 
   protected and that extreme flood flow paths are not impeded;  
  vii. New highway and connectivity infrastructure.  
6. The Hub Framework Plan and Arden Cross Masterplan documen ts should be read 
  alongside this policy. Whilst the masterplans may be subject to change in light of  
  further work that may need to be carried out at the planning application stage, any 
  significant departure from the principles outlined for Site UK1 will need to be justified 
  and demonstrate that the overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not 
  compromised.  
 This land release is driven by the location of the HS2 station and the potential this 855.850.
gives to making more efficient use of the land than that proposed by the HS2 Company. The 
release of this c140ha site from the Green Belt to accommodate the HS2 Interchange and 
mixed use development is not to simply serve local needs but is part of the contribution the 
Borough is making to the wider West Midlands area that will benefit economically from this 
important infrastructure provision. The ability to provide residential development as part of a 
mixed use development remains an important component. 
 The site lies in a lower performing parcel in the Green Belt Assessment. Significant 856.851.
development is proposed for the HS2 rail interchange station and supporting infrastructure, 
which will substantially reduce the contribution of this land to Green Belt purposes. The site 
is in an area that has low capacity to accommodate change in the Landscape Character 
Assessment. 
 The Sustainability Appraisal of the Strategic Housing Options (Scope Issues & 857.852.
Options 2015) forecast major beneficial outcomes for the UK Central Hub and HS2 
Interchange Area for prosperity, access to jobs, reducing the need to travel, resource 
efficiency, adaptation to climate change and commercial attractiveness. Although the site 
performs poorly in the Sustainability Appraisal for Site 19, with significant negative effects 
relating to the size of the site, impact of heritage assets, and access to leisure facilities and 
convenience stores or supermarkets, this mixed use development will be highly accessible 
by public transport and provide significant convenience food and leisure opportunities 
associated with the NEC, station and other developments. As such the negative impacts 
identified are all capable of being mitigated through the context of the proposed 
development. 
 The Heritage Impact Assessment for Site 19 identifies the potential to cause 858.853.
significant harm to the setting of Park Farmhouse, and harm to the setting of Packington Hall  
  
 
 23
3 233 and Park. To mitigate this planting should be used to enhance key views to and from Park 
Farmhouse, and the telecommunications mast should be located so that it does not impinge 
on the key view from the Pleasure Grounds in Packington Park towards Park Farmhouse. In 
addition, a comprehensive Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment should be undertaken 
to establish a formal views analysis between Packington Park and Site UK1, to inform final 
development proposals. A suitable use for Park Farmhouse should be identified, which could 
include interpretation of its interest and significance. 
 A Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been undertaken for this site, as a 859.854.
small part in the corridor of Hollywell Brook lies within higher flood zones. This area is 
included within the green infrastructure proposals for the site, and development will be 
restricted to areas within flood zone 1. There are a number of culverts within the site, and 
developers will be expected to naturalise the culverts wherever possible to reduce flood risk 
and secure wider environmental benefits. The culverted Hollywell Brook beneath Chester 
Road is a known flooding hotspot , which significantly impacts on the highway, so any 
development in the proximity of the culvert will need to provide flood alleviation to this 
infrastructure. 
 The exceptional circumstances justifying its release are set out in Policy P1. 860.855.
Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in the 
policy.  The Council will work with key stakeholders to produce a SPD to help guide 
development across the UKC Hub area.  
Policy UK2 - Land at Damson Parkway  
1. This site is allocated for  employment development to meet local employment needs, 
  needs associated with the key economic assets in the UK Central Solihull Hub Area, 
  and for a potential relocated Household Waste and Recycling Centre and Depot.  
2. Development of this site should  be consistent with the principles of a Concept  
  Masterplan for this site, which is expected to include the following:  
  i. No development within any area of higher flood risk zones;  
  ii. Relocation of the existing sports provision off Damson Parkway t o a suitable 
   site in the vicinity (see below);  
  iii. The existing sports provision off Damson Parkway will not be available for 
   development until a suitable alternative site is provided and ready for use, 
   within the vicinity of the existing sites ; 
  iv. The alternative site must be agreed with the governing bodies and Sport  
   England;  
  v. The alternative site must be in accordance with the relevant policies of the 
   plan, in particular Policy P20;  
3. Likely infrastructure requirements will include:  
  i. Development of the site should provide flood alleviation to Damson Lane;  
  ii. The Low Brook corridor shall be significantly improved and turned into a high 
   quality linear attenuation and water quality improvement area for S UuDS;   
  
  
234 
   iii. Highway improvements as required and access improvements along Damson 
   Parkway and Damson Lane;  
  iv. Appropriate measures to promote and enhance sustainable modes of  
   transport including pedestrian and cycle connectivity to surrounding  
   residential  areas;  
4. Green Belt enhancements will include:  
  i. Improvements to environmental quality of remaining Green Belt between the 
   main urban area and Damson Parkway;  
  ii. Improvements to the environmental quality of Green Belt to the east to  
   enhance/extend the important grassland habitats to the east of the site.  
5. The Concept Masterplan document should be read alongside this policy. Whilst the 
  concept masterplans may be subject to change in light of further work that may need 
  to be carri ed out at the planning application stage,  any significant departure from the 
  principles outlined for Site UK2 will need to be justified and demonstrate that the  
  overall objectives for the site and its wider context are not compromised.  
 This is an employment led land release of c94ha which will provide additional 861.856.
employment land to meet local needs, including future expansion for JLR and JLR related 
activities and ancillary development for Birmingham Airport. It will also provide an option for 
a relocated Household Waste and Recycling Centre and Depot, which will address needs set 
out in Policy P12 and enable the delivery of Site SO2 housing allocation. The release of the 
site from the Green Belt will meet local employment and waste management needs, an d 
needs associated with the key economic assets within the UK Central Solihull Hub Area. 
 The area east of Damson Parkway lies in a moderately performing parcel whilst the 862.857.
land to the west is lower performing in the Green Belt Assessment. Both parcels have been 
affected by development by JLR permitted under very special circumstances, so their 
contribution to Green Belt purposes is reduced. The site is in an area that has low capacity 
to accommodate change in the Landscape Character Assessment. 
 The site performs reasonably well in the Sustainability Appraisal with three times as 863.858.
many positive or neutral effects than negative, and the only significant negative effect due to 
the size of the site.  
 A Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been undertaken for this site, as a 864.859.
small part adjacent the eastern boundary in the corridor of Low Brook lies within higher flood 
zones. This area is included within the green infrastructure proposals for the site, and 
development will be restricted to areas within flood zone 1 and should ensure that flood risk 
is not increased to surrounding land uses. The low point on Damson Lane is known to flood 
significantly during rainfall events, so development at this point will be required to provide 
flood alleviation benefits to protect existing and proposed infrastructure. The Low Brook 
corridor on the south eastern boundary of the site has the potential to be significantly 
improved and turned into a high quality linear attenuation and water quality improvement 
area for S UuDS. 
 The exceptional circumstances justifying its release are set out in Policy P1. 865.860.
Compensatory improvements will be required for the loss of Green Belt as set out in the 
policy. 
 A concept masterplan will be developed to help guide development of this site. 866.861. 
  
 
 23
5 235     
  
  
236 
 Appendices 
   
  
 
 23
7 237 Abbreviations 
 The abbreviations used in this document are as follows: 867.862.
AMP  Automated People Mover 
AMR  Authority Monitoring Report 
ATM  Active Traffic Management  
BBP  Birmingham Business Park 
BLR  Brownfield Land Register 
BREEAM Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 
BVP  Blythe Valley Park 
CA  Combined Authority (as in West Midlands Combined Authority) 
CCC   Committee on Climate Change 
CCG   Clinical Commissioning Groups 
CIL  Community Infrastructure Levy 
CIRIA  Construction Industry Research Information Association 
DfT  Department for Transport 
DLP  Draft Local Plan 
DPA  Dwellings per annum 
DPD   Development Plan Document 
DtC  Duty to Cooperate 
EA  Environment Agency 
EIA  Environmental Impact Assessment 
EIP  Examination in Public 
ERDF   European Regional Development Fund 
EV  Electric Vehicle 
FE  Form of Entry (e.g. 1FE is one form of entry (for schools)) 
FRA  Flood Risk Assessment 
GBA  Green Belt Assessment 
GBSLEP Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership 
GHG  Greenhouse Gas 
GHG  Green House Gas 
GI  Green Infrastructure 
GI  Green Infrastructure 
GTAA  Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 
GVA  Gross Value Added 
HBA  Habitat Biodiversity Audit 
HEDNA  Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 
HIA  Health Impact Assessment 
HMA  Housing Market Area 
HMO  Homes in Multiple Occupation 
HS2  High Speed 2 Rail link 
HWRC  Household Waste and Recycling Centre 
ICT  Information and Communications Technology 
IDP  Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
JLR  Jaguar Land Rover 
JSNA  Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 
KDBH   Knowle, Dorridge and Bentley Heath 
KRN   Key Route Network 
LAA  Local Aggregate Assessment 
LCA  Landscape Character Assessment 
LCWIP  Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan 
LEP  Local Enterprise Partnership   
  
  
238 
 LET&C  Low Emissions Towns and Cities (programme) 
LGS  Local Green Space 
LHN  Local Housing Needs 
LNR  Local Nature Reserve 
LNRS  Local Nature Recovery Strategy  
LNRS  Local Nature Reserve Strategys 
LPA  Local Planning Authority 
LPR  Local Plan Review 
LWS  Local Wildlife Site 
MBC  Metropolitan District Council 
MHCLG Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government 
MRN  Major Road Network 
MSA  Motorway Service Area / Mineral Safeguarding Area 
NCIL  Neighbourhood Community Infrastructure Levy 
NEC   National Exhibition Centre 
NIA  Nature Improvement Area 
NPPF   National Planning Policy Framework 
ONS  Office for National Statistics 
PPG   Planning Practice Guidance 
PPTS  Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 
SEP  Strategic Economic Plan 
SHELAA Strategic Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment 
SLP  Solihull Local Plan (Dec 2013) 
SMBC  Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council 
SME  Small and Medium Enterprises 
SoS  Secretary of State 
SPD   Supplementary Planning Document 
SSSI   Site of Special Scientific Interest 
SUDS   Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
UDP   [Solihull] Unitary Development Plan (Feb 2006) 
UGC  Urban Growth Company 
UHB   University Hospitals Birmingham 
UKC   UK Central 
WMAWP West Midlands Aggregates Working Party  
 WMCA  West Midlands Combined Authority    
  
 
 23
9 239 Monitoring Indicators 
Sustainable Economic Growth 
Policy P1 – UK Central Solihull Hub Area 
 MI01 - Quantum and type of floorspace developed across the UK Central Solihull 
Hub Area 
 MI02 - Quantum and type of floorspace developed on Birmingham and Blythe Valley 
Business Parks. 
 MI03 - Extent to which development is linked to local employment needs (measures 
adopted to target local needs and the quantum of employment). 
P2 – Maintain Strong, Competitive Town Centres  
 MI04 - The quantum of development of retail, office and leisure floorspace in the main 
Solihull town centre. 
 MI05 - The number of dwelling units built in Solihull town centre in accordance with 
Town Centre Masterplan. 
 MI06 - Extent of encroachment of non-retail development into primary retail 
frontages. 
P3 – Provision of Land for General Business and Premises  
 MI07 - Floorspace developed for employment use by type, size and number of 
employees. 
Providing Homes for A ll 
P4A Meeting Housing Needs - Affordable Housing 
 MI08 - Number of affordable dwellings delivered through the planning system. 
 MI09 - Percentage of affordable housing on qualifying sites, with a target of 40%. 
P4B Meeting Housing Needs - Rural Exceptions 
 None 
P4C Meeting Housing Needs - Market Housing 
 MI10 - Mix of market housing reflecting the policy expectations 
P4D Meeting Housing Needs - Self and Custom Housebuilding 
 MI11 - Number of people on the Solihull Self and Custom Housebuilding and number 
of permissions gra nted in each base period. 
 MI12 - Self-build plots: number of relevant permissions granted to Part 1 registrations 
 MI13 - Number of individuals on Part 1 of the register 
 MI14 - Number of associations of individuals on Part 1 of the register 
P4E Meeting Housing Needs - Older and Disabled People 
 MI15 - Percentage of M4(2) delivered on qualifying sites 
 MI16 - Percentage of M4(3) delivered on qualifying sites 
 MI17 - Specialist housing delivered:   
  
  
240 
  Number of developments 
 Number of apartments 
 MI19 - Number of specialist care bedspaces delivered 
P5 – Provision of Land for Housing 
 MI20 - The number of dwellings delivered per annum  in accordance with the stepped 
trajectory. 
 MI21 - Maintain a continuous five years (+5%) housing land supply based on the 
stepped delivery target and taking delivery to date into account. 
P6 - Provision of Accommodation for Gypsies and Travellers 
 MI22 - Whether the  identified need for  permanent residential pitches has been met 
for the period 20 20 – 2025, 2026– – 2031 and 203 1–1 - 2036 for 
 Gypsies and Travellers who meet the PPTS definition  
 Gypsies and Travellers who do not meet the PPTS definition 
 MI23 - The numbers of authorised pitches provided per annum. 
 MI24 - The number of unauthorised developments and encampments per annum. 
Improving Accessibility and Encouraging 
Sustainable Travel 
P7 – Accessibility and Ease of Access  
 MI25 - Percentage of qualifying residential development within accessibility 
parameters. 
 MI26 - Percentage of qualifying B1 office, retail, leisure developments within 
accessibility parameters. 
P8 – Managing Demand for Travel and Reducing Congestion  
 MI27 - Increase the proportion of trips by public transport, walking and cycling into 
Solihull Town Centre during the AM peak period. 
 MI28 - Number of travel plans brought forward with new development 
 MI29 - Percentage change in transport modal share across the Borough for bus, rail 
and cycle use. 
Protecting and Enhancing Our Environment 
P9 – Climate Change  
 MI30 Annual reductions in CO2 emissions 
 MI31 No. of new EV charging points on new developments. 
 MI32 No. of new homes that are built to Future Homes Standard (from 2021) and 
zero  carbon (from 2025 ). 
 MI33 - No. of renewable/low carbon energy generation installations per year. 
P10 – Natural Environment  
 MI34 - Proportion of local sites where positive conservation management is being 
achieved (MHCLG Single data list 160-00).  
  
 
 24
1 241  MI35 - No. of new trees planted per year under WMCA scheme. 
 MI36 - Amount of accessible natural green space created/enhanced each year  
P11 – Water Management  
 MI37 - Planning permissions granted contrary to Environment Agency objections on 
water quality and flood risk grounds. 
P12 – Resource Management  
 MI38 - Amount of waste arising and capacity of waste management facilities in the 
Borough. 
P13 – Minerals  
 MI39 - Progress on this policy will be monitored through the Regional Aggregates 
Working Party Annual Reports which provide data on sub-regional production and 
landbanks. 
P14 – Amenity  
 None 
Promoting Quality Of Place  
P15 – Securing Design Quality  
 MI40 - Number/proportion of developments achieving at least 10 out of 12 ‘green 
lights’ measured against BfL 12 Standard. 
 MI41 - Number/proportion of non-residential developments achieving BREEAM). 
P16 – Conservation Of Heritage Assets And Local Distinctiveness 
 MI42 - Number/proportion of heritage assets at risk (Grade I, II* and II Listed 
Buildings, Scheduled Ancient Monuments, Registered Parks and Gardens and 
Conservation Areas). 
 MI43 - Number/proportion of Conservation Areas with up- to-date Conservation Area 
Appraisals and Management Plans. 
P17 – Countryside and Green Belt  
 MI44 - Loss of Green Belt to development. 
Supporting Local Communities 
P18 – Health and  Well Being  
 MI45 - The number of community facilities lost to alternative development where no 
replacement has been provided. 
 MI46 - The number of new planning permissions for hot food takeaways. 
P19 – Range And Quality Of Local Services  
 MI47 - The number and location of vacant units in town and local centres. 
P20 – Provision for Open Space, Children’s Play, Sport, Recreation and Leisure   
 MI48 - Amount of open space awarded Green Flag Award status. 
 MI49 - Progress towards the priorities for action in the Playing Pitch Strategy 
 MI50 - Amount of open space created and/or enhanced through development.   
  
  
242 
 Delivery and Monitoring 
P21 – Developer Contributions and Infrastructure provision   
 MI51 - Total developer contributions per annum. 
Other  
 MI52 - Number of Neighbourhood Plans adopted. 
   
  
 
 24
3 243 Schedule of Solihull Local Plan 
(2013) Policies to be Retained 
 These paragraphs set the policies in the 2013 plan that are to be retained.  They 868.863.
relate to site allocations made in the earlier plan which are still to be b rought forward. 
Policy P3 – Provision of Land for General Business 
and Premises 
 Those parts of policy P3 (including figure 13) that relate to the following sites: 869.864.
 SLP 27 – Fore, A34 Stratford Road adj M42 
 SLP 28 – Chep/Higginson, Bickenhill Lane, Bickenhill 
 SLP29 – Land north of Clock Interchange, Coventry Road 
 SLP31 – Birmingham Business Park 
Policy P5 – Provision of Land for Housing 
 Those parts of policy P5 (including figure 15) that relate to the following sites: 870.865.
 SLP3  - Simon Digby (200 dwellings47) 
 SLP19 – Riddings Hill48, Balsall Common (65 dwellings) 
 SLP24 – Meriden Road, Hampton in Arden (110 dwellings) 
  
                                                           
47 The SLP indicates a capacity of 200 dwellings, but subsequent work is indicating a likely capacity of 175, and it is this 
latter number that has been included in the land supply as part of this plan. 
48 Also known as Hallmeadow Road   
  
  
244 
 Schedule of Solihull Gypsy & 
Traveller DPD (2014) Policies to 
be Retained 
 This paragraph set out the policies in the 2014 plan that are to be retained.  They 871.866.
relate to site allocations made in the earlier plan which are still to be b rought forward (either 
in whole or in part): 
 Policy GTS 2 – Old Damson Lane 
 Policy GTS 3 – The Warren 
 Policy GTS 4 – The Uplands 
 Policy GTS 5 – The Haven 
 Policy GTS 6 – Canal View 
 Policy GTS 7 – Detailed Planning Considerations 
 Policy GTS 8 – Safeguarding 
   
  
 
 24
5 245 Schedule of Allocations 
 This table sets out the allocations in the plan and cross references them with the 872.867.
reference numbers used in both the Draft Local Plan (2016) and Draft Local Plan 
Supplementary Consultation (2019) (the former site reference numbers). 
Area Policy 
Ref. Site Name  Former Site 
Reference Number  
Balsall 
Common  BC1 Barratt’s Farm  1 
BC2 Frog Lane  2 
BC3 Windmill Lane/Kenilworth Road  3 
BC4 Pheasant Oak Farm  21 
BC5 Trevaillion Stud 22 
BC6 Lavender Hall Farm  23 
Blythe  BL1 West of Dickens Heath  4 
BL2 South of Dog Kennel Lane  12 
BL3 Whitlocks End Farm  26 
Hampton in 
Arden  HA1 Meriden Road , Hampton in Arden  6 
HA2 Oak Farm , Catherine -de-Barnes 24 
Hockley 
Heath  HH1 School Road 25 
Knowle  
 KN1 Hampton Road  8 
KN2 South of Knowle   9 
Meriden  ME1 West of Meriden   10 
North of the 
Borough  NS1 Kingshurst Village Centre  7 
Solihull  
 SO1 East of Solihull  16 
S02 Moat Lane/Vulcan Road  17 
UK Central 
Solihull  UK1 HS2 Interchange/Arden Cross  19 
UK2 Damson Parkway  20   
  
  
246 
 Schedule of Policies 
 This table sets out the policies contained in the plan and which are considered to be 873.868.
strategic policies. 
Chapter  Policy 
Ref. Policy Strategic 
Policy 
Sustainable 
Economic Growth  P1 UK Central Solihull Hub Area  Yes 
P1A Blythe Valley Business Park  Yes 
P2 Maintaining Strong, Competitive  Town 
Centres  Yes 
P3 Provision of Land for General Business 
and Premises  Yes 
Providing Homes for 
All P4A Meeting Housing Needs – Affordable 
Housing  Yes 
P4B Meeting Housing Needs – Rural 
Exceptions  No 
P4C Meeting Housing Needs – Market Housing  No 
P4D Meeting Housing Needs – Self & Custom 
Housebuilding  Yes 
P4E Meeting Housing Needs – Housing for 
Older and Disabled People  Yes 
P5 Provision of Land for Housing  Yes 
P6 Provision of Accommodation for Gypsies 
and Travellers  Yes 
Improving 
Accessibility  and 
Encouraging 
Sustainable  Travel  P7 Accessibility  and Ease of Access  Yes 
P8 Managing Travel Demand and Reducing 
Congestion  Yes 
P8A Rapid Transit  Yes 
Protecting and 
Enhancing our 
Environment  P9 Mitigating and Adapting to Climate 
Change  Yes 
P10 Natural Environment  Yes 
P11 Water and Flood Risk Management  Yes 
P12 Resource Management  Yes  
  
 
 24
7 247 Chapter  Policy 
Ref. Policy Strategic 
Policy 
P13 Minerals  Yes 
P14 Amenity  No 
P14A  Digital Infrastructure and 
Telecommunications  Yes 
Promoting Quality of 
Place  P15 Securing Design Quality  Yes 
P16 Conservation of Heritage Assets and Local 
Distinctiveness  Yes 
P17 Countryside and Green Belt  Yes 
P17A  Green Belt Compensation  Yes 
Health and 
Supporting Local 
Communities  P18 Health & Wellbeing  Yes 
P19 Range & Quality of Local Services  No 
P20 Provision for Open Space, Childrens Play, 
Sport, Recreation and Leisure  Yes 
Delivery & 
Monitoring  P21 Developer Contributions and Infrastructure 
Provision  Yes 
 
    
  
  
248 
  
 
Policy & Delivery 
Economy & Infrastructure Directorate 
Solihull MBC 
Council House 
Manor Square 
Solihull 
B91 3QB 
 
psp@solihull.gov.uk  
 
(0121) 704 8008 
 
www.solihull.gov.uk/lpr  
 