   1                                                        
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   i                                                        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    ii                                                        
 FOREWORD  
Welcome to the pre -submission version of the South Downs Local Plan.  
This is the first Local Plan ever produced for the National Park: a landmark for this very special place. 
It looks rather different from most other local plans because it must recognize the national importance 
of the landscapes and our duty to conserve and enhance them.  
But this Plan is not just about these precious, nationally important, landscapes, their wildlife and cultural 
heritage. It is about the wide range of benefits they provide for us all that must be nurtur ed and 
protected for future generations. It is about our communities that live and work in the National Park 
and their social and economic needs.  
I thank everyone who has helped us create this Plan: those of you who have guided us with your 
comments during  the Options consultation in 2014 and the Preferred Options consultation in 2015.  
This version, which precedes submission to the Secretary of State for public examination, takes into 
account your previously expressed views as well as extensive backing evi dence.  
I am conscious that this is a large and complex document but urge you to provide your comments on 
it so we can produce a Plan worthy of the South Downs National Park.  
 
 
MARGARET PAREN  
CHAIR OF SOUTH DOWNS  NATIONAL PARK AUTHOR ITY 
 
 
 
 
  
   iii                                                        
 KEY MESSAGES  
This is a landscape led Local Plan, looking at the South Downs as a whole for the first time with 
National Park purposes and duty to the fore, to conserve and enhance the landscapes, the special 
qualities of the National Park and communities small and larg e within it. The Plan introduces a new 
spatial portrait for the South Downs, which is set out overleaf.  
The Local Plan considers the geology, geography and river catchments that have shaped the landscapes 
of the National Park and their influence on the evolution of settlement patterns . We attempt to 
capture principles of ‘ecosystem services’ into the making and delivery of the Local Plan. This approach 
seeks to ensure the services nature provides us (such as woodfuel, clean water,  health and well -being)  
from nature’s own ‘capital’ (timber, water, fresh air) is factored into decision making and allocations.  
This thinking results in an emphasis on landscape and the nature of the areas as mapped out in the 
South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Areas (S DILCA). This has informed the evidence base, 
which is wide and varied and deliberately includes elements important to the National Park’s special 
qualities.  
Development allocations and policies are therefore landscape capacity led, not target driven. This 
complies with the National Planning Policy Framework and the DEFRA Vision and Circular 2010 on 
National Parks. These documents, as Margaret Paren advises in the Foreword, do support our need 
to produce a plan fit for the conservation and enhancement of the  landscape and, in relation to housing, 
local affordable homes provision. Therefore whilst we end up with site allocations, these are driven 
by landscape focussed assessments and the Local Plan approach as a whole, rather than by any 
individual piece of ev idence.  
Nevertheless we are subject to scrutiny and the plan has to be found ‘sound’ if it is to conserve the 
wider landscape to which the highest degree of protection has been afforded by planning system.  We 
have searched thoroughly and rigorously  for su itable development sites;  it is just that in carrying out 
this work landscape conservation takes the primary role.  
We have a clear spatial strategy, one of dispersing a ‘medium’ level of growth throughout communities 
within the National Park, rather than a llowing growth just around the largest settlements. This has 
come from, and is broadly supported by, local communities, evidence of local need and a recognition 
that even the smallest communities need to live, breath and prosper over the next 15 years if l andscape 
capacity allows.  
A strategic approach of dispersed growth combined with a landscape capacity analysis within the Local 
Plan, to formulate policies and allocate sites is driven by a number of key factors:  
 Evidence Base – Studies / information such  as Tranquillity mapping, Dark Night Skies, Transport 
Assessments, Ecoserve mapping to know what ecosystem services are available or in deficit  
 Evidence Base – The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment where many parameters 
relate to landscape mat ters such as views, impact upon the special qualities of the National Park 
and other statutory assessments such as Habitat Regulation Assessments and Sustainability 
Appraisals  
 Community Engagement and Feedback – particularly Neighbourhood Plans but also ind ividual and 
collective Parish Meetings, use of a Landowners network, the South Downs Partnership and 
discussions with statutory agencies  
 Officer and Member knowledge and professional insight as to what may be possible and what may 
be available. Given the r ange of officers involved in the Local Plan, the extensive knowledge of 
the National Park and the experience of Members in so many areas relevant to plan making, this 
is key to sound plan making  
We have, in advance of the Local Plan, but using the same approach and where possible evidence base, 
actively promoted and assisted in 50 Neighbourhood Plans, all incorporated into the Local Plan. Th is 
ensures local knowledge and experience is used to fullest effect in creating a single Local Plan over 
such a large area.         iv                                                                                             
  
   v                                                                                             
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    vi                                                                                             
 HAVE YOUR SAY  
The consultation on the Pre-Submission  South Downs  Local Plan  will run from 26 September to 21 
November 2017.  
The quickest and easiest way to input into the consultation is to access the consultation website: 
https://www.southdowns.gov.uk/planning/planning -policy/natio nal-park-local-plan/ 
Alternatively you can fill in an electronic comment form and email it to 
planningpolicy@southdowns.gov.uk  or fill out a paper copy comment form and write to the South 
Downs National Park Authority (SDNPA) at the following address:  
Planning Policy  
South Downs National Park Authority  
South Downs Centre  
North Street  
Midhurst  
West Sussex  GU29 9DH  
Everyone is welcome to comment on the Local Plan. All comments received in writing by the SDNPA 
will be passed in their entirety to the Local Plan Inspector on submission of the plan. This means that 
any comments you make will be considered by both the Authority and t he Inspector. Whilst you may 
comment on any aspect of the Local Plan, your comments should ideally focus on these questions1:  
 Has the Plan been positively prepared? (Based on a strategy that provides for the development 
and infrastructure needs)  
 Is the Pl an justified? (Founded on proportionate evidence and is the most appropriate strategy 
against all reasonable alternatives)  
 Is the Plan effective? (Deliverable and based on effective joint working on cross -boundary strategic 
priorities)  
 Is the Plan consist ent with national policy? (Enable the delivery of sustainable development in 
accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework  and consistent with the  DEFRA Vision & 
Circular on English National Parks and the Broads ) 
 Has the plan met legal and procedu ral requirements?  
So that your response can be accurately recorded, please let us know which chapter and / or policy 
you are commenting on. Please note that all representations will be published on the National Park 
Authority website and anonymous comments  cannot be accepted.  
Please do not hesitate to contact the Planning Policy team by email at 
planningpolicy@southdowns.gov.uk  or telephone on 01730 814810 if you have any queries about 
this consultatio n. 
  
                                                      
1 Tests of soundness     vii                                                                                             
 CONTENTS  
CHAPTERS                                                                                  PAGE No.                                                      
1. Introduction                                                                                                       1       
2. Vision & Objectives         16 
3. Spatial Portrait  and Spatial  Strategy       18 
4. Core Policies          39 
5. A Thriving Living Landscape        50 
a) Landscape          51  
b) Biodiversity          68 
c) Historic Environment        79 
d) Water          87 
6. People Connected to Places        94 
a) Sustainable Transport        95  
b) Understanding and Enjoyment of the National Park     106 
7. Towards a Sustainable Future        113 
a) Development         114 
b) Homes  (Strategic policies )       121 
c) Affordable Homes         129 
d) Homes (Development Management Policies)      136 
e) Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople     142 
f) Employment          147 
g) Town Centres and Retail        155 
h) Agricultur e and Forestry        163 
i) Infrastructure         171 
j) Green Infrastructure         177 
k) Climate Change         186 
l) Advertisements and Signage        196 
m) Pollution and Contamination       198 
8. Strategic Sites          201 
9. Sites and Settlements         218 
10. Implementation and Monitoring        356 
    viii                                                                                             
 APPENDICES                PAGE No.                                                      
1. Broad A reas and River Corridors  430  
2. Local Plan Policies Superseded by the South Downs Local Plan    433 
3. Marketing Requirements for Change of Use Applications     527 
Glossary           530 
 
     ix                                                                                             
 POLICIES                                            PAGE No.                                                      
 Core Policy SD1: Sustainable Development  39 
 Core Policy SD2: Ecosystems Services  45 
 Core Policy SD3: Major Development  47 
 Strategic Policy SD4: Landscape Character  53 
 Strategic Policy SD5: Design  56 
 Strategic Policy SD6: Safeguarding Views  60 
 Strategic Policy SD7: Relative Tranquillity  61 
 Strategic Policy SD8: Dark Night Skies  64  
 Strategic Policy SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  70 
 Strategic Policy SD10: International Sites  74 
 Development Management Policy SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  77 
 Strategic Policy SD12: Historic Environment  80 
 Development Management Policy SD13: Listed Buildings  82 
 Development Management Policy SD14: Climate Chan ge Mitigation and  83 
Adaptation of Historic Buildings   
 Development Management Policy SD15: Conservation Areas  84 
 Development Management Policy SD16: Archaeology  85 
 Strategic Policy SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  89 
 Development Management Policy SD18: The Open Coast  91 
 Strategic Policy SD19: Transport and Accessibility  96  
 Strategic Policy SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  98 
 Development Management Policy SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and  101 
Public A rt 
 Development Management Policy SD22: Parking Provision  104    x                                                                                             
  Strategic Policy SD23: Sustainable Tourism  108 
 Development Management Policy SD24: Equestrian Uses  111 
 Strategic Policy SD25: Development Strategy  116 
 Strategic Policy SD26: Supply of Homes  122 
 Strategic Policy SD27: Mix of Homes  126 
 Strategic Policy SD28: Affordable Homes  130 
 Strategic Policy SD29: Rural Exception Sites  134 
 Development Management Policy SD30: Replacement Dwellings  136  
 Development Management Policy SD31: Extensions to existing d wellings,   138 
and provision of annexes and outbuildings   
 Development Management Policy SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers ’ 139 
Dwellings   
 Strategic Policy SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  144  
 Strategic Policy SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  148 
 Strategic Policy SD35: Employment Land  151 
 Strategic Policy SD36: Town and Village Centres  157 
 Development Management Policy SD37: Development in Town and Village  158 
Centres  
 Development Management Policy SD38: Shops outsi de Centres  160 
 Development Management Policy SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  164 
 Development Management Policy SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  166 
 Development Management Policy SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 168 
Forestry Buildings   
 Strategic Policy SD42: Infrastructure  171 
 Development Management Policy SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  173    xi                                                                                             
  Development Management Policy SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities  175 
Infrastructure   
 Strategic Policy SD45: Green Infrastructure  178 
 Development Management Policy SD46: Provision and Protection of Open Space,  180 
Sport a nd Recreational Facilities and B urial grounds  / Cemeteries   
 Development Management Policy SD47: Local Green Spaces  184 
 Strategic Policy SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources    188 
 Strategic Policy SD49: Flood Risk Management  190 
 Development Management Policy SD50: Sustainable Drainage  Systems  192 
 Development Management Policy SD51: Renewable Energy  193 
 Development Management Policy SD52: Shop Fronts  196 
 Development Management Policy SD53: Adverts  197 
 Development Management Policy SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  198 
 Development Management Policy SD55: Contaminated Land  199 
 Strategic Site Policy SD56: Shoreha m Cement Works  209 
 Strategic Site Policy SD57: North Street Quarter and adjacent Eastgate area,  215 
Lewes  
 Allocation Policy SD58: Former Allotments, Alfriston  222 
 Allocation Policy SD59: Kings Ride, Alfriston   225 
 Allocation Policy: SD60: Land at Clements Close, Binsted  228 
 Allocation Policy SD61: New Barn Stables, The Street, Binsted  230 
 Allocation Policy SD62: Land at Greenway Lane, Buriton  233 
 Allocation Policy SD63: Land South of the A272 at Hinton Marsh, Cheriton  237 
 Allocation Policy SD64: La nd South of London Road, Coldwaltham  242 
 Allocation Policy SD65: Land East of Warnford Road, Corhampton  245    xii                                                                                             
  Allocation Policy SD66: Land at Park Lane, Droxford  249 
 Allocation Policy SD67: Cowdray Works Yard, Easebourne  253 
 Allocation Policy SD68: Land at E gmont Road, Easebourne  256 
 Allocation Policy SD69: Former Easebourne School, Easebourne  260 
 Allocation Policy SD70: Land behind the Fridays, East Dean (East Sussex)  262 
 Allocation Policy SD71: Land at Elm Rise, Findon  266 
 Allocation Policy SD72: Soldiers F ield House, Findon  269 
 Allocation Policy SD73: Land at Petersfield Road, Greatham  273 
 Allocation Policy SD74: Land at Fern Farm, Greatham  276 
 Allocation Policy SD75: Half Acre, Hawkley  279 
 Allocation Policy SD76: Land at Itchen Abbas House, Itchen Abbas  282 
 Allocation Policy SD77: Land at Castelmer Fruit Farm , Kingston  near Lewes  285 
 Allocation Policy SD78: The Pump House, Kingston   287 
 Strategic Housing Allocation Policy SD79: Land at Old Malling Farm, Lewes  293 
 Allocation Policy SD80: Malling Brooks, Lew es 298 
 Strategic  Housing  Allocation Policy SD81: West Sussex County Council Depot  302 
and former Brickworks site, Midhurst  
 Strategic  Housing  Allocation Policy SD82: Holmbush Caravan Park, Midhurst  308 
 Allocation Policy SD83: Land at the Fairway , Midhurst  312 
 Allocation Policy SD84: Land at Lamberts Lane, Midhurst  315 
 Allocation Policy SD85: Land at Park Crescent, Midhurst  318 
 Allocation Policy SD86: Offham Barns, Offham  321 
 Allocation Policy SD87: Land at Church Lane, Pyecombe  323 
 Allocation Policy SD88: L and at Ketchers Field, Selborne  326 
 Allocation Policy SD89: Land at Pulens Lane, Sheet  330    xiii                                                                                             
  Allocation Policy SD90: Land at Loppers Ash, South Harting  334 
 Allocation Policy SD91: Land North of the Forge, South Harting  337 
 Allocation Policy SD92: Stedham Sawmill, Stedham  340 
 Allocation Policy SD93: Land South of Church Road, Steep  344 
 Allocation Policy SD94: Land at Ramsdean Road, Stroud  348 
 Allocation Policy SD9 5: Land South of Heather Close, West Ashling  351 
 Allocation Policy SD 96: Land at Long Priors, W est Meon     354 
   1                                                           
 1. INTRODUCTION  
It is important that the plan is read as a whole. All Local Plan policies should be viewed 
together and not in isolation in the preparation and consideration of planning 
applications. All development plan policies will be taken into account in determining 
planning applications, along with other material considerations. The polic ies in this Local 
Plan do not list or cross -reference to all other policies that may be relevant. The Core 
Policies set out the overarching principles of development for the National Park.  
What is the Local Plan?  
1.1 The South Downs was established as a Nation al Park in 2010 . The South Downs National Park 
Authority ( National Park Authority ) became the local planning authority for the National Park 
in 2011. The National Park contains over 1,600km2 of England’s most iconic lowland landscapes 
stretching from Winch ester in the west to Eastbourne in the east. The South Downs Local Plan  
is the first Local Pl an to plan for the National Park as a single entity.  
1.2 On adoption, th is Local Plan  will become the statutory development plan for the whole National 
Park, along with the minerals and wa ste plans and ‘made’ (adopted) Neighbourhood 
Development P lans. The planning system in this country is plan -led and statute states that 
decisions on plan ning applications must be taken in accordance with the development plan unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise. Accordingly this  Local Plan will be used in the 
determination of planning applications.  
1.3 This Pre-Submission  Plan will accordingly be given some weight in the determination of planning 
applications by the National Park Authority  and on its behalf. This weight will increase according 
to the stage of preparation of the Local Plan, the extent to which there are unresolved 
objections to rele vant policies and the degree of consistency with  the relevant policies with the 
NPPF.  
1.4 This is the Pre-Submission version of the  Local Plan  (subsequently referred to as the Local Plan) 
and is being published for public consultation under Regulation 19 of Th e Town and Country 
Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 . This version of the plan follows on from the 
Options  and the Preferred Options  documents that were published for public consultation  in 2014 
and 2015 respectively.  
1.5 This Local Plan doe s not deal with minerals and waste. Instead , policies on this subject are 
developed through joint minerals and waste plans with the adjoining relevant  authorities 
covering the National Park.  
1.6 All planning applications should make reference to all relevant p olicies in minerals and waste 
plans, this Local Plan and Neighbourhood Development P lans. All parts of the development plan 
are complementary, and aim to fulfil the statutory purposes and duty of the National Park 
Authority.  
1.7 The Local Plan covers the time period 2014 to 203 3. This means that it will cover a 15 -year 
time period from its projected time of adoption in 201 8. 
 
 
   2                                                           
 What is the Policies Map ? 
1.8 The South Downs Policies Map  illustrates how the policies in the adopted development plan will 
apply. The Policies Map  consists of three overview maps covering  all of the National Park and 
about  50 inset maps. Together, these show  all site allocations  and designations that are most 
relevant to the determination of planning applications, including all those con tained in made 
NDPs. It also shows, where practicable, planning constraints, for example environmental 
designations and conservation areas. The published paper and PDF (portable document format) 
versions of the Policies Map show some but not all planning c onstraints. The National Park 
Authority will also maintain an interactive version of the Policies Map, which will include more 
features than the paper and PDF versions, and allow a more detailed look at specific localities.  
1.9 The adopted Policies Map is not itself part of the statutory development plan. It will therefore 
be updated as required to reflect updated information , for example the making of further NDPs.  
What does the Local Plan seek to achieve?  
1.10 The Local Plan sets out how the National Park Authority  will manage development over the 
next 15 years. This is based on the statutory purposes and duty for national parks as specified 
in the Environment Act 1995 : 
FIGURE 1.1: THE PURP OSES AND DUTY  
The National Park purposes are:  
1. To conserve and enhanc e the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the area  
2. To promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyme nt of the special qualities of the 
National P ark by the public  
The National Park Authority  also has a duty when carrying out the purposes : 
 To seek to foster the economic and social well -being of the local commun ities within the National 
Park 
In addition, Section 62 of the Environment Act 1995  also req uires all relevant authorities, including 
statutory undertakers and other public bo dies, to have regard to these purposes. Where there is an 
irreconcilable conflict between the statutory purposes, statute requires the Sandford Principle to be 
applied and the first purpose of the National Park will be given priority.    3                                                           
 1.11 The DEFRA  Vision and  Circular on English National Parks and the Broads2 provides guidance to 
national park authorities on how to achieve their purposes and duty. The Local Plan builds on 
the framework of the South Downs National Park Partnership Management Plan3 (PMP), which 
was adopted by the National Park Authority  in 2013 following extensive consultation and 
dialogue with many interested parties and groups. The PMP sets out an overarching strategy for 
the management of the National Park. Local Plan policies deliver many of the outcomes and 
policies of the PMP; this was set out in greater detail in tables throughout the Preferred Options 
document.  
1.12 The PMP’s starting point was the State of the South Downs National Park Report4, 2012, which 
provided baseline information against  which the success of future action arising from the PMP 
could be measured. The facts set out in the report form a fundamental part of the Local Plan 
evidence base. The seven special qualities of the South Downs National Park formed the basis 
for the State of the South Downs National Park Report . The special qua lities do not sit in isolation, 
but are interconnected and mutually reinforcing . The specia l qualities are illustrated in F igure 
1.2. 
                                                      
2 Vision and Circular on English National Parks and the Broads (DEFRA, 2010)  
3 Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your South Downs National Park 2014 -2019 (South Downs 
National Park Authority, 2013)  
4 State of th e South Downs National Park Report  (South Downs National Park Authority, 2012)    4                                                           
 FIGURE 1.2:  THE SPE CIAL QUALITIES OF TH E SOUTH DOWNS 
NATIONAL PARK  
1.13 Landscape is the key to all of the special qualities.  The South Downs was designated as a National 
Park in recognition of its exceptional natural beauty, for the opportunities to learn about and 
appreciate its special qualities, and as a landscape of national importance.  Therefore it is entirely 
appropriate to take a landscape -led approach to the formulation of its Local Plan. The National 
Planning Policy Framework5 (NPPF) states that great weight should be given to conserving 
landscape and scenic beau ty in national parks, which have the highest status of protection in 
relation to landscape and scenic beauty along with the Broads and Areas of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty (AONB).  
What are ecosystem services?  
1.14 Ecosystem services come from our natural capital  – our natural assets which provide valuable 
resources to people in a range of different ways. Some examples of natural capital are:  
 Animal and plant species and their habitats;  
 Soils; 
 Freshwater rivers, streams, lakes and ponds;  
 Aquifers  storing water bel ow the ground;  
 Minerals resources ; and 
 Coasts and sea.  
                                                      
5 National Planning Policy Framework (2012)  
  5                                                           
 1.15 People are able to enjoy a huge variety of benefits  from these natural assets,  ranging from the 
food they eat and water they consume , to outdoor experiences and improved health.  These 
benefits to society can be seen as services, all of which are interlinked. These benefits are called 
ecosystem services. M ore and better quality natural capital should lead to more and better 
benefits for people and society –in other words, enhanced  ecosystem services. The landscapes 
of the South Downs provide a multitude of ecosystem services. This is illustrated in Figure 1.3.  
                  FIGURE 1.3: THE FOUR ASPECTS O F ECOSYSTEM SERVICES  
 
 
1.16 Our natural capital  is extremely vulnerable to impa cts from human activities, as it cannot be 
readily substituted.  It is therefore important that it is conserved and enhanced in good condition . 
The concept of e cosystem services allows the environment to be seen as a  valuable asset to 
society, in a way which can in turn be used to steer  growth to the right places , and ensure that 
growth incorporates features that support these benefits . In addition, our natural capital  needs 
careful management and stewardship to ensure that the multiple benefits it gives to society are 
supported and protected . 
What is the Structure of the Local Plan?  
1.17 The Local Plan includes a vision, objectives and sets of  policies which together provide a policy 
framework for assessing planning applications and guiding development in the National Park  as 
follows : 
 The 2050 Vision  looks ahead to a future National Park. A set of objectives act as stepping 
stones between the Vision , the s patial strateg y and the Local Plan’s policies  
  6                                                           
  The Spatial Portrait  provides a pen portrait of the National Park today. This includes  a 
snapshot of the National Park in key facts and figures, and a description of the broad areas 
of the National Park, which represent the strategic landscape -defined areas upon which the 
Local Plan approach is built.  The Spatial St rategy  captures the high -level plan for 
managing growth and change across the National Park  
 Core P olicies  deal with the overarching principles of development for the National Park.  
These core policies relate to the purposes and duty, the ecosystem service s approach and 
major development  
 The National Park -wide policies of the Local Plan are set out in three main chapters, which 
follow the headings of the PMP:  
 A thriving living landscape  
 People connected to places  
 Towards a sustainable future  
1.18 The policies in  these sections have been defined as:  
 Strategic P olicies , which  are considered fundamental to achieving the overall 
Vision for the National Park and are l inked to its special qualities  
 Development Management P olicies , which  are listed alongside the relevant 
strategic policies. They provide more detail on specific issues such as shopfronts and 
advertisements  
 Strategic site allocations  relate to Shoreham Cement Works in Upper Beeding and the 
North Street Quart er and Eastergate  Area of Lewes  
 Allocation P olicies  allocate sites for devel opment across the National Park  
 The Implementation and Monitoring chapter  explains the mechanisms for delivering 
the Local Plan  objectives, and how the policies will be monitored. In  addition , the Local 
Plan includes : 
 Appendices  to set out further technical details and guidance to support policy 
implementation  
 A Glossary  explains technic al terms used in the Local Plan  
 The Policies Map  is a spatial interpretation of the development plan poli cies 
covering the National Park  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   7                                                           
 How have the Local Plan Policies been prepared?  
Landscape  and ecosystem services  
1.19 All the Local Plan policies have been formulated putting landscape first and then peoples’ 
interaction with it . This is in line with the purposes of national parks to conserve and enhance 
the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the area, and promote opportunities for the 
understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities. The Local Plan and its policies seek to 
ensure that t he benefits and services people and wider society get from the natural environment 
are recognised and enhanced.  Many Local Plan policies require development proposals to 
conserve and enhance various aspects of natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage . The 
extent to which development proposals will be expected to both conserve and enhance is 
proportionate to the scale and impact of the development.    
Evidence  
1.20 All of the Local Plan policies are supported by adequate, up -to-date, relevant and proportionate 
evidence.  A Whole Plan Viability Assessment6 has been carried out, which tests the ability of a 
range of types of development  to viably meet the emerging  Local Plan requirements and adopted 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) . All the support ing documents that the Authority consider 
to be relevant to the preparation of this Local Plan form the Core Document Library . These 
documents will be submitted for examination alongside the Local Plan.   
1.21 Figure 1. 4 illustrates the statutory framework, pla nning policy documents and evidence based 
studies that are linked to the Local Plan.  
Public consultation and engagement with parishes  
1.22 Local Plan policies have been formulated in consultation with local communities, building on 
extensive engagement on the PMP and the State of the Park Report . The views and input of the 
local community are vital to us and we have undertaken a considerable amount of public 
engagement, particularly with the town and parish councils. The Authority also benefits from 
active engag ement with a number of groups including the South Downs Partnership and the 
South Downs Land Managers’ Group, who give us a wide range of expert views from people 
who work and invest in the National Park.  
1.23 The first formal round of public consultation on the Local Plan was on the Options Consultation 
Document in spring 2014. The Progress from Options to Preferred Options7 report sets out all the 
issues and options consulted on, the main issues raised and how these main issues were 
addre ssed in the formulation of the preferred o ptions. The second public consultation was on 
the Preferred Options Local Plan8 in autumn 2015. Ap proximately 400 individuals and organisations 
made approximately 2,640 individual repre sentations on the Local Plan. 77% of people who 
expressed an opinion supported or, supported with changes, Local Plan policies and/or chapters. 
                                                      
6 Whole Plan Viability Assessment and Affordable Housing Update (BNP Paribas, 2017)  
7 South Downs Local Plan – Progress from Issues a nd Options to Preferred Options (South Downs National 
Park Authority, 2015)  
8 South Downs Local Plan: Preferred Options (South Downs National Park Authority, 2015)    8                                                           
 A Consultation Statement9 has been produced to support this Pre-Submission Local Plan , which 
summarises the main issues raised by these representations and how they have been taken into 
account in this iteration of the Local Plan.  An informal round of consultation took place in 
autumn 2016 with all the town and parish councils of the National Park . This focused on Sites 
& Settlements and asked for the expert opinions  of the town and parish councils on emerging 
Local Plan allocations and designations .
                                                      
9 Statement in accordance with Regulation 22 (1) (c) of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England)  
Regulations 2012 (Consultation Statement) (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)   
9 
 FIGURE 1 .4:  POLICIES AND PLAN S LINKED TO THE SOUTH DOWNS LOCAL PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Parks and Countryside Act 1949; Environment Act 1995,  incorporating  
Statutory Purposes of the National Park and Duty of the National Park Authority  
Special Qualities of the South Downs National Park (2011)  
South Downs National Park Partnership 
Management Plan (2014) including Vision 
for 2050  
  
 
SOUTH DOWNS LOCAL PLAN  
Joint Minerals and Waste 
Local Plans  
Community Infrastructure Levy 
Charging Schedule  
Neighbourhood 
Development Plans  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
Supplementary Planning Documents  
 Statement of Community Involvement  
Parish Plans, 
Village Design 
Statements, 
Local Landscape 
Character 
Assessments  
Public 
Consultation  
Duty to 
Cooperat e:   
Cross 
boundary 
strategic  issues  
e.g. Green 
Infrastructure 
Framework  
Evidence base:  
e.g. Integrated 
Landscape Character 
Assessm ent, Strategic 
Housing Market 
Assessment, Strategic 
Housing Land 
Availability 
Assessment, 
Employment Land 
Review  
Policies  and evidence of 
the Joint Core Strategies 
prepared with East 
Hampshire, Lewes, 
Wealden, Winchester 
and Worthing Councils  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990; Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004; 
Marine & Coastal Access Act 2009; Localism Act 2011  
National Planning Policy Framework; National Planning Practice Guidance ; Marine Policy 
Statement  
Sustainability 
Appraisal, 
Habitat 
Regulations 
Assessment  
State of the South Downs National Park report (2012)  
National Parks Vision and Circular 2010  
 Natural Environment White Paper 2010  10 
  Sustainability Appraisal  
1.24 The purpose of a Sustainability A ppraisal (SA) is to promote sustainable development through 
the integration of social, environmental and economic considerations into the preparation of 
the Local Plan. Both the Local Plan and its accompanying SA meet the requirements of the 
Strategic Environment al Assessment (SEA) Directive. The Authority considers that this plan sets 
out t he most appropriate strategy for development in the National Park when considered 
against the reasonable alternatives. The policies and sites identified in the Local Plan have been 
appraised against sustainability objectives on an iterative basis. These it erations identify how 
emerging policies help to achieve the relevant social, environmental and economic objectives, 
and recommend how sustainability could be improved. These recommendations have been 
taken into account in the drafting of this Local Plan.  
Duty to Cooperate  
1.25 The National Park Authority  has worked collaboratively with many other bodies to ensure that 
strategic priorities across local boundaries are properly coordinated and clearly reflected in this 
Local Plan. The key cross -boundary strategic issues identified by the Authority for the pu rpose 
of fulfilling the duty to cooperate are:  
 Conserving and enhancing the natural beauty  of the area  
 Conserving and enhancing the region’s biodiversity  includ ing green infrastructure issues  
 The delivery of new homes , including affordable homes and pitch es for Gypsies and 
Travellers  and Travelling Showpeople  
 The promotion of sustainable tourism  
 Development of the local economy  
 Improving the efficiency of transport  networks by enhancing the proportion of travel by 
sustainable modes and promoting policies which reduce the need to travel  
1.26 The size of the National Park, and the numerous local authority and other boundaries, has made 
the duty to cooperate vital to the formulation of this Local Plan. Evidence of this is provided in 
the National Park Authority  Duty to Cooperate  Statement10 published at the same time as this 
plan.  
1.27 The positive engagement on cross -boundary issues has involved all the districts, boroughs, city 
and one unitary authority that fall partly within the National Park . The National Park Au thority  
has engaged positively with all the strategic planning groupings both at an officer and member 
level that work across administrative boundaries. Figure 1. 5 shows all of the local authorities 
within and adjoining the National Park.  
1.28 The South Downs National Park Authority  has also engaged constructively with all the relevant 
‘specific’ bodies , who are responsible for advising on  statutory and key infrastructure 
requirements. They includ e Natural England, Historic England, the Environment Agency, 
Highw ays England and the Marine Management Organisation.  
                                                      
10 Duty to Cooperate Statement (South Downs National Park A uthority, 2017)  11 
  1.29 There has been collaborative working with the three Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) 
covered by the National Park – Coast to Capital (C2C), Enterprise M3  (EM3) and South East 
(SELEP). The National Park Authority is more involved with C2C than the other LEPs as it 
covers around two thirds of the  National Park’s area . 
1.30 The National Park incorporates 17.5km of open coastline; as such, it has a duty under the Marine 
and Coastal Access Act (MACAA) Section 58 (3) to consider relevant marine planning documents 
for any decision that might affect the marine area. Preparation of the Local Plan has been 
integrated with the preparation of the South Marine Plan insofar as it affects the marine 
environment.12                                                                                                            
 FIGURE 1. 5:  ADMINISTRATIVE BO UNDARIES AND THE SOU TH DOWNS NATIONAL PA RK 
 
 
13                                                          
 What are the statutory requirements of the Local Plan?  
1.31 The statutory requirements for preparation of local plans are set out in the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 200411, and guidance is contained in the NPPF and the National Planning 
Practice Guidance (NPPG). The submission version of the Local Plan will  be examined by an 
independent inspector whose role is to assess whether it has been prepared  in accordance with 
the duty to cooperate, legal and procedural requirements, and whether it is sound. The tests of 
soundness are that it is positively prepared, j ustified, effective and consistent with national policy. 
The Soundness Self -Assessment Checklist12 and the Legal Compliance Checklist13 published at the 
same time as this Pre-Submission Local Plan  demonstrate how the  tests of soundness have been 
met and proof that all legal requirements have been met.  
How will this Local Plan be implemented?  
1.32 The National Park Authority  delivers its planning function uniquely through a partnership with 
Local Authorities with land inside the National Park boundary. In  2016-17, some 87% of the 
4,953  planning and related applications that were determined were dealt with by host authorities 
acting on behalf of the National Park Authority .  
1.33 Any reference in this Plan to ‘the Authority’ relates to the South Downs National Park Au thority  
or the host Authority determining applications on its behalf. Where the National Park Authority  
is specifically referred to, this means the South Downs Nationa l Park Authority itself and not 
any host authority.  
What does  this Local Plan replace?  
1.34 At present, planning decisions are made in accordance with  national policy and with the policies 
contained within the adopted local plans of host authorities or, where applicable, joint core 
strategies adopted by the host authority and the National Park Au thority .  
1.35 On adoption , the policies of this Local Plan will replace all the saved local plan and core strategy 
policies inherited by the South Downs National Park Authority when  it became the local 
planning authority for  the National Park in April 201 1 other than those policies relating to 
minerals and waste. It will also replace all joint core strategies relating to the National Park 
adopted since April 2011 other than those plans relating to minerals and waste. The policies to 
be replaced are listed in Appendix 2  along with  the specific policies they will be replaced by.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
11 Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act (2004) 
12 Soundness Self -Assessment Checklist  for South Downs Local Plan (South Downs National Park Authority,  
2017)  
13 Legal Compliance  Checklist  for South Downs Local Plan (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)  
  
 
14                                                          
 What is the relationship between the Local Plan and neighbourhood development plans?  
1.36 The Local Plan establishes the strategic planning policy framework . However at a local level, 
neighbourhood planning provides a powerful set of tools for local people to ensure that they 
get the right types of developme nt for their community. When a  Neighbourhood Development 
Plan (NDP)  is ‘made’ (adopted ), it becomes part of the development plan for  the National Park , 
and its policies will be used to determine planning applications within the relevant parish 
alongside the Local Pla n and mineral and waste plans.  
1.37 NDPs are  being prepared by many communities across the National Park . The National Park 
Authority  is fully supportive of all parish and town councils that have expressed an interest in 
preparing an NDP for their community.  The National Park Authority’s website lists all made 
and emerging NDPs.  
1.38 All NDPs, both partly and w holly within the Nationa l Park, need to be in general conformity 
with the strategic policies contained in the final adopted version of this Local Plan. NDPs can 
allocate land for development in line with the strategic policies  and targets  set out in this Local 
Plan. They can also  formulate development management policies specific to their parish or town.  
It is important to note that the focus of NDPs is on guiding development rather than stopping 
it.  The Authority is working proactively with all neighbourhood planning groups to ensure that 
emerging NDPs are consistent with the Local Plan . Any ‘made’ NDP that  deviates significantly 
from this  Local Plan when it is adopted will require a review.  
1.39 It is important that all of the National Park is planned for. This Local Plan does not  generally  
allocate any development in parishes with a n NDP. Exceptions to this are strategic sites  / 
strategic allocation s, or where a NDP itself does not allocate sites to meet Local Plan provisions .  
It does allocate sites in areas without an NDP . It is n ecessary for NDPs to proceed in a timely 
fashion in order to avoid there being any policy gaps. Nearly all  NDPs that are  allocat ing 
development sites  have progressed to a pre-submission stage . This is a significant and important 
achievement for all the volunteers who have contributed  to these  plans.  
1.40 In order to provide some flexibility should  unexpected delays occur  to NDPs, further 
Development Plan Documents  (DPD)  may be programmed . These  will allocate sites as 
necessary to accommodate the levels of gro wth set out in this plan. Additional DPDs  may be 
taken forward if NDPs have not progress ed in a timely fashion. This will be monitored and 
reported in the yearly Authority Monitoring Report.  
1.41 Other forms of community -led plans, such as parish plans and vill age design statements may be 
more appropriate for some towns and villages than NDPs. Although these other plans would 
not be made part of the development plan for the National Park , they may form material 
considerations in the determination of planning app lications . These types of community plans  
can become Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) , thereby assuming greater weight in the 
decision -making process,  if they undergo the statutory periods of consultat ion set out in the 
regulations.  
 
 
 
  
 
15                                                          
 What are the next stages of the Local Plan?  
1.42 Having undergone public scrutiny, this Pre-Submission version of the  Local Plan  will be submitted 
to the Secretary of State , via the Planning Inspectorate , for independent examination as soon as 
practicably possible after the  close of this consultation. The sustainability appraisal, Policies Map, 
Core Document Library and all the representations made on this version of the Local Plan will 
also be submitted. The examination lasts from the date of Submission to the date on which  the 
Inspector’s final report is dispatched. The National Park Authority  aims to adopt a sound Local 
Plan in 201 8. 
1.43 Figure 1. 6 sets out the main stages in the preparation of the Local Plan along with key dates and 
references to the Town and Country Planning  (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012.           
          FIGURE  1.6:  TIMELINE FOR LOCA L PLAN PREPARATION  
Local Plan stage  Regulation  Date  
Options Consultation  18 February -April 2014  
Preferred Options Consultation  18 September -October 2015  
Pre-Submission  Consultation  19 September -November  2017 
Submission to Secretary of State  22 March  2018 
Examination  24 March - July 2018 
Adoption  26 September  2018 
     16                                                          
 2. VISION AND OBJECTIVE S 
2.1 The Vision for the South Downs National Park ( the National Park) is set out in the Partnership 
Management Pla n14 (PMP). This Vision describes where we want to be in  2050 and it is the 
overarching vision for the South Downs Local Plan. It applies across the whole National Park, 
but the ways in which it could be achieved will vary from area to area based on the 
characteristics and opportunities in that area.    
FIGURE 2.1: A VISION FOR THE NAT IONAL PARK  
By 2050 in the South Downs National Park:  
The iconic English lowland landscapes and heritage will have been conserved and greatly enhanced. 
These inspirational and distinctive places, where people live, work, farm and relax, are adapting well 
to the impacts of climate change and other pressures.  
People will understand, value, and look after the vital natural services that the National Park 
provides. Large areas of high -quality and well -managed habitat will form a netwo rk supporting wildlife 
throughout the landscape.  
Opportunities will exist for everyone to discover, enjoy, understand and value the National Park 
and its special qualities. The relationship between people and landscape will enhance their lives and 
inspire  them to become actively involved in caring for it and using its resources more responsibly.  
Its special qualities will underpin the economic and social wellbeing of the communities in and around 
it, which will be more self -sustaining and empowered to sha pe their own future. Its villages and 
market towns will be thriving centres for residents, visitors and businesses and supporting the wider 
rural community.  
Successful farming, forestry, tourism and other business activities within the National Park will 
actively contribute to, and derive economic benefit from, its unique identity and special qualities.  
Achieving the Vision for the National Park  
2.2 A number of strategic objectives, based on the National Park purposes and duty (Figure 1.1), 
outline the direction that the Local Plan will take in order to achieve the vision. These objectives 
deliver the vision within the rem it of the Local Plan and consider ation of planning applications. 
The core, strategic, development management and allocat ion policies will deliver these 
objectives. 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
14 Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your South Downs National Park 2014 -2019 (South  
Downs National Park Authority, 2013)      17                                                          
 FIGURE 2 .2: LOCAL PLAN OBJECTIVE S 
1. To conserve and enhance the la ndscapes of the National Park.  
2. To conserve and enhance the cultural heritage15 of the National Park.  
3. To conserve and enhance large areas of high -quality and well -managed habitat to form a 
network supporting wildlife throughout the landscape.  
4. To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services16 thus enhancing natural capital across the 
landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human health and wellbeing.  
5. To protect and provide opportunities for everyone to discover, enjoy, understand an d value 
the National Park and its special qualities.  
6. To adapt well to and mitigate against the impacts of climate change and other pressures.  
7. To conserve and enhance the villages and market towns of the National Park as thriving 
centres for residents, visitors and businesses.  
8. To protect and provide for the social and economic wellbeing of National Park communities 
supporting local jobs, affordable homes and local facilities.  
9. To protect and provide for local businesses including farming, forestry and tourism that are 
broadly compatible with and relate to the landscapes and special qualities of the National Park.  
 
 
 
                                                      
15 The reference to ‘cultural heritage’ encompasses the historic environment.  
16 ‘Ecosystem services’ are the benefits people and society get from the natural environment.   
18                                                         
 3. SPATIAL PORTRAIT  AND SPATIAL 
STRATEGY   
Introduction  
3.1 This chapter of the  Local Plan introduces the spatial portrait, which is a new way of looking at 
the South Downs National Park (the National Park) as a single entity, arising from its geology, 
geography and settlement pattern.  This is illustrated by the spatial diagram set out in Figure 3.4 .  
The spatial strategy is also  explained  in this chapter  and is summarised in Figure 3.1.  
FIGURE 3.1 : SUMMARY OF SPATIAL S TRATEGY  
Having regard to the landscape and five broad areas and river corridors, the spatial 
strategy for the South Downs Local Plan  is for a medium level of growth dispersed across 
the towns and villages of the National Park.  
The National Park Today  
3.2 Figure 3. 2 is a map showing key features of the National Park . The National Park has  a population 
of about  112,000, and appro ximately 2 million people live  within 5 kilometres of its boundary.  
Figure 3. 3 is a snapshot of the South Downs National Park today . 
19                                                                                                                FIGURE 3.2:  THE SOUTH DOWNS NATI ONAL PARK  
 
20                                                                                                                       FIGURE 3. 3:  A SNAPSHOT OF THE  SOUTH DOWNS NATIONAL PARK  
 
21                                                          
        The Spatial Portrait  
3.3 This Local Plan introduces a new way of looking at the  South Downs  National Park as a single 
entity, arising from its geology, geography , and hydrology  and settlement pattern.  This is 
illustrated in the spatial diagram  set out in Figure 3.4. The spatial portrait is based on  five broad 
areas  and four river cor ridors . These are the Western Downs, the Western Weald, the Scarp 
Slope, the Dip Slope and the Coastal Plain broad areas  and the Arun, Adur, Ou se and Cuckmere 
river corridors. The four river corridors highlighted all flow north to south bisecting the 
Natio nal Park; there are several other important rivers in the National Park such as the Itchen, 
Meon and Rother whose whole catchment area  lies within the National Park.  The spatial 
portrait : 
 Is informed by the characteristics of the different landscapes, as d efined in the SDILCA  and 
the historic patterns of development. For example, t he springlin e villages that run along the 
Scarp Slope from east to west face common challenges and  opportunities , which are 
different to those faced by communities in the Western Weald  
 Seeks to recognise the ecosystem services and special qualities that exist in different 
‘amounts’ and provide opportunities for multiple benefits stemming from development, as 
well as constraints to growth  
 Combines this with the reality of a long, relatively thin protected landscape which is 
strongly influenced by the areas around it  
3.4 The spatial portrait  stretches  beyond the National Park ’s boundary,  and acknowledges the many 
interdependencies and connections that exist across the boundary. For exampl e, the Coastal 
Plain only covers the southern fringes of the National Park but extends southwards down to 
the coast. The spatial portrait and strategy have informed the National Park Authority’s 
approach to the Duty to Cooperate.   
22 FIGURE 3 .4:  CONC EPTUAL  SPATIAL DIAGRAM OF T HE SOUTH DOWNS NATIO NAL PARK AND SURROUN DING ARE
 
                                                                        
 23                                                         
        3.5 Each of the broad areas and river corridors  are now discussed in greater detail under the 
following sub-headings : 
 Special qualities: describes how the special qualities are expressed within that area ( SQ 
references in bold ). 
 Towns and villages  
 Gateways: settlements outside the South Downs with good bus, ferry or rail links to the 
wider region and beyond, and bus and cycle links into the National Park  
 Hubs: settlements in the National Park that have public transport links, accommodation 
and hospitality businesses  and to urist information points  
 Ecosystem services:  benefits people and society get from the natural environment. Most 
ecosystem services are provided Park -wide, but the stock of natural capital from which 
these services flow does vary spatially between the diff erent areas.  This differentiation is 
particularly clear with ‘provisioning services,’ which are the goods or products obtained 
from ecosystems such as food crops and timber. Ecoserv16 maps have been produced for 
the whole National Park and its different areas, and are explained in more detail in the 
next chapter. They have been compiled into the document Mapping of Ecosystem Services 
within the South Downs National Park using the EcoSe rv GIS Tool17, which is part of the core 
document library and will be updated as new data becomes available ( main type of 
ecosystem service in bold ) 
 Challenges and issues: identifies distinctive challenges and opportuni ties for individual 
broad areas  
3.6 The settlements, strategic sites, gateways and hubs for the broad areas and river corridors are 
listed in Appendix 1. The Settlement Context Study18 provides a strategic overview of the 
landscape context of the settlements in the National Park.    
THE WESTE RN DOWNS  
3.7 This broad area is located in the north west of the National Park and is close to the historic 
city of Winchester where the South Downs Way starts.  
Special Qualities  
3.8 The Western Downs are characterised by large -scale open farmland dotted with the remnants 
of ancient woodland. In terms of landscapes (SQ1)  there is Open Downland to the west. 
Downland Mosaic covers the central and eastern part of this area, which is inters ected by Clay 
Plateau in places. The Western Downs contain some of the most  tranquil  (SQ2)  areas and 
darkest night skies in the National Park. However, it also contains some areas of relatively low 
tranquillity, for example, the area surrounding the city o f Winchester.  
                                                      
16 EcoServ -GIS Toolkit V2  
17 Mapping of Ecosystem Services within the South Downs Nationa l Park using the EcoServ GIS Tool (South 
Downs National Park Authority, 2016)  
18 Settlement Context Study :  Report and User Guide (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)   
                                                                        
 24                                                         
        3.9 In terms of its wildlife (SQ3) , this area has a rich variety of habitats, which support a variety 
of rare and internationally important species. These include ancient woodland, chalk grassland 
fragments, and the river Itchen, within the nort h-western boundary of the National Park. This 
is a chalk stream which is designated both as a Special Area of Co nservation (SAC) and a site of 
Special Scientific I nterest (SSSI) due to its high -quality habitats, which support a range of 
protected species i ncluding the water vole and otter.   
3.10 In this area, farming and new enterprise (SQ4)  takes the form of larger, diversified holdings 
such as the Rotherfield, Estate which include arable, managed woodland, shoots and  fisheries. 
Nationally important watercress  production occurs in the Itchen Valley.   
3.11 Opportunities for access (SQ5)  are more dispersed than in some of the other areas where 
the National Park is narrower with a larger population close at hand. Winchester is linked to 
its adjacent downland by the So uth Downs Way, and there are other hotspots, such as 
Cheesefoot Head.  
3.12 This broad area also has a rich cultural heritage and historical features  (SQ6) , including 
the site of the Battle of Cheriton (English Civil War battle of1644) and the National Trust ho use 
and garden at Hinton Ampner.  
3.13 Picturesque villages, many with literary links, are situated in the Western Downs, such as 
Chawton, which was home to Jane Austen. These distinctive settlements (SQ7)  are more 
scattered than in other areas of the National Park as they are less strongly influenced by the 
drainage pattern and the proximity of rivers or springlines.  
Towns and villages  
3.14 There are no market towns in this area of the National Park. Villages in the Western Downs 
are clustered along the northern bo undary of the National Park and relate most closely to the 
gateway towns, along the A31 corridor.  
Gateways  
3.15 The city of Winchester is the main western gateway to the National Park and is the county 
town of Hampshire.  Alton and Alresford are smaller gateway s to the north.  
Hubs  
3.16 There are no hubs within this sparsely populated area of the National Park.  
Ecosystem services  
3.17 Food provision in the Western Downs is of national importance with e xtensive areas of arable 
production including fodder crops for livestock. The chalk rivers and streams in this area are 
among the finest in the world, providing high -quality water for domestic, agricultural and 
commercial uses including paper mills, fish f arms and water cress beds (provisioning 
services) .  The high relative tranquility and sense of isolation in this area provides a cultural 
service  to visitors and locals.  
Challenges and Opportunities for the Western Downs  
3.18 Parts of the Western Downs are easily accessible from more densely populated areas around 
the National Park, such as Winchester and Alton, and there are opportunities to create better 
multi-user routes and circular itineraries based on railway stations.    
                                                                        
 25                                                         
        3.19 A specific challenge in this area lies with the need to safeguard the important habitats and species 
of the Itchen and to reconcile these with the commercial imperatives of watercress production 
by finding more sustainable methods of cultivation and proces sing. 
THE WESTERN WEALD  
3.20 The Western Weald runs from the northernmost point of the National Park at Alice Holt 
Forest down to the market town of Petersfield, and east along to Petworth and Pulborough.  
Special Qualities  
3.21 The Western Weald is made up of woode d hills, deep valleys and open heaths linked by sandy 
sunken lanes. It includes Black Down, which is the highest point in the National Park.  
3.22 This area is made up of a diverse range of types of landscapes (SQ1) , including the following 
SDILCA areas –Scarp F ootslopes, Greensand Terrace, Mixed Farmland and Woodland Vale, 
Wealden Farmland and Heath Mosaic, Sandy Arable Farmland, Greensand Hills, Low Weald and 
Major Scarp. It has some of the most tranquil  (SQ2)  areas and darkest night skies in the 
National Park,  such as Ambersham Common. However, it also contains some areas of relatively 
low tranquillity, for example, along the northern boundary and around the towns of Petersfield, 
Midhurst and Petworth.  
3.23 The area has a rich variety of wildlife (SQ3).  This includ es the river Rother, which is unusual 
in that it flows through chalk and greensand, large areas of ancient semi -natural woodland and 
a chain of lowland heathland sites. Internationally important woodland sites include Ebernoe 
Common NNR  / SAC and The Mens SAC. Heathlands are of considerable international 
biodiversity importance and home to a large number of rare plants, insects, birds, amphibians 
and reptiles. Designated sites and priority sites include Woolmer Forest SAC and the Wealden 
Heaths (Phase II) S PA. 
3.24 The thin sandy soils in the majority of the Western Weald provide very poor agricultural land 
for farming and new enterprise (SQ4)  and instead there is a large amount of heathland and 
woodlan d. However, there are areas of Grade 3 and G rade 2 agricultur al land; the most fertile 
soils being found in the north and alongside the river Rother in Hampshire .Ancient, species -rich 
and ecologically important coppice woodlands, traditionally intensively managed for fuel and 
timber, are a feature, and the area is h ome to a number of wineries . 
3.25 There are particular opportunities for access (SQ5) to activities based on the special qualities 
of the National Park. These include large areas of open access land and accessible woodland. 
Examples include Alice Holt Forest, Black Down, Iping Common, Woolbeding Common and 
the Serpent Trail.  
3.26 There are rich cultural heritage and historical features (SQ6)  in the area, including 
Cowdray Park and Petworth Park, and the historic market towns of Petersfield, Midhurst and 
Petworth. There are a number of large ponds, representing hammerponds associated with the 
Weal den iron industry or later mill ponds, and the most significant Bronze Age barrow cemetery 
in the National Park is on Petersfield Heath.   
 
 
  
                                                                        
 26                                                         
        Towns and Villages  
3.27 Four of the National Park’s five main settlements are located in the Western Weald, namely 
Petersfield, Liss, Midhurst and Petworth. These settlements serve a wide rural hinterland.  
Petersfield lies well-hidden from longer views in the valley of the Rothe r, with a historic core 
and medieval market square. It is well connected, situated on the A3 and a mainline railway line 
between London and Portsmouth. Liss is sometimes known as the ‘hidden village’ located in the 
wooded valley of the River Rother. It is also well connected by road and rail to London and the 
south coast. Midhurst and Petworth are smaller market towns  than Petersfield  located in the 
heart of the National Park. The historic town of Midhurst is located on a key junction of the 
A272 and A286 a nd on the river Rother; it is located close to Cowdray House and Park and 
the home to the ruin of the Tudor Cowdray House. Petworth is the centre of a nationally 
significant antiques trade. It is home to the 17th   century Petworth House situated on the edg e 
of town, with high walls surrounding the house and Capability Brown designed gardens.  
Gateways  
3.28 Liphook, Haslemere and Pulborough all provide easy access to the National Park from their 
train stations and have direct services to London.  
Hubs  
3.29 Petersfield, Liss, Midhurst and Petworth all provide a variety of services for visitors to the 
National Park.  
Ecosystem services  
3.30 The heavily wooded Western Weald  has one of the highest densities of ancient woodlands in 
England and provides a number of prov isioning services  particularly t imber from commercial 
plantations on the larger estates. It is a mixed farming area producing significant amounts of 
cereals and arable crops and is important for livestock including sheep, pigs and cattle. Vineyards 
are inc reasingly a feature on the south facing slopes. This broad area forms part of a sandstone 
aquifer, which has an important role in maintaining springs and base flows into rivers.  The 
woodlands and heaths of the Western Weald provide regulatory services , for example, 
through carbon sequestration and storage. The woods at Alice Holt provide cultural services  
to children and young people with school field trips and forest schools.  
Challenges and Opportunities for the Western Weald  
3.31 There are opportunities to imp rove facilities in the three market towns.  
3.32 The redevelopment of the former Syngenta site in Fernhurst provides an opportunity for an 
exemplar sustainable development of a strategic scale.  
3.33 Heathlands are very vulnerable to rapid loss and degradation, for ex ample, through neglect, and 
require careful management.  
3.34 There is a risk of creeping urbanisation encroaching on the hills, which would dilute the hidden 
character of most of the larger settlements.  
 
 
  
                                                                        
 27                                                         
        THE SCARP SLOPE  
3.35 The Scarp Slope runs from Butser Hill in the west to Eastbourne in the east and is the steep, 
largely north facing aspect of the South Downs. It also runs north from Petersfield to mark the 
edge of the Western Downs. There are many picturesque springline s ettlements at the foot of 
the chalk Scarp Slope.  
Special Qualities  
3.36 The escarpment provides sweeping views north across the Weald. Distinctive sunken lanes link 
the Western Weald with the scarp slopes emerging on open commons such as Noar Hill, known 
for its wild flowers and rare butterflies like the brown hairstreak.  
3.37 This area is made up of a diverse range of inspirational  landscapes  (SQ1) as defined in the 
SDILCA. The Major Scarp, Greensand Terraces and Scarp Footslopes  run from Petersfield in 
the west to Eastbourne in the east and north towards Alton.  
3.38 This broad area has a rich variety of wildlife (SQ3). Designated sites and priority habitats 
include Old Winchester Hill NNR, Butser Hill SAC / NNR, Ashford Hangers SAC  / NNR, East 
Hampshire Hangers SAC, Rook Clift SAC, Duncton and Bignor Escarpment SAC,  Lewes Downs 
(Mount Caburn) NNR and SAC, together with many other fragments of chalk grassland and 
deciduous woodland.  
3.39 In terms of farming and new enterprise (SQ4), the steep topography in much of this area 
has meant that conversion of grassland to arable has been less prevalent as has wholesale 
intensive forestry despite the heavily wooded nature of the central downs. However, less 
livestock has meant many important habit ats have been under grazed. More intensive arable 
cultivation is the norm on the clay soils below.  
3.40 There are particular opportunities for access (SQ5)  and overnight stays linked to the South 
Downs Way. Along the route there are a number of landmarks and ke y visitor attractions, 
including Butser Hill, Chanctonbury Ring, Devil’s Dyke and Ditchling Beacon. This broad area 
also has a rich cultural heritage and historical features  (SQ6) , including Charleston 
Farmhouse,  Roman villas such as at Bignor, Iron Age hill forts and Parham House and Gardens.  
3.41 At the foot of the chalk slopes and hangers are a number of springline villages including the 
village of Selborne, which was the home to the 18th century ‘father of ecology’ Gilbert White.   
Towns and villages  
3.42 Villages are distributed along this broad area as far east as Ditchling. The strongest relationships 
are mainly with towns outside the broad area such as Midhurst and Petersfield in the Western 
Weald.  
Gateways  
3.43 There are a number of gateways that lie just outsid e the National Park and cover both the scarp 
and dip slopes such as Worthing, Brighton & Hove, Eastbourne, Polegate, Storrington, Steyning 
and Hassocks.  
Hubs  
3.44 There are no notable hubs on the scarp slope.  
  
                                                                        
 28                                                         
        Ecosystem services  
3.45 The lowland calcareous grassla nd that covers the Scarp Slope has been called the European 
equivalent of tropical rainforest as up to 45 species of flowering plants can be found within one 
square metre of this habitat. This is part of a supporting service  that helps to maintain the 
other ecosystem services.  The breath -taking views from the top of the Scarp Slope from, for 
example, Butser Hill and Ditchling Beacon are a form of cultural service  from which people 
derive happiness and inspiration. The sheep that graze the steep Scarp Slope  are an important 
source of local and regional food and provide a provisioning service . The underlying chalk 
aquifers act as a storage reservoir forming the principle source of water for all of the settlements 
in and around the South Downs  ridge. This in t urn provides regulatory s ervices  with the 
chalk geology acting as a natural filtering system, which helps to maintain the chemical and 
ecological status of water bodies in and around the Dip Slope.   
Challenges and Opportunities for the Scarp Slope  
3.46 Floodin g is the major challenge for the springline villages that run along the bottom of the scarp 
slope. There is great potential for these communities to benefit from being access points and 
gateways for visitors coming to the National Park. There is also a nee d for more good -quality, 
low-cost accommodation for users of the South Downs Way. The challenge, given the small 
size of most settlements, the narrow roads and the scarcity of parking, is to provide facilities 
and routes which encourage more walkers and cy clists and fewer cars. There is also a need to 
spread visits across a wider area to reduce pressure on hotspots such as Devil’s Dyke.  
3.47 The views out from the Scarp Slope are one of the reasons so many people visit this area. These 
views of the surrounding landscapes are vulnerable to development, such as creeping 
urbanisation on the lower scarp slope, which has the potential to create int rusion and alter the 
scale of views due to urbanising and incongruous elements.  
THE DIP SLOPE  
3.48 The Dip Slope extends along the entire length of the South Downs ending in the east at the 
spectacular sheer white cliffs of the Sussex Heritage Coast. This broad  area includes villages 
such as Twyford, Singleton and Findon, and parts of country estates such as Uppark and 
Goodwood.  Along with the Scarp Slope, i t includes the downland part of the Brighton and 
Lewes Downs Biosphere Reserve, one of five areas in the U nited Kingdom recognised by 
UNESCO.  
Special Qualities  
3.49 In terms of landscapes (SQ1),  the south -facing chalk Dip Slopes are intersected by river 
valleys, until the eastern end where the Dip Slope ends dramatically at the white cliffs of the 
Seven Sisters and Beachy Head.  
3.50 The Dip Slope includes parts of the following landscape types define d in the SDILCA – Chalk 
Valley Systems (associated with the rivers Itchen, Meon and Lavant), Downland Mosaic, 
Wooded Estate Downland, Upper Coastal Plain and Open Downland.    
                                                                        
 29                                                         
        3.51 The area has a rich variety of wildlife (SQ3).  There are extensive areas of decid uous and 
coniferous woodland, such as Queen Elizabeth Country Park, Houghton and Friston Forests. 
Other designated sites and priority habitats include Kingley Vale National Nature Reserve 
(NNR) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC), one of Europe’s finest  yew forests, areas of 
outstanding south facing Dip Slope chalk grassland such as at Castle Hill NNR  / SAC near 
Brighton and Lullington Heath NNR.  
3.52 To the west, the river Meon is a high quality chalk stream which support s a range of protected 
species includ ing the water vole and otter. To the east there are important coastal, marine and 
estuarine habitats, including the chalk sea cliffs which are home to breeding colonies of seabirds 
such as kittiwakes and fulmars. A Marine Conservation Zone (designated in 2 013) protects the 
chalk reef offshore and runs from Brighton Marina to Beachy Head, providing a valuable habitat 
supporting species such as the Short -snouted Seahorse.   
3.53 The majority of the Dip Slope is Grade 3 agricultural land (farming and new enterprise  
(SQ4)).  However, there are pockets of Grade 2, some of the most fertile soils in the National 
Park. The farmed south -facing slopes provide for a range of food and drink production, including 
arable, grazing, vineyards such as those at Hambledon and Alfris ton, and breweries such as those 
at Dundridge and Lewes.  
3.54 The Dip Slope has many access (SQ5) opportunities with  Rights of Way (RoW) linking the 
coast to the crest of the South Downs, long -distance footpaths such as the Monarch’s Way and 
large areas of acce ssible woodland and estates open to the public. This broad area also has a 
rich cultural heritage and historical features (SQ6),  including West Dean Estate, Weald 
and Downland Open Air Museum and Goodwood.  
Towns and villages  
3.55 The villages on the Dip Slope are nearly all situated in southern -oriented valleys and have 
relationships of varying strength with towns beyond the southern boundary of the National 
Park. The exceptions are Twyford in Hampshire and East Dean in East Sussex, at either end of 
the Nationa l Park, which look across the chalk ridge towards Winchester and Eastbourne 
respectively.  
Gateways  
3.56 There are a number of gateways that lie just outside the National Park and cover both the scarp 
and dip slopes such as Worthing, Brighton & Hove, Eastbourne,  Polegate, Storrington, Steyning 
and Hassocks.  
Hubs  
3.57 There are no notable hubs on the Dip Slope.  
Ecosystem services  
3.58 The gently sloping, south facing Dip Slope provide many of the Provisioning Services  within 
the National Park. This includes viticulture, ce real production, sheep grazing and both beef and 
dairy cattle. The underlying chalk aquifers provide the same Regulatory and Provisioning 
Services described for the Scarp Slope. There are a number of notable attractions on the Dip 
Slope that provide world famous cultural services  such as Glyndebourne, home to the world 
famous opera festival.   
                                                                        
 30                                                         
        Challenges and Opportunities for the Dip Slope  
3.59 The Dip Slope is easily accessible from the densely populated Coastal Plain and so similar 
challenges and opportunities a rise in ensuring that extra visitor pressure does not damage the 
special qualities. Improving the RoW network as a whole and providing new off -road multi -user 
routes can also relieve the pressure on very sensitive sites such as Kingley Vale.    
3.60 Areas of mo re fertile soil on these warm south -facing slopes, coupled with the effects of climate 
change, mean there are particular opportunities for viticulture and wine production. As this is 
one of the most productive areas agriculturally, the incentive for more i ntensive production and 
related agricultural developments is higher than in other areas, and over time more sustainable 
ways to farm on the thin chalk soils may be found which provide benefits in terms of carbon 
sequestration and reducing soil erosion alon gside crop production. The potential fragmentation 
of the remaining Dip Slope chalk grassland habitats is a key challenge for the National Park.    
3.61 The undeveloped coast is an important aspect of the National Park landscape. The boundary of 
the National Pa rk was intentionally drawn to include several narrow locations in addition to the 
Heritage Coast where settlements do not extend across the coastline. These areas are subject 
to particular developmental and recreational pressures from surrounding urban set tlements.  
THE COASTAL PLAIN  
3.62 The northernmost part of the Coastal Plain is located within the National Park. The entire 
Coastal Plain extends southwards from the South Downs to the Solent and the English Channel 
and includes large towns and cities such as Southampton, Portsmouth and C hichester.   
Special Qualities  
3.63 The fragments of this broad area that lie within the National Park include Wooded Claylands, 
Upper Coastal Plain and Shoreline landscapes (SQ1).  
3.64 Due to the proximity of large urban areas to the south, much of this area is rel atively less 
tranquil (SQ2)  than others in the National Park, and light pollution is more prevalent; this 
makes the parts that are quieter and have darker skies particularly special.    
3.65 In terms of farming & new enterprise (SQ4),  this broad area and the adjacent Dip Slope to 
the north, include some of the most fertile soils in the National Park, which has led to a larger 
proportion than elsewhere of intensively farmed Grade 2 agricultural land.  
3.66 The proximity of the coastal towns a nd the largely gentle topography means there are particular 
opportunities to provide access (SQ5),  for example, to areas of accessible woodland such as 
West Walk in the Forest of Bere.  
3.67 There are rich cultural heritage and historical features (SQ6)  in the C oastal Plain area, 
which has been settled from prehistoric times forward.  
3.68 The part of the Coastal Plain located within the National Park is sparsely populated with small 
hamlets and valley villages (distinctive towns and villages (SQ7)),  such as Lavant. Ma ny of 
these are relatively well connected to settlements beyond the southern boundary, on which 
they rely for many essential services.  
 
  
                                                                        
 31                                                         
        Towns and Villages  
3.69 The villages within the fragment of the Coastal Plain within the National Park are all closely 
related to the city of Chichester.   
Gateways  
3.70 Chichester is the main gateway into the Coastal Plain within the National Park.  
Hubs  
3.71 There are no notable hubs on the Coastal Plain within the National Park.  
Ecosystem Services  
3.72 It is mainly provisioning services that are provided here, with highly fertile soils covering the 
river flood plains; this broad area also overlies chalk aquifers.  
 Challenges and Opportunities for the Coastal Plain  
3.73 There is very significant development pr essure on this southernmost broad area because of the 
growth of housing to the north of the coastal towns and along the A27. The A27 itself forms a 
noisy and congested barrier to people from the south  accessing the National Park. As the 
population of the w ider Coastal Plain grows, the thin strip within the National Park provides 
opportunities for family days out, hiking, cycling, dog walking and other leisure activities. 
Managing this increased pressure so that visitors can discover, enjoy, understand and v alue the 
National Park without damaging its special qualities is a challenge, and as the first point of entry 
from the south, this area can play a part by providing good facilities at gateway points which 
orientate visitors, raise awareness of the importan ce of the landscapes and encourage more 
sustainable travel choices and behaviour.   
3.74 Significant parts of this broad area are at a relatively higher risk from coastal, ground water and  
/ or fluvial flooding. To ensure these areas are adapting well to the impacts of climate change 
will involve using natural processes such as changes in cultivation and land -use in flood sensitive 
zones rather than major engineering solutions more suited to urban areas.    
RIVER ARUN CORRIDOR  
3.75 The source of the River Arun lies outside the National Park to the east of Horsham. It flows 
northsouth across the National Park from Pulborough to Arundel and enters the English 
Channel at Littlehampton. Its main tributary is the River Rothe r. 
Special Qualities  
3.76 In terms of landscapes (SQ1) , the River Arun flows through Major River Floodplains and 
Major Valley Sides.  
3.77 The Arun Valley area has a rich variety of wildlife (SQ3 ) and is designated partly as an SAC, 
SPA and Ramsar site and partly as a Local Wildlife Site. Pulborough Brooks is an RSPB reserve 
that can be accessed from the gateway village of Pulborough. The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust 
reserve at Arundel is also at a gateway location. Both sites are important in providing managed 
access (SQ5)  to the sensitive wildlife of the valley.   
                                                                        
 32                                                         
        3.78 The Arun Valley has many rich cultural heritage and historical features (SQ6)  including 
the Castle Park of Arundel, which forms a southern gateway, the industrial museum at 
Amberley, the painted church at Hard ham, and the route of the Wey and Arun Canal north of 
Pulborough. The villages of Bury and Burpham have literary connections.  
Towns and Villages  
3.79 The villages of Bury, Amberley, Coldwaltham and Watersfield are located in the Arun Valley.  
Gateways  
3.80 Arundel and Pulborough are important gateways into the National Park.  
Hubs  
3.81 Amberley Station forms a small hub in this river corridor.  
Ecosystem Services  
3.82 The principal ecosystem services provided by all the river corridors are Regulating Services  
particula rly the regulation of water timing and flows. However, the River Arun has lost much of 
its flood storage capacity through land drainage and conversion for agriculture. In terms of 
Provisioning Services  highly fertile soils cover the river flood plains and significant areas have 
been drained and converted to intensive agriculture. There are extensive areas of brooks and 
flood plain grazing marshes on the lower stretches of the River Arun at Amberley. There are 
also Cultural Services  with people enjoying both  recreational pursuits and the aesthetic 
qualities of this major river.   
Challenges and Opportunities for the River Arun Corridor  
3.83 The principal challenge for all the river corridors relate to flooding. The principal opportunities 
relate to recreational opportunities along the river.  
RIVER ADUR CORRIDOR  
3.84 The River Adur is formed at the confluence of the western Adur and eastern Adur just west of 
Henfield. It flows north to south across the National Park from Coombes Farm and through a 
gap in the South Down s near Lancing College where it is fed by the Ladywell Stream. It travels 
past the strategic site of Shoreham Cement Works and leaves the National Park just north of 
Shoreham -by-Sea. It enters the English Channel at Shoreham -by-Sea.  
Special Qualities  
3.85 In terms of landscapes (SQ1),  the River Adur flows through Major River Floodplains and 
Major Valley Sides.  
3.86 Coombes Farm gives visitors an insight into the farming way of life (SQ4)  of the South 
Downs.  
3.87 The historic buildings (SQ6)  of Bramber village and Lancin g College mark the northern and 
southern entrances to the section of valley in the National Park.  
3.88 The Downs Link cycle route runs along the Adur Valley, providing opportunities for access 
(SQ5).  
 
  
                                                                        
 33                                                         
        Towns and Villages  
3.89 There are no notable settlements in that part of the National Park within the Adur Valley.  
Gateways  
3.90 Shoreham -by-Sea is an important gateway to the south of the National Park.  
Hubs  
3.91 There are no notable hubs in this river corridor although Shoreham Cement W orks does offer 
opportunities to become an important hub for the National Park.  
Ecosystem Services  
3.92 The main ecosystem services provided by all the river corridors are Regulating Services  
particularly the regulation of water timing and flows. The Adur’s  floodplain and wetlands retain 
water, which can decrease flooding and reduce the need for engineered flood control 
infrastructure. There are also Cultural Services  with people enjoying both recreational 
pursuits and the aesthetic qualities of this major r iver.   
Challenges and Opportunities for the River Adur Corridor  
3.93 The principal challenge for all the river corridors relates to flooding. The principal opportunities 
relate to recreational opportunities along the river and in the case of the River Adur the se 
principally lie at Shoreham Cement Works. They are all substantially tidal, which limits their 
recreational use.  
RIVER OUSE CORRIDOR  
3.94 The River Ouse rises near Lower Beeding and then travels eastwards into East Sussex. It flows 
into the National Park nea r Hamsey and through the town of Lewes where it is crossed by 
Willey's Bridge, the Phoenix Causeway next to North Street Quarter , and Cliffe Bridge. It flows 
on past the villages of Glyde, Rodmell and Southease and leaves the National Park just south of 
Piddinghoe. It enters the English Channel at Newhaven.   
Special Qualities  
3.95 In terms of landscapes (SQ1),  the River Ouse flows through Major River Floodplains and 
Major Valley Sides.  
3.96 In terms of its distinctive towns and villages (SQ7) , Lewes is considered to  be one of the 
best preserved small market towns in England, with significant artistic and cultural heritage 
(SQ6)  making it a popular tourist destination. Springline settlements lie at the foot of the chalk 
scarp, including the village of Rodmell, which h as literary connections with Virginia Woolf.  
3.97 A large part of the floodplain is designated as Lewes Brooks SSSI for its nationally important 
wildlife and habitats (SQ3),  notably in the ditches that criss -cross the area.  
3.98 The South Downs Way crosses the River Ouse at the small hamlet of Southease , which has a 
railway station served by trains direct from Brighton, and from London via Lewes . The 
construction of the Egrets Way multi -user route along the river provides an oppor tunity to 
improve access (SQ5)  to the valley for walkers, cyclists, mobility scooters and, in places, 
horse -riders.  
  
                                                                        
 34                                                         
        Towns and Villages  
3.99 The historic market town of Lewes is located in the River Ouse corridor and is the county 
town of East Sussex. The villa ges of Kingston -near-Lewes and Rodmell also lie on the valley 
sides.  
Gateways  
3.100  Newhaven, with its ferry service, is a gateway into the Nat ional Park from the continent.  
Hubs  
3.101  Lewes is also an important hub within the National Park providing a full and varied range of 
services and attractions to visitors.  
Ecosystem Services  
3.102  The principal ecosystem services provided by all the  river corridors are Regulating Services  
particularly the regulation of water timing and flows. The Ouse’s floodplain and wetlands retain 
water, which can decrease flooding and reduce the need for engineered flood control 
infrastructure. In terms of provisioning services highly fertile soils cover the river flood plains 
and significant areas have been drained and converted to intensiv e agriculture. here are 
extensive areas of brooks and flood plain grazing marshes at Lewes Wild Brooks. There are also 
Cultural Services  with people enjoying both recreational pursuits and the aesthetic qualities 
of this major river.   
Challenges and Oppor tunities for the River Ouse Corridor  
3.103  A key challenge for the town of Lewes is flooding as it is located on a stretch of the River Ouse 
where it flows southwards through a narrow gap in the South Downs. Restoring the natural 
capacity of the floodplain to th e north of the town to absorb floodwater also brings 
opportunities in  terms of wildlife and access. The redevelopment of the North Street Quarter 
of Lewes offers major regeneration opportunities for the town and the wider area.  
RIVER CUCKMERE CORRIDOR  
3.104  The River Cuckmere rises near Heathfield, flows across the Weald and enters the National Park 
just north of Alfriston. The Cuckmere Valley Nature Reserve is located on the lower estuary 
stretch of the river and it flows into the English Channel on the Sussex H eritage Cost at 
Cuckmere Haven.   
Special Qualities  
3.105  In terms of landscapes (SQ1), the River Cuckmere flows through Major River Floodplains and 
Major Valley Sides. The meanders of the River Cuckmere are an iconic feature of the National 
Park. 
3.106  Multiple oppor tunities exist for access (SQ5),  with Berwick station nearby, the Seven Sisters 
Country Park and footpaths along the river.  
3.107  Alfriston is a distinctive, historic settlement (SQ6, SQ7)  that is a magnet for visitors to 
the area.  
3.108  The southern part of the valley is designated as an SSSI for its wildlife (SQ3),  in particular for 
its plants and birds. The Cuckmere is one of few undeveloped estuaries along this stretch of 
coastline.   
                                                                        
 35                                                         
        Towns and Villages  
3.109  The picturesque and historic villa ge of Alfriston is located on the River Cuckmere.  
Gateways  
3.110  There are no notable gateways into the River Cuckmere Corridor.  
Hubs  
3.111  The Seven Sisters Country Park at Exceat forms a small hub next to the river.  
Ecosystem Services  
3.112  The principal ecosystem serv ices provided by  all the river corridors are Regulating Services , 
particularly the regulation of water timing and flows. The Cuckmere Valley provides 
Supporting Services  in terms of biodiversity and Regulating Services  in relation to water 
flow. In terms o f Cultural Services  there is a sense of relative remoteness and wildness 
associated with the undeveloped heritage coast and Cuckmere Haven . 
Challenges and Opportunities for the River Cuckmere Corridor  
3.113  The principal challenge for all the river corridors rel ate to flooding. The principal opportunities 
relate to recreational opportunities along the river and in the case of the River Cuckmere these 
opportunities can be accessed at the Seven Sisters Country Park hub at Exceat.  
The Spatial Strategy  
3.114  The spatial st rategy seeks to deliver the vision and objectives of the Local Plan. It guides how 
the National Park will evolve and develop over the plan period (2014 -2033). Having regard 
to the landscape and five broad areas and river corridors, the spatial strategy for  
the South Downs Local Plan is for a medium level of growth dispersed across the 
towns and villages of the National Park . This starts from the following key principles:  
 The Local Plan must first and foremost reflect the purposes of the National Park, and i s 
therefore based on the capacity of the landscape to accommodate growth (landscape -led); 
and 
 Pursuant to this, the Local Plan must reflect the duty of the National Park, and should 
therefore seek to foster the economic and social wellbeing of local commun ities, across the 
breadth of the National Park . 
3.115  The spatial strategy therefore seeks to ensure that our towns and villages remain vibrant 
centres, whilst conserving and enhancing the special qualities.  
3.116  There are several hundred settlements  in the National Park, ranging from a collection of a few 
buildings, to large market towns. However , the spatial strategy of dispersed growth is limited 
to the 53 settlements listed in Policy SD25 : Development Strategy of this plan. T hese are the 
settlements for which ther e are defined boundaries, and where the principle of growth is 
accepted.  
 
 
 
  
                                                                        
 36                                                         
         
Level and distribution of housing growth  
3.117  The level and distribution of growth is informed by a robust evidence base and engagement 
exercise that incorporates the results of informal and formal consultations on the Local Plan.  
The proposed level of housing growth is a matter that has been carefully considered through a 
wide ranging evidence base including the Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment 
(HEDNA)19, (which builds on the Strategic Housing Market Assessment  (SHMA)20), the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment  (SHLAA)21, and the Sustainability Appraisal22 (SA). The 
scenarios  considered in the context of a landscape -led approach were:  
1. Low growth: the minimum number of homes needed to maintain the size of the current 
population;  
2. Medium growth: the number of homes to reflect the historic delivery rate in the area now 
covered by the South Downs National Park, for the period 2004 -2014;  
3. Medium growth + 60%: the number of homes to reflect the Winchester, East Hampshire 
and Lewes Joint Core Strategies, and a 60% uplift on historic delivery for settlements 
outside the Jo int Core Strategy areas; and  
4. High growth: projects forward population growth for the period 2013 -20133 based on five 
year trends, as set out in the SHMA – this scenario fully meets the objectively assessed 
housing need (OAN)  identified in the SHMA.  
3.118  For eac h of these scenarios, two high -level development strategies were initially considered: 
dispersed development, where development would be spread across a wide range of 
settlements, and a concentrated strategy, where housing growth would be restricted to the  five 
key settlements of Petersfield, Lewes, Midhurst, Liss and Petworth.  
3.119  Some scenarios were, at an early stage, considered not to be reasonable alternatives. Low 
growth would have resulted in little growth occurring anywhere but the five large settlement s, 
which would fail to meet social and economic sustainability objectives. For higher growth 
scenarios, a concentrated strategy would lead to such high levels of development in the larger 
settlements that negative landscape impacts would be inevitable.  
3.120  Of the remaining options tested through the SA, it was determined that a ‘dispersed medium ’ 
development strategy would do most to promote the vitality of a wide range of settlements in 
the National Park and support the rural economy, whilst protecting and enh ancing the special 
qualities of the National Park. The SA also identified the sustainability benefits of encouraging 
development in a range of small settlements to support local services, rather than limiting 
growth only to locations with public transport opportunities.  
                                                      
19 Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (G.L. Hearne, 2017)  
20 Strategic  Housing Market Assessment (G.L. Hearn, 2015)  
21 South Downs Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)  
22 South Downs Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal (AECOM, 2014, 2015 and 2017)   
                                                                        
 37                                                         
        3.121  A dispersed medium  development strategy also reflects the outcome of public consultation. 
There has been strong community support for addressing  local housing need within many 
settlements across the National Park. Equally, there was little appetite within the large 
settlements for high levels of  growth over the period of the Local Plan , given their landscape 
setting . 
Objectively assessed housing need and the Duty to Cooperate  
3.122  The ‘objectively assessed need’ for housing (OAN) is the forecast amount of housing needed 
for an area to fully meet the needs of its population. Footnote 9 of the National Planning Policy 
Framework  (NPPF) identifies national parks as an area where development should be restricted 
and OAN does not need to be met , notwithstanding  the more generally applied n ational policy 
requir ing local plans to meet the full OAN for housing in the housing market are a. For the South 
Downs National Park, the HEDNA has set out a housing need of 447 new dwellings per year.  
The SA has confirmed that the National Park Authority would not be meeting its statutory 
purpose if it were to seek to fully meet the OAN within the N ational Park boundaries. Figure 
3.5 sets out the overall picture  of housing provision in the South Downs Local Plan, compared 
with the OAN range as advised in the HEDNA . 
        FIGURE 3. 5 HOUSING PROVISION CO MPARED WITH OAN  
Annualised OAN in the National Park  
(over whole Plan period)  447 
(8,493)  
South Downs Local Plan housing provision  
(over the whole Plan period)  250 
(4,750)  
Annual shortfall in the National Park  
(over the whole Plan period)  197 
(3,743)  
3.123  The National Park Authority has tested all known possible housing sites for development 
potential through the SHLAA , and made provision for housing within a limited landscape 
capacity . The National Park Authority is also working with partner authorities to fully test all 
reasonable options for meeting unmet housing need in suitable locations outside the National 
Park boundaries. Chapter 1 of this Local Plan explains what the National Park Authority has 
done to engage positively with its neighbouring local authorities and others on cross -boundary 
issues, i ncluding housing. The Duty to Cooperate Statement23 sets out further details of how the 
unmet need relates to specific district, borough and city areas, and also sets out in detail the 
processes by which partners are seeking to address the need.  
Level and d istribution of employment and retail growth  
3.124  This Local Plan seeks to provide local employment and facilities primarily to addres s the social 
and economic wellbeing of local communities, and to provide for local businesses that contribute 
to the special qualities of the National Park. Chapter 7 sets out relevant strategic policies.  
                                                      
23 Duty to Cooperate Statement (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)   
                                                                        
 38                                                         
        3.125  The HEDNA indicates a modest need for new employment  land supply , and much of the 
requirement is met by extant planning permissions . Opportunities for new sites, as well as 
extant permissions,  are focused  on larger settlements. The SA recognised that the National 
Park’s business base is based on small businesses that do not require large scale allocations. The 
spatial strategy for employment is therefore to focus on safeguarding local employment sites, 
and modest employment growth in the main towns.  
3.126  The spatial strategy for retail is focused on supporti ng and sustaining local settlements and the 
rural economy. The market  town centres  within the National Park are Petersfield, Midhurst, 
Petworth  and Lewes . Liss forms a larger village centre  and s maller village centres are identified 
at Alfriston, Ditchling , Fernhurst and Findon . 
3.127  There is no provision in the spatial strategy for strategic or large scale retail development, as 
this would not be appropriate for a National Park.  
Broad areas  
3.128  The spatial strategy applies across all the broad areas and river corri dors and will be delivered 
through the policies of this Local Plan. It follows that the Local Plan policies will need to be 
interpreted in slightly different ways in the different areas if they are to operate effectively. For 
example, opportunities for agr icultural diversification exist throughout, but we are likely to see 
more applications for development related to vineyards across the Dip Slope, and more for 
woodfuel supply chains in the Western Weald.  The spatial p ortrait and spatial strategy will  help 
to inform the preparation of further Neighbourhood D evelopment Plans (NDP) . Planning 
applications should reference it as appropriate.   
39                                                         
     4. CORE POLICIES    
4.1 The core policies set out in this chapter provide the overarching framework for evaluating all 
development proposals in the National Park. These core policies will be used in the assessment 
of all planning applications and  thereby  avoid s the need for dupli cating criteria in other policies. 
The core policies apply equally across the National Park.  The three core policies relate to 
sustainable development, ecosystem services and major development.   
4.2 These  core policies  are relevant to all the Local Plan object ives. 
MANAGING DEVELOPMENT  IN THE NATIONAL PARK  
Introduction  
4.3 The NPPF sets out how the presumption in favour of sustainable development is a golden thread 
running through both plan -making and decision -making.  This means that local planning 
authorities shou ld positively seek opportunities to meet the development needs of their area. 
They should also take a positive approach when deciding planning applications. Core Policy S D1 
and its supporting text reflects these principles, within the context of the Nation al Park’s 
statutory purposes and duty. The supporting text also provides general guidance to clarify on 
the development management process.  
Core Policy SD1: Sustainable Development  
1. When considering development proposals that accord with relevant policies in this Local Plan 
and with National Park purposes, the Authority will take a positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development. It will work with applicants to find solutions 
to ensure that those development proposals ca n be approved without delay, unless material 
planning considerations indicate otherwise.  
2. The National Park purposes are i) to conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and 
cultural heritage of the area; and ii) to promote opportunities for the unde rstanding and 
enjoyment o f the special qualities of the N ational Park by the public. Where it appears that 
there is a conflict between the National Park purposes, greater weight will be attached to the 
first of those purposes. In pursuit of the purposes, t he National Park Authority will pay due 
regard to its duty to seek to foster the economic and social well -being of the local communities 
within the National Park.  
3. When determining any planning application, the Authority will consider the cumulative impacts  
of development.  
4. Planning permission will be refused where development proposals fail to conserve the 
landscape, natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the National Park unless, 
exceptionally:  
a) The benefits of the proposals demonstrably outweigh the great weight to be attached to 
those interests; and  
b) There is substantial compliance with other relevant policies in the development plan.   
40                                                         
     4.4 The purpose of this policy is to reflect the three guiding principles of this Local Plan.  The three 
principles are reflected in the policies that appear throughout the Local Plan.  These are :  
 Firstly, the presumption in favour of sustainable development set out in the National Planning 
Policy Framework (NPPF) ; 
 Secondly, the statutory duty of the Authority  to have regard to National Park purposes 
when determining planning application and ; 
 Thirdly , the great weight to be attached, in the determination of planning applications, to 
conserving and enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the National 
Park.  
National Park purposes and duty  
4.5 The Authority will seek to achieve the right balance between conservation and recreation in 
the National Park when delivering the purposes of the National Park. However, at times this 
can cause conflict. To help national park authorities make decisions relating to conservation and 
recreation, the National Parks Policy Review Committee made a recommendation in 1974, 
which is now known as the 'Sandford Principle' . This principle was include d in the Environme nt Act 
1995 (as amended)  which states that: "If it appears that there is a conflict between those 
purposes, [the National Park Authority] shall attach greater weight to the purpose of conserving 
and enhancing the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural herit age of the area"   
4.6 The Environment Act 1995 (as amended)  states that a national park authority, in pursuing the 
purposes, shall seek to foster the economic and social well -being of local communities within 
the national park and shall for that purpose co -operate with local authorities and public bodies 
whose functions include the promotion of economic or social development within the area of 
the national park.  
Cumulative impacts of development  
4.7 It is important to consider the impact of cumulative development  in the National 
Park.  Cumulative impacts can be defined as the additional changes caused by a 
proposed development in conjunction with other similar developments or as the 
combined effect of a set of developments.   
Determination of planning applications  
4.8 On adoption, the South Downs Local Plan  will form part of the statutory development plan for 
the whole of the National Park, along with the minerals and wa ste plans and ‘made’ (adopted) 
Neighbourhood D evelopment Plans. It is important that the Local Plan sh ould be read as a 
whole because all relevant policies apply to all planning applications .. Decisions on planning 
applications must be taken in accordance with the development plan unless material planning 
considerations indicate otherwise. It is implicit w ithin criterion 1 of Policy SD1 that if a 
development proposal does not comply with key policies in the development plan, then it will 
be contrary to the development plan, and may therefore be refused.  The Authority is committed 
to working with applicants to find solutions where they are seeking to conserve and enhance  
the landscapes of the National Park and in accordance with the development plan.   
41                                                         
     4.9 The application of planning policies will be proportionate to the nature and scale of development 
proposals , and the combination of policies will depend on the details of the development 
proposal.  
4.10 A material planning consideration is one which is relevant to making the planning decision in 
question , and will generally be concerned with ensuring that land use  is in the public interest . 
The weight attached to material considerations in reaching a decision is a matter  of judgement 
for the decision -maker. 
4.11 The National Park Authority  will work positively and in partnership with other local authorities 
to ensure that de velopment outside of the National Park does not have a detrimental impact 
on its setting or otherwise prejudice the achievement of the National Park purposes. Section 62 
of the Environment Act 1995  requires all relevant authorities, including statutory und ertakers and 
other public bodies, to have regard to these purposes.  
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES  
Introduction  
4.12 Ecosystem services are the benefits that people and society get from the natural environment.  
An ecosystems approach helps us to id entify the benefits we get from nature, value them and 
build them into planning,  decision making and management. The National Park Authority 
adopted an ecosystems approach to the South Downs Partnership Management Plan  (PMP)24, and 
this is  embed ded into  the Local Plan. This has b een achieved in three main ways:   
 Firstly, there is a core polic y on ecosystems services (SD2)  
 Secondly, a n assessment has been made of all the strategic and development management 
policies , to identify those that make a positive contribution to a significant number of 
ecosystem services; these are identified with the icon  
 Thirdly , consideration was given to  the site allocations , the se ttlements within which they 
sit and the ability to deliver multiple ecosystem services. Icons and site specific development 
requirements relating to specific ecosystem services indicate how these  sites in particular 
are expected to contribute  
4.13 A GIS based tool (EcoServ GIS) has been developed to provide supporting evidence for the 
Local Plan on ecosystem services. The EcoServ models and maps have been used to map and 
understand the delivery of ecosystem services within the National Park in spatial terms.  Ecoserv 
maps have been generated , which have informed the spatial portrait and all the allocations in 
the Local Plan. Further details are set out in the evidence based study Mapping of Ecosystem 
Services within the South Downs National Park using the EcoServ GIS Tool .25  
                                                      
24 Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your  South Downs National Park 2014 -2019 (South 
Downs National Park Authority, 2013)  
25 Mapping of Ecosystem Services within the South Downs National Park using the EcoServ GIS Tool (South 
Downs National Park Authority, 2016)   
42                                                         
     4.14 In Chapter 1, F igure 1.3 - The Four Asp ects of Ecosystem Services  illustrates how t he landscapes 
of the South Downs provide a multitude of ecosystem services. Figure  4.1 below illustrate s the 
inter-relationships between ecosystem services and people’s enjoyment and understanding of 
the National  Park. Figure 4.2 provides further detail on ecosystem services within the National 
Park. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
43                                                                                                  
       FIGURE 4.1: ‘PEOPLE SUPPORTING  LANDSCAPE, LANDSCAPE  SUPPORTING PEOPLE
 
44                                                           
 FIGURE 4.2: THE FOUR ASPECTS OF ECOSYSTEM SERVICE S IN THE SDNP  
The Four Aspects of Ecosystem Services in the SDNP  
There are four main categories of ecosystems services, namely, supporting, provisioning, regulating 
and cultural s ervices . The natural environment is a dynamic system and these four services cannot be 
viewed in isolation from one another. They are ecologically and functionally interdependent.   
Supporting services  offered by flora and fauna and micro -organisms are essential for healthy soils, 
habitats and nutrient cycling, which underpin the environment’s natural goods and services which 
benefit people. The National Park has a rich variety of species, landscapes, rivers and coastline which 
support the other ecosystems services, such as soil and water quality.  
Provisioning se rvices  relate to the products and productivity of the natural environment. 
Approximately 85 per cent of the National Park is farmed and its soils support it being a major 
producer of cereal crops, which are grown mainly on the dip slopes. These soils also support grazing 
and biodiversity of important native habitats and species like the Duke of Burgundy butterfly. 
Approximately 25 per cent of the National Park is wooded, which contributes renewable fuel like 
biomass. The chalk hills, which sweep across the National Park, filter and store fresh water, providing 
us with high -quality drinking water.   
Regulating services  are the controls from the natural environment. For example, rivers which help 
to control water flow, drainage and flooding. Rivers such as the  Meon, Ouse and Cuckmere support 
habitats and biodiversity.  Enhancing species like bees and other pollinators are vital for food crops as 
well as other plants and wildflowers. Woodland also prevents soil erosion and is an important resource 
for carbon sto rage which helps to mitigate climate change. These services also regulate pollution in 
the air, water and on land. These include regulating carbon dioxide and air quality from cars and 
industry, chemicals from the treatment of agricultural fields or viticu lture or surface water run -off and 
percolation from the urban environment into rivers and ground water.  
Cultural services  relate to people’s enjoyment of the National Park and its special qualities. The 
distinctive landscape of the Western Weald, the chal k ridge, scarp and dip slopes and the dramatic 
Seven Sisters cliffs are of inspirational value through their sense of place and tranquillity, including dark 
night skies. Embedded in the landscape is important cultural heritage which is rich in arts and lit erature, 
archaeological remains, traditional historic towns and villages and architecture. These special qualities 
and an extensive network of bridleways and footpaths enhance people’s health and wellbeing.  
All of these ecosystem services can be utilised a nd enhanced to provide for sound growth within 
properly understood limits. The services described above are assets that should guide all growth, 
hence their thinki ng underpins this Core Policy. Through careful management of development, the 
various provisi ons of ecosystem services can be used to ensure that the multiple benefits they give to 
society are supported and protected.   
 
 
 
 
 
  
45                                                           
 Core Policy SD2: Ecosystem Services  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where they have an overall positive impact on the 
ability of the natural environment to contribute goods and services . This will be achieved  
through the use of high quality design , and by delivering all opportunities to:  
a) Sustainably manage land and water environments;  
b) Protect and provide more, better and joined up natural habitats;  
c) Conserve water resources and improve water quality;  
d) Manage and mitigate the risk of flooding;  
e) Improve the National Park’s resilience to, and mitigation of, climate change;  
f) Increase the ability to store carbon through new planting or other means;  
g) Conserve and enhance soils;  
h) Support the sustainable production and use of food, forestry and raw materials;  
i) Reduce levels of pollution;  
j) Improve opportunities for peoples’ health and wellbeing; and  
k) Provide opportunities for acce ss to the natural and cultural resources which contribute 
to the special qualities.  
Development proposals must be supported  by a statement that sets out how the development 
proposal impacts, both positively and negatively, on ecosystem services.  
4.15 The purpose of this policy is to embed  a holistic approach to managing our natural resources 
sustainably for the future. Its criteria encapsulate the ecosystem  services  that the natural 
environment contributes to people. This integrated approach is importa nt because development 
can have multiple effects across these services. Development p roposals should take a positive 
approach to the delivery of ecosystem services and take adequate account of the economic 
benefit of enhancing ecosystem services.  There are  many ways to deliver on these criteria.  
These should be delivered on a site by site basis  with reference to the aspects of ecosystem 
services set out in Figure 4.2.  
4.16 All planning applications should  be accompanied by a statement  that sets out how the 
development proposal impacts, both positively and negatively , assessing the impact on 
ecosystem services. The preparation of the statement should be proportionate to the impact. 
Use should be made of the Ecoserve GIS maps, when avail able. A technical advice note will be 
produced by the National Park Authority to provide further guidance to applicants on this 
policy.    
46                                                           
 4.17 This core policy should not be read in isolation but instead  linked to all other Local Plan policies .  
For example, cri terion ( d) of policy SD2 is about managing and mitigating the risk of flooding 
and is linked to the ecosystem services of water flow and flood.  The relevant Local Plan policies 
are SD45: Green Infrastructure, SD17: Protection o f the Water Environment, SD4 8: Climate 
Change and Sustainable Use of Resources.  It should be noted that where  more detailed 
applicable criteria are containe d in other policies within the P lan, SD2 should be read as 
supporting and not weakening that detailed criteria.   
MAJOR DEVELOPME NT  
Introduction  
4.18 The NPPF (paragraph 116) sets out the approach local planning authorities should take to 
development in national parks. The National Planning Practice Guidance  (NPPG) states that: 
“Whether a proposed development in these designated areas s hould be treated as a major 
development, to which the policy in paragraph 116 of the Framework applies, will be a matter for the 
relevant decision taker, taking into account the proposal in question and the local context .”  
4.19 The NPPF does not define major development. The National Park Authority  has sought legal 
opinions26 on what constitutes major development. These  opinions are that the definition of 
“major development” is based on whether, prima facie, the development might potentially have 
adverse impacts on a national park, rather than whether, after a careful and close assessment, 
it will have such adverse impacts.  
4.20 Major development can include various forms of both infrastructure and works associated with 
infrastructure projects.  Development proposals should address the requirements of policies 
SD3: Major Development , SD42 : Infrastructure  and any other specific policy relevant to that 
form of infrastructure .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
26 Legal Opinion In the matter of th e South Downs National Park Authority and in the matter of paragraph 22 
of PPS7 (James Maurici, 2011); Legal Opinion  In the matter of the National Planning Policy Framework and 
In the matter of the South Downs National Park Authority  (James Maurici, 2014);  Further Opinion In the 
matter of the National Planning Policy Framework and In the matter of the South Downs National Park 
Authority  (James Maurici, 2014)   
47                                                           
 Core Policy SD3: Major Development  
1. In determining what constitutes major development the National Park Authority  will consider 
whether the development, by reason of its scale, character or nature, has the potential to have a 
serious adverse impact on the natural beauty, wildlife or cultural  heritage of, or recreational 
opportunities provided by, the National Park.  The potential for adverse impact on the National Park  
will include  the consideration of both  the impact of cumulative development and the individual 
characteristics of each proposa l and its context.     
2. Planning permission will be refused for major developments in the National Park except in exceptional 
circumstances , and where it can be demonstrated they are in the public interest. Consideration of 
such applications should include an assessment of:  
a) The need for the development, including in terms of any national considerations, and the impact 
of permitting it, or refusing it, upon the local economy;  
b) The cost of, and scope for, developing elsewhere outside the designated area, or meeting the 
need for it in some other way; and  
c) Any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and recreational opportunities, and 
the extent to which that could be moderated.  
3. If it is considered that exceptional circumstances exist and development would be in the public 
interest, all opportunities to conserve and enhance the special qualities should be sought.  
Development propos als should be sustainable as measured against the following factors:  
 Zero Carbon  
 Zero Waste  
 Sustainable Transport  
 Sustainable Materials  
 Sustainable Water  
 Land Use and Wildlife  
 Culture and Community  
 Health and Wellbeing  
4.21 The purpose of this policy is to set out how the National Park Authority will determine what 
constitutes major development and, if an application is deemed to constitute major 
development, how that application will be considered.  
Major Development Test  
4.22 Core Policy SD3 sets out the two stages of decision making in relation to major development. 
Firstly, a n assessment will be made to determine whether development constitutes major 
development. For the purposes of this policy, all of the following principles will be applied when 
determining whether an application constitutes major development:  
 A judgement will be made in light of all of the circumstances of the application and the 
context of the application site   
48                                                           
  The phrase ‘major development’ will be given its  common usage , and will not be restricted 
to the definition of major development in the Town and County Planning (Development 
Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 , or to proposals that raise issues of national 
significance  
 The determination as to whe ther the development is major development will consider 
whether it has the potential to have a serious adverse impact. It will not include an in -depth 
consideration of whether the development w ill in fact have such an impact  
 The application of other criter ia may be relevant to the considerations, but will not 
determine the matter or raise a presumption either way  
4.23 It is important to consider the impact of cumulative development in the National Park. An 
individual development viewed in isolation may, in itsel f, constitute minor development, but 
when viewed with neighbouring development within the National Park could be considered to 
form part of a major development. In such cases the National Park Authority will apply all of 
the principles in paragraph 4.2 1 to assess whether major development is proposed . 
4.24 All allocations, including those for strategic sites, within this Local Plan have been screened to 
determine if they would constitute major development. If development on the site is expected 
to constitute maj or development then the second part of Core Policy SD3 will have been applied 
when the allocation was made. This is set out in detail in the evidence -based study, Assessment 
of Site Allocations against Major Development Considerations – Technical Report.27 
Consideration of major development proposals  
4.25 If the proposal is considered to be major development , then the second part of the policy will 
apply. It will then be assessed against the following considerations which are consistent with 
paragraph 116 of the NPPF:  
 The need for development in the location proposed. Where residential development is 
proposed, taking account of any local need identified by the relevant housing authority and 
bearing in mind that housing in the National Park should focus on the need s of its local 
communities;  
 The possible impact on the local economy, in particular any that is specific to the site or 
location as opposed to general benefits such as on the construction industry;  
 The cost of, and scope for, meeting the need in some other  way, on the assumption that it 
is a local need which should ideally not be met outside the designated area  (the National 
Park) ; 
 Detrimental effects on the environment , including wildlife and cultural heritage , and the 
extent to which the effects can be mo derated;  
 Detrimental effects on the landscape and the extent to which the effects can be moderated;  
and 
                                                      
27 Assessment of Site Allocations against Major Development Considerations – Technical Report (Envision, 2015 
and update  2017)   
49                                                           
  Detrimental effects on recreational opportunities and the extent to which the effects can 
be moderated.  
4.26 A consideration will then take place as to wheth er there is a reasonable expectation that the 
exceptional circumstances exist , and that it could be demonstrated that development would be 
in the public interest.  
Principles of Sustainable Development  
4.27 The third part of the policy applies to applications f or major development for which the 
Authority considers exceptional circumstances exist and would be in the public interest. The 
extent to which mitigation can overcome any detrimental effect on the environment, the 
landscape and recreational opportunities will be taken into account when considering proposals.  
Any short -term and long -term harm or adverse impact will need to be minimised and it should 
be clearly demonstrated how the proposals have incorporated all opportunities to conserve 
and enhance the sp ecial qualities of the National Park . 
4.28 The sustainability of the development proposals will be measured against  the following principles 
of sustainable development:  
 Zero Carbon - Making buildings energy efficient, supplying energy from on -site renewable 
sources, where possible, and seeking to deliver all energy with renewable technologies  
 Zero Waste - Reducing waste generation through good design, encouraging reuse, 
recycling and composting and seeking t o send zero waste to landfill  
 Sustainable Transport - Reducing the need to travel and dependence on fossil fuel use and 
encouraging low and zero carbon modes o f transport to reduce emissions  
 Sustainable Materials - Where possible, using local, reclaimed, renewable and recycled 
materials in construction and products, which minimises transport emissions, encourages 
investment in local natural resource stoc ks and boosts the local economy  
 Sustainable Water - Implement water use efficiency measures, reuse and recycling and 
minimise the need for water extraction.  Designing to avoid local issues such as flooding, 
drought and water course pollution  
 Land Use and Wildlife - Protecting and restoring biodiversity and creating new natural 
habitats through good land use and integra tion into the built environment  
 Culture and Community - Celebrate, respect and revive cultural heritage and the sense of 
local and regional identity. Encourage  the involvement of people in shaping their community 
and creating a new culture of sustainability  
 Health and Wellbeing - Promote  healthy lifestyles and physical, mental & spiritual well -being 
through design and community engagement   
50                                                                     
   5. A THRIVING LIVING LA NDSCAPE  
5.1 The theme for this chapter, Thriving Living Landscape , is primarily based on the first purpose of the 
National Park . The policies in this chapter are divided into four sub-sections: Landscape, B iodiversity, 
Historic E nvironment  and Water. 
5.2 Conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the area and the region’s biodiversity , including green 
infrastructure , are both key cross -boundary strategic issues identified by the National Park Authority 
for the purpose of fulfilling the Duty to Cooperate.   
Local Plan Objectives  
The following Local Plan objectives are considered most relevant for this section:  
Objective  1: To conserve and enhance the landscapes of the National Park.  
Objective 2: To conserve and enhance the cultural heritage of the National Park.   
Objective 3: To conserve and enhance large areas of high -quality and well -managed habitat to form a 
network supporting wildlife throughout the landscape.  
Objective 4:  To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services thus enhancing natural capital across the 
landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human health and wellbeing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
51                                                                     
   5a. LANDSCAPE  
Introduction  
5.3 This section of the Local Plan includes five strategic policies which relate to the landscape and 
associated special qualities  of the National Park.  These set a positive strategy for conserving and 
enhancing landscape character (SD4), views (SD6), relative tranquillity (SD7) and dark night skies (SD8) , 
and sets out a landscaped -led approach to design (SD5).  
5.4 The d iverse  and inspirational landscapes of the National Park are defined as one of its special qualities. 
The landscape is also the foundation for the other special qualities  of the National Park , including its 
views, tranquil and unspoilt places and its distinctive towns and villages . As set ou t in Chapter 4, Spatial  
Strategy and  Portrait, the varied landscapes of the National Park collectively contribute to the range 
of ecosystem services wh ich the National Park provides. The condition  of landscape  features , and their 
management, is therefore e ssential to the continued function of ecosystem services and the benefits 
they provide.  Any development in the National Park has the potential to cause harm to the landscape 
both individually and cumulatively. These policies seek to ensure that development  avoids having a 
detrimental impact on the landscape and its special qualities, and , wherever possible , enhances the 
landscape. Figure 5.1 explains how the landscape is formed.  
                     FIGURE 5.1:  LANDSCA PE 
 
5.5 The South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment  (SDILCA)28 divides the rich and complex 
landscape character of the National Park into 18 g eneral landscape types (as shown in F igure 5.2) and 
49 more place -specific ‘character areas’. It identifies the features that create local distinctiveness, a 
'sense of place' and is an aid to decision making . 
                                                      
28 South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (SDILCA) (LUC, 2005, updated 2011)  
 
52 
             FIGURE 5.2: LANDSCAPE CHARAC TER TYPES29  
                                                      
29 https://www.southdowns.gov.uk/planning/planning -advice/landscape/  
 
53                                                          
 Strategic Policy SD4: Landscape Character  
1. Development proposals will only be permitted where they conserve and enhance landscape 
character by demonstrating that:  
a) They are informed by landscape character , reflect ing the context and type of landscape 
in which the development is located;  
b) The design, layout and scale of proposals conserve and enhance existing landscape and 
seascape character  features which contribute to the distinctive cha racter, pattern and 
evolution of the landscape ;  
c) They will safeguard the experiential and amenity qualities of the landscape;  
d) Where planting is considered appropriate, it is consistent with local character, enhances 
biodiversity, contributes to the delive ry of green infrastructure and uses native species, 
unless there are appropriate and justified reasons to select non -native species; and  
2. Where development proposals are within designed landscapes, or the setting of designed 
landscapes, (including historic  parkscapes and those on the Historic England Register of Historic 
Parks and Gardens ) they should be based on a demonstrable understanding of the design 
principles of the landscape and should be complementary to it.  
3. The individual identity of settlements and the integrity of predominantly open and undeveloped 
land between settlements will not be undermined.  
4. Green and blue corridors will be  safeguarded . Development proposals should identify and take 
opportunities to create and connec t green corridors . 
5. The restoration of landscapes where either natural or cultural heritage features have been lost 
or degraded will be supported  where it contributes positively to landscape character .  
5.6 The purpose of Policy SD 4 is to set out how development proposals will be expected to 
conserve and enhance landscape character in the National Park.  
Understanding of landscape context and character  
5.7 The ability of proposals to meet the requirements to enhance landscape character in Policy SD 4 
will be considered in proportion to the size, scale and likely impacts of the proposals.  
5.8 It is important that proposals are based on a meaningful understanding of the context and 
character of an area and those positive characteristics which define local d istinctiveness. The 
use of standard design solutions and features can erode local distinctiveness in urban and rural 
areas . Therefore, this policy is closely linked to Policy SD 5: Design , and they need to be read 
together.   
5.9 Proposals should be informed by  the SDILCA , community -led / local landscape character 
assessments and appropriate site -based investigations. Local landscape character assessments 
may include community, parish or Village Design Statements and other community planning 
documents. However, references to these will not be a substitute for appropriate professional 
site based a ssessment  and research . 
5.10 Proposals should be accompanied by a Landscape Appraisal, which should be proportionate to 
the size and likely impacts of the scheme. Landscape Appraisals should be car ried out in  
54                                                          
 accordance with the  Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment30 and successor 
documents . If the  proposals require a full Environm ental Impact Assessment then a Landscape 
and Visual Impact Assessment undertaken by a Chartered Landscape Architect will be required . 
Most applications will be likely to require a bespoke Landscape Appraisal . Applicants are advised 
to consult the Authority  on the proposed scope for such a study at the earliest opportunity. 
Householder applications should be informed by the Landscape and Biodiversity Baseline Checklist  
which is available on the Authority’s website in the first instance. Further study may be required 
following on from completion of the checklist which the Authority would advise on.  
5.11 The cumulative impact of development or land -use change can detrimentally affect landscape 
character.  There are many cultural features in the landscape these contri bute to local 
distinctiveness reflecting the time depth which is present in the landscape.  
Design and layout  
5.12 The design and layout of proposals should be consistent with local landscape character. Good 
design should avoid the need for screening which could appear incongruous in the landscape. 
Proposals should be designed to be complementary to their context and setting . Policy SD 5: 
Design, includes further requirements and guidance o n design and landscape matters. The 
introduction of undesirable exotic  plant species into the wider countryside and at the settlement 
edge as part of scheme planting proposals will be strongly resisted. The use of non -native plant 
species may be justifiable in some cases where there are clear reasons for this, for example, 
based on biodiversity or other ecosystem services functions.  
Designed landscapes  
5.13 There are many locations where designed landscapes, gardens and parkscapes exist within the 
towns, settlements and wider countryside, often associated with land holdings. Ther e are 30 
parks and gardens on the Historic England Register of Historic Parks and Gardens31, for example , 
Petworth Park,  designed by Capability Brown . In addition, there are many other sites which are 
identified as being designed landscapes, but not included on the Historic England list. These are 
identified in the Historic Landscape Character Assessments32 for the National Park and are 
important cultur al heritage assets.  
5.14 Policy SD1 2: Historic Environment , sets relevant requirements for heritage assets. Detailed 
records of historic parks, gardens and designed landscapes are available from the County 
Garden Trusts, which are independent charities engaged  in caring for gardens and designed 
landscapes.  
5.15 Proposals which may affect designed landscapes, gardens and parkscapes should be informed by 
a design process which understands and identifies the key features within the designed 
                                                      
30 Guidelines for Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment 3rd Edition (Landscape Institute & IEMA, 2013)  
31 Link to the Historic England website to view / search the Historic Parks and Gardens Register: 
https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the -list/ 
32 Link to the Sussex Historic Landscape Characterisation study: https://www.westsussex.gov.uk/land -waste -
and-housing/landscape -and-environment/sussex -historic -landscape -characterisation/ ; the Historic Landscape 
Assessment of Hampshire is underway.  
  
55                                                          
 landscape . This process sho uld ensure  that development will enhance the designed character of 
the landscape.  
The individual identity of settlements  
5.16 The gaps between settlements protect the individual character and identity of towns and villages. 
They retain the open nature and the p hysical and, either real or perceived, visual separation 
between settlements. The land at the edge of settlements often forms part of the historic setting 
of the settlement and can include areas which have cultural importance. Public Rights of Way 
can ofte n provide access to these areas and connections to the open landscape of the National 
Park beyond.  
Green and Blue Corridors  
5.17 Green and blue corridors are areas or linear features which connect habitat and wildlife 
populations and can provide opportunities for walking and cycling, and also facili tate the 
movement of wildlife. Green and blue corridors are an essential component  of the National 
Park's green infrastructure, and can provide benefits for people and wildlife at both the landscape 
scale and more lo cal scale. More information is provide d under policy SD45: Green 
Infrastructure.  
Landscape features  
5.18 Natural and historic features such as trees, woodlands, hedgerows, historical water systems, 
chalk pits  and sandpits , should be conserved and enhanced throu gh design. Reference should be 
made to the Pan Sussex Historic Landscape Character Assessment  and other  appropriate research 
material to identify the relevant natural and historic key features  this should be used to inform 
development proposals.   
  
56                                                          
 5.19 The purpose of Policy SD 5 is to ensure that all development is of the highest possible design 
quality which reflects and respects the exceptional quality of the natural, agricultural and built 
environment of the National Park. Proposals should adopt a landscape -led design approach  and 
seek to  enhance local character and distinctiveness of the area as a place where people want to 
live and work now and in the future . The definition of landscape encompasses all types and 
forms, including townscape .  This refers to areas of buildings a nd related infrastructure , and the 
relationships between buildings and different types of urban greenspace.  
 
 
   Strateg ic Policy SD 5: Design  
1. Development proposals will only be permitted where they adopt a landscape -led approach and 
respect the local character, through sensitive and high quality design that makes a positive 
contribution to the overall character and appearance of the area. The  following design 
principles should be adopted as appropriate:  
a) Integrate with, respect and sympathetically complement the landscape character by 
ensuring development proposals are demonstrably informed by an assessment of the 
landscape context;  
b) Achieve effective and high quality routes for people and wildlife, taking opportunities to 
connect green infrastructure;  
c) Contribute to local distinctiveness and sense of place through its relationship to 
adjoining buildings, spaces and  landscape features.  
d) Create high -quality, clearly defined public and private spaces within the public realm;  
e) Incorporate hard and soft landscape treatment which takes opportunities to connect to 
the wider landscape, enhances green infrastructure, and is consistent with local 
character;  
f) Utilise architectural design which is appropriate and sympathetic to its setting in terms 
of height, massing, density, roof form, materials, night and day visibility, elevational and, 
where relevant, vernacular detailing;  
g) Provide high quality, secure, accessible, and where possible, integrated storage for 
general and recycling waste, heating fuel, and transport related equipment;  
h) Provide high quality outdoor amenity space appropriate to the needs of its occupiers or 
users;  
i) Ensure development proposals are durable, sustainable and adaptable over time , and 
provide sufficient internal space to meet the needs of a range of users ; 
j) Give regard to improving safety and perceptions of safety, and be inclusive and accessible 
for all; and  
k) Have regard  to avoiding harmful impact upon, or from, any surrounding uses and 
amenities.   
57                                                          
 A landscape -led approach  
5.20 Development should enhance, respect and reinforce the landscape through a landscape -led 
design approach, informed by contextual analysis of the local landscape character and built 
character, as set out in Figure 5.3. This contextual analysis should include  considerations, as 
relevant, of topography, landscape features, the water environment, biodiversity and other 
ecosystem services, key routes and street patterns, landmarks, views and vistas, the scale, 
proportions, pattern, and vernacular architecture and  materials. The surrounding mix of uses 
should also inform proposals. Appropriate study areas and methodology would be determined 
in discussion with the Authority and will be dependent on the size, height and location of 
proposals.  
5.21 Individual design eleme nts, such as use of materials and detailing of elements such as windows, 
are critical to the success of the overall design and should be considered once the character of 
the area has been assessed.  
5.22 Supporting information accompanying planning applications  should be proportionate to  
sensitivity of  the location and  the scale of  what is being proposed. The Authority  will engage 
with applicants and agents to offer advice on what is required. It will need to demonstrate how 
the design has been informed through an analysis of the opportunities and constraints of the 
site, its context, and how it responds positively to these. Some schemes may be asked to go 
through the National Park Authorit y’s Design Review Panel process. Depending on the scale of 
development, a comprehensive masterplan outlining the principles for a site should address all 
of these elements and any other site -specific issues,  to achieve an exemplary design.  
FIGURE 5.3:  A LAN DSCAPE -LED APPROACH TO DESI GN 
 
 
 
58                                                          
 Connections for people and wildlife  
5.23 Good design provides effective and high quality connections for people and wildlife, ensuring 
sustainable ease of movement. Opportunities should be identified and taken to connect green 
infrastructure assets and make a positive contribution to local charac ter. The purpose of an 
open space , for example a playground or  orchard,  should be clear , otherwise it will most likely 
become a forgotten space  which serve s no purpose or benefit.  Open spaces should be 
connected to the existing environment, for example by footpaths or cycleways.  Where  public 
open spaces are provided , there should be  no restrictions, such as locked  / keypad entry gates, 
to accessing these areas , and they should be accessible to all. Policies SD 45 and SD 46 set out 
criteria related to the provision of green infrastructure and open space, respectively.  
High quality landscape and architectural design  
5.24 The Authority will seek the highest quality design for development proposals in line with the 
first purpose of the National Park. This includes truly outstanding or innovative design and 
contemporary design which reinforce local distinctiveness, taking ref erence and visual cues from 
the landscape and local settlement identity and character.  The Authority will encourage the use 
of locally sourced materials to support local character and distinctiveness , and to reduce the 
cost both financially and environment ally of transp orting materials long distances. R eference 
should be made to the respective strategic stone studies for each of the three counties .  
5.25 The design of streets has a significant influence on the layout and setting of development , and 
should respec t local character , and respond to the historic form and layout of existing streets. 
Further criteria relating to the public realm a nd street design is set out in P olicy SD 21: Public 
Realm , Highway  Design and Public Art . 
5.26 The spaces around new buildings are integral to the success of new development and should be 
well designed to create a high quality built environment. This includes the gap s between houses, 
gardens, driveways, parking areas, waste and recycling storage, street composition and open 
space  / amenity space. Careful consideration should be given to the siting, use  / function and 
materials used. Spaces should be defined through use of suitable landscaping , such as  boundary 
treatments, planting and varied use of materials, which differentiate betwee n private and public 
areas. The use of hard and soft landscaping should be consistent with local character and 
enhance green infrastructure. Existing features such as trees, hedges and walls which are 
characteristic of the streetscape and local area should  be retained. The long term maintenance 
of landscape  features  should be addressed , for example through a legal agreement .  
5.27 Development should  comply with design policies set out in Neighbourhood Development P lans, 
and take into account village and town des ign statements.  
Adaptable, durable, and sustainable design  
5.28 New housing needs to be appropriate for the widest range of households and should therefore 
be adaptable, accessible and durable over time to accommodate people of all ages and abilities , 
without  diminishing  overall appearance and function.  
5.29 Development should maximise sustainable technologies . The  sourcing  and performance of 
materials, and construction methods, should  maximise energy and resource efficiency. The 
wood fuel economy is one example of  this. Dwellings which utilise local sustainable wood fuel 
schemes support the local economy, repurpose what wou ld otherwise be a waste product  and  
59                                                          
 can support reductions in fuel poverty. This should be undertaken in accordance with Policy 
SD48:  Climate C hange and Sustainable Use of Resources .  
5.30 Development should be durable and adaptable to change . The ongoing management and long 
term maintenance of the scheme, including all design elements , should be addressed . 
Amenity  and functional needs  
5.31 It is important  that all types of development meet the day -to-day functional needs of its users, 
and of those responsible for its servicing.  Internal space should have internal proportions that 
allow quality of experience for its occupiers and users.  High quality, accessible, secure and where 
possible integrated on site storage should be available for the storage of transport equipment 
which includes bicycles, mobility scooters, push chairs and wheelchairs.  Refuse and recycling 
storage should take account of the ope rational requirements of refuse collection services.  
5.32 High quality garden, terrace or balcony space should be provided for residential occupiers, of a 
size and nature that befits future occupiers’ needs , for example families with children . Other 
uses may ne ed to provide outdoor space for staff and  / or visitors depending on the use and 
context.  
5.33 In addition, the privacy and amenity of existing neighbours and future occupiers should be 
respected. Proposals should ensure good natural light for new and, where re levant, existing 
buildings and their occupiers. Proposals affecting residential properties in particular should not 
be unduly overbearing, or compromise others’ reasonable privacy, unless outweighed by 
innovative design solutions that mitigate these impact s. 
5.34 Reference should also be made to policies SD 30 and SD 31 on Replacement Dwellings and 
Extensions  to Existing Dwellings, Annexes and Outbuildings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
60                                                          
 Strategic Policy SD6: Safeguarding Views  
1. Development proposals will  only be permitted where they preserve the visual integrity, identity 
and scenic quality of the National Park, in particular by conserving and enhancing key views and 
views of key landmarks within the National Park .  
2. Development proposals will  be permitted that  conserve and enhance the following view types 
and patterns identified in the Viewshed Characterisation Study :  
a) Landmark views to and from viewpoints and tourism and recreational destinations;  
b) Views from publically accessible areas which are within, to and from settlements which 
contribute to the viewers’ enjoyment of the National Park;  
c) Views from public rights of way, open access land and other publically accessible areas; 
and 
d) Views which inclu de or otherwise relate to specific features relevant to the National Park 
and its special qualities, such as key landmarks including those identified in Appendix 2 of 
the Viewshed Characterisation  and Analysis  Study, heritage assets (either in view or the 
view f rom) and biodiversity features.  
3. Development proposals will be permitted provided they conserve and enhance  sequential 
views , and do not result in adverse cumulative impacts within views.  
5.35 The purpose of Policy SD 6 is to ensure that development does not harm views or landmarks , 
to encourage conservation and enhancement of key view types and patter ns, and to ensure 
development does not detract from the visual integrity, identity and scenic quality that are 
characteristic of the National Park.  
Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment  
5.36 The View Characterisation and Analysis Study33 provides baseline information about the major 
viewtypes , and about possible and likely ranges of visibility within,  to and from the National 
Park. Proposals should take into account the View Characterisation  and Analysis  Study and the 
Seascape Assessment for the South Marine Plan34. However, representative views and landmarks 
set out in the View Characterisation and Analysis Study do not provide an exhaustive list and 
reference to the se studies will not be a substitute for appropriate site based assessment in 
accordance with the Landscape Inst itute & IEM A’s Guidelines  for Landsca pe and Visual Impact 
Assessment  (LVIA) . A LVIA should be carried out in accordance with these guidelines , and 
should be proportionate to the size and likely impacts of the scheme. If the applicant can 
demonstrate to the  satisfaction of the Authority that an LVIA is not required, a simple landscape 
assessment may be appropriate. More information on landscape assessments is available in the 
supporting text of Policy SD 4: Landscape Character. Applicants are advised to consu lt the 
Authority on proposed viewpoint locations to inform such studies at the earliest opportunity.  
                                                      
33 South Downs National Park: View Characterisation and Analysis (LUC, 2015)  
34 Draft South Marine Plan (Marine Management Organisation, 2016)   
61                                                          
 5.37 The SDILCA , Village Design S tatements, conservation area character appraisals, conservation 
area management plans, local landscape character  assessments, p arish plans and N eighbourhood  
Development  Plans may provide evidence on views and should be referred to. This information, 
together with es sential field and desktop studies  which are undertaken at an appropriate level 
to the application, should be provided  at the earliest possible stage in the planning application 
proces s and would form part of LVIA.  
5.38 Zone of Theoretical Visibility (ZTV) analysis is the process of determining the visibility of an 
object in the surrounding landscape and illustrates the potent ial (or theoretical) visibility of an 
object in the landscape, based on topography. The use of digital ZTV  data is recommended for 
larger applications in order to identify potential visibility and to demonstrate areas of zero 
visibility.  
5.39 Sequential views a re the series of views which we see unfold when moving through the 
landscape, for example , when walking along a footpath or travelling along a road. Impacts on 
these views can arise frequently or occasionally , and may be generated by periodic views of the 
same development or by more than one development. Sequential visibility can be assessed by 
use of transect ZTVs.  
Strategic Policy SD7: Relative Tranquillity   
1. Development proposals will only be permitted where  they conserve and enhance relative 
tranquillity  and should consider the following impacts:  
a) Direct impacts that the proposals are likely to cause by changes in the visual and aural 
environment in the immediate vicinity of the proposals;  
b) Indirect impacts th at may be caused within the National Park that are remote from the 
location of the proposals themselves such as vehicular movements; and  
c) Experience of users of the P ublic Right of W ay network and other publicly accessible 
locations.  
2. Development proposals in highly tranquil and intermediate tranquillity areas should conserve 
and enhance, and not cause harm to, relative tranquillity.  
3. Deve lopment proposals in poor tranquillity areas should take opportunities to enhance relative 
tranquillity where these exist.   
5.40 The purpose of Policy SD 7 is to ensure that development does not harm the relative tranquillity  
of the National Park and to encourage the conservation and enhancement of positive tranquillity  
factors.  
5.41 Tranquillity is considered to be a state of calm, qu ietude and is associated with a feeling of peace. 
It relates to quality of life, and there is good scientific evidence that it also helps to promote 
health and well -being. It is a perceptual quality of the landscape, and is influenced by things that 
people  can both see and hear in the landscape around them.  The tranquillity scores apply 
specifically to the South Downs National Park; they are therefore to be considered relative to 
the National Park area only. They are not intended to be comparative or consid ered in relation 
to tranquillity scores for other national parks or other areas of the country.  
  
62                                                          
 The South Downs National Park Tranquillity  Study  
5.42 In preparing proposals, applicants are advised to take into account the evidence of relative 
tranquillity  in the South Downs National Park Tranquillity  Study35. For the Tranquillity  Study, positive 
and negative tranquillity  factors at locations across the National Park were scored on a sliding 
scale. The tranquillity  scores from the study are shown on the map in Figure 5.4. In order to 
assess impacts on relative tranquillity  the South Downs Tranquillity  Study should be used as a 
baseline from which to assess changes in the aural and visual environment which are likely to 
result from the proposals , including con siderations of temporary /  permanent or varying nature 
of the impact .  
5.43 The assessment of impacts on relative tranquillity  is not the same as a noise assessment , and 
the assessment of zero noise impact for an application will not be taken necessarily as meaning 
that there would be a similar impact on relative tranquillity .  
5.44 The Tranquillity  Study identified areas which are highly tranquil, of intermediate tranquil lity, and 
those of low tranquillity .  Applications for development proposals in highly tranquil areas should 
demonstrate that they conserve and enhance , and do not harm , relative tranquillity .  
Development proposals in areas of intermediate relative tranqu illity are the areas which are 
most vulnerable to change , and should avoid further harm to relative tranquillity  and take every 
opportunity to enhance it. Development proposals in areas of poor tranquillity  are often located 
within or on the edge of urban areas and thus there may be limited scope for enhancing relative 
tranquillity  in these area; opportunities to enhance relative tranquillity  should be taken wherever 
possible.  
5.45 The extent that proposals conserve and enhance  relative tranquillity  will be dete rmined by an 
assessment of the impact on relative tranquillity , which is proportionate to the scale and 
expected impact of the development in relation to the surrounding context.  
 
                                                      
35 South Downs N ational Park Tranquillity Study (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)   
63                                                                                                           
 FIGURE 5.4:  TRANQUI LLITY SCORES IN THE NA TIONAL PAR K
 
64                                                          Strategic Policy SD8: Dark Night Skies  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where  they conserve and enhance the intrin sic quality 
of dark night skies  and the integrity of the Dark Sky Core as shown on the Policies Map . 
2. Development proposals must demonstrate  that all opportunities to reduce light pollution  have 
been taken , and must ensure that the measured and observed sky quality in the surrounding area 
is not affected , having  due regard to the following hierarchy : 
a) The installation of lighting is avoided;  
b) If lighting cannot be avoided, it is demonstrated to be necessary and appropriate, for its 
intended purpose or use : 
i. any adverse impacts are avoided; or 
ii. if that is not achievable, then adverse impacts are mitigated to the greatest reasonable 
extent .’ 
3. Lighting which is proposed to be installed must meet or exceed  the level of protection 
appropriate to the environmental zone, as shown on the Policies Map,  as set out in the table 
below.   
Location  Requirements for level of protection  
Dark Sky Zone 
Description  
 ILP 
Guidance36 Landscape 
Impact  Maximum 
Lux Level 
(Suggested 
10 Lux)  Evening 
Curfew  Astronomical 
Darkness 
Curfew  
E0 
Dark Sky Core 
and areas 
outside this zone 
with a SQM37 of 
20.5+   
  
    
E1(a) 
2km Buffer Zone 
and areas 
outside this and 
the above zone 
which are of 
intrinsic rural  
  
    
                                                      
36 Institute of Lighting Professionals (ILP) guidance GN01:2011 Guidance Notes for the Reduction of Obtrusive 
Light 
37 Sky Quality Measurement (SQM). The latest version of the S ky Quality Measurement  map should be used as 
the reserve is subject to ongoing mea surement.    
65                                                          darkness with a 
SQM range of 20 
to 20.5  
E1(b)  
Transition  Zone  
and areas 
outside this and 
the above zones 
with a SQM 
range of ~15 to 
20  
  
    
E3/4 
Urban zone with 
an SQM of < 15       
4. Outdoor lighting proposals are required to provide a statement to justify why the proposed 
lighting is required . 
5.46 The purpose of Policy SD 8 is to ensure that development does not harm the quality  of dark 
night skies. It also encourages  enhancement  of the dark night skies of the National Park , for the 
benefit of people and wildlife . The policy seeks to do this by  ensuring that proposed lighting is 
necessary , and by reducing  the unnecessary light sp ill that is often a result of poor design, in 
order to minimise the overall impact of light.  
5.47 Policy SD 8 applies across the International Dark Sk y Reserve which covers the entirety of the 
National Park.  It applies to any proposals which involve the instal lation of external lighting and 
where the design of developments may result in light spill from internal lighting. It will also apply 
to specific lighting schemes which require planning permission or listed building consent, 
including installing:  
 A lightin g scheme of such nature and scale that it would represent an engineering 
operation38; 
 Lighting such as the floodlighting of sports pitches, car parking or menages; and  
 A lighting scheme on a listed building that would significantly affect its character.  
5.48 Mapping has been undertaken of the quality of dark skies across the entire National Park, as set 
out in the South Downs Dark Night Skies Guidance Document39. These measurements have been 
used to categorise the National Park into a number of dark sky zones w hich reflect the quality 
of the dark night skies overhead and the level of street lighting. These zones are:  
 E0 Dark Sky Core  - there are large areas which have skies that can be classified as 
intrinsically dark. These areas form a continuous dark sky core (and 2km buffer zone ) to 
                                                      
38 such as  requiring a separate structure and typically be undertaken by specialist lighting engineers  
39 South Downs Dark Night Skies Guidance Document (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)   
66                                                          the International Dark Sk y Reserve, as shown on the Policies Map, which contain some of 
the darkest  areas of the National Park.  
 E1 (a) 2km Buffer Zone and (b)  Transition  Zone – areas that lie between the larger urban 
settlements and the surrounding darker skies notably vulnerable to light pollution. These 
areas are generally in the Buffer Zones and Rura l Transition areas. Generally this will be  
where the sky quality changes from poor to the edge of an intrinsic dark sky zone typically 
with Sky Quality Meter40 (SQM) values of 20  Lux. 
 E3/4 Urban – the towns and villages of the National Park have lower quality of dark night 
sky, primarily due to street lighting  and light spill from buildings  
5.49 Although some areas of the National Park are outside of the core and buffer zones; this policy 
is looking to conserve and enhance all areas of intrinsic dark sky within the National Park.   
Hierarchy of lighting  
5.50 In order to ensure that dark night skies are protected and enhanced, the hierarchy as set out in 
criteria (2) is applied  across the National Park . Installation of lighting should be avoided and , 
where lighting is  demonstrated to be  necessary, the design an d installation  should be such that 
adverse impacts are avoided  or, if not achievable, mitigated to the greatest possible extent . The 
hierarchy should be applied in conjunction with the requirements for protection for the relevant 
dark sky zone as set out i n criteria (3) of this policy .  
5.51 In the darkest areas, where control is more important, the overall impact of the lighting should 
ideally not be visible in any direction or in any form such as glare, skyglow, spill and reflection. 
It also should not reduce the measured and observed quality of easily visible astronomical 
features such as the Milky Way and Andromeda Galaxy.  
5.52 In some circumstances it may be possible to reduce the impact of existing lighting by removal 
in return for new lights.  
Requirements and g uidance  for proposed lighting  in dark sky zones  
5.53 Much of the rural landscape is part of the Dark Sky Core , but this should be checked prior to 
an application.  In the preparation and determination of development proposals, the latest 
version of the Sky Quality  Measurement map should be used as the reserve is subject to ongoing 
measurement. To provide some indication of sky quality and zoning : 
 An intrinsic dark zones is where the Milky Way can be seen with the naked eye and in an 
area with no street light ing 
 If there is a provision of highways authority street lighting, the zoning will  usually  be E3  
5.54 In addition to the application of the lighting hierarchy and avoidance and mitigation measures 
which may be required with regard to impacts on landscape and ha bitat, development proposals 
will be subject to particular requirements at a level of protection appropriate to the dark sky 
zone, as set out in Policy SD 8, which is based  on the measured sky quality.   
                                                      
40 A Sky Quality Meter measures the brightness of the night sky in magnitudes per square arcsecond.   
67                                                          5.55 Proposals within the Dark Sky C ore and 2km buffer zone will be  subject to maximum protection 
using the full weight of mitigation options, with a relaxation as light quality decreases further 
into urban areas.   
5.56 Any Dark Sky that measures 20.5  Lux and above, should be considered as core qua lity, 
irrespective of whether it is within or outside the Dark Sky Core .  In general, lighting under the 
best quality skies should cease on the onset of astronomical darkness, in addition to basic 
principles of good lighting (ILP) and appropriate rural ill uminance levels.  The time of 
astronomical darkness varies throughout the year, but marks the point at which dark skies are 
defined.  In intrinsic skies, 20 to 20.5  Lux, an evening curfew should be set, for example, 9pm.   
5.57 The Authority will encourage further reductions, for example towards the limits of an E0 dark 
sky zone , or by removing below or near horizontal light paths from fixtures. Often this can be 
achieved with little further disruption. Examples of how this can b e done include:  
 Lighting should be subject to control measures to reduce unnecessary light pollution. 
Examples include:  
 ‘Curfews’ or automatic timers;  
 Proximity ‘PIR’ sensors, timers or any additional shielding or coving, including angling 
the front surf ace of lights to the horizontal;  
 Different surface types to reduce the amount of reflectivity;  
 Appropriate use of glazing to reduce light transmittance; and  
 Screening or shielding to reduce the impact of reflectivity.   
Lighting assessments  
5.58 Where a proposa l involves outdoor lighting, a statement will be required to justify why the 
proposed lighting is required for its intended use and that shows every reasonable effort has 
been made to mitigate skyglow and light intrusions. This should be accompanied by a c omputer 
calculation indicating task luminance, uniformity, horizontal values of overspill beyond the 
property line and vertical luminance values of light intrusion on adjacent property windows.  Any 
statement should be proportionate to the size and likely i mpacts of the scheme.  
5.59 Habitats, particularly woodlands, should not be considered as a ‘natural shield’ to lighting, 
because of the impact on an unlit habitat. Lighting that would spill into sensitive habitats should 
be shielded or removed particularly if nocturnal species are present. Direct illumination of bat 
roosts must be avoided.  
5.60 Proposals should take due consideration of the overall visual impact that the lighting will have 
on the landscape. This may include ground surface reflectivity, the number of  lights, the daytime 
intrusion and the general overall footprint of the lighting. It is also necessary to consider the 
visibility of the lights from the surrounding landscape particularly from viewpoints in accordance 
with Policy SD 6: Safeguarding Views.   
5.61 The spill of lights from large open glass windows and sky lights often present a greater source 
of light pollution than externally mounted lights. Consequently, it is important to control the 
lighting coming from these types of developments. The design of buildings should reduce the 
impact of light spill from internal lighting or suitable mitigation measures should be put in place.   
68                                                          5b. BIODIVERSITY  
Introduction  
5.62 This section  of the Local Plan  includes three policies relating to the wildlife of the National Park. 
Strategic Policy SD 9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity relates to the conservation and 
enhancement of biodiversity and geodiversity across the National Park and sets out a hierarchy 
for designated sites. Strategic Policy SD10: International Sites provides further specific 
requirements for particular International Nature Conservation Designations. Development 
Management Policy SD 11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows provides furt her detail regarding 
these assets. These po licies all relate to the first p urpose of the National Park.  
5.63 The term biodiversity includes all species, communities, habitats and ecosystems, whereas the 
term geodiversity includes all features of geological and  geomorphological interest including 
rocks, fossils, landforms and natural processes which create them.  
5.64 The biodiversity and underlying geodiversity of the National Park directly provide or underpin 
many ecosystem services that people depend on. Together,  these include the filtering and 
storage of water for clean water supplies, water management and flood alleviation, and also the 
provision soils in which we grow our food and other produce, such as timber. In addition, 
biodiversity also underpins air quali ty regulation, pollination and pest control. The geology of 
the National Park provides aggregates and stone for building and other material uses. These 
local materials contribute to the economy of the National Park and have had a strong influence 
on the bu ilt vernacular.  
5.65 The combination of geology and micro -climates has created a diverse mosaic of habitats that 
supports many rare and important wildlife species. Many of these are recognised through various 
international, national and local nature conservati on designations. They form essential 
components of ‘ecological networks’, helping species to adapt to the impacts of climate change 
and other pressures ; evidence for this is provided in the Habitat  Connectivity Study41. Designated 
sites within the National Park are shown on the Policies Map  and m ore information on the types 
of designations is set out in the Glossary.    
5.66 Wildlife habitats are subject to a range of pressures, including those from development, and are 
often degraded and fragmented. A landscape -scale approach is needed to conserve, restore and 
reconnect habitats across the National Park. As well as causing direct loss of wildlife habitats 
and geodiversity, development can have a wide range of other negative impacts, for example, 
housing developmen ts can result in disturbance to wildlife on sensitive sites by dogs and cats as 
well as increased recreational pressure from the local population ; evidence for this is set out in 
the Access Network and Accessible Natural Greenspace Study42.  
5.67 Development can  also have a positive impact on biodiversity and geological features. The impact 
on and conservation of geological features, landforms and processes is a crucial consideration 
when planning for coastal defences and re -engineering of river catchments. By restoring an 
interconnected network of wildlife sites and achieving net gains in biodiversity, species will be 
more resilient to adapt to pressures such as climate change. Urban habitats such as gardens, 
                                                      
41 Habitat Connectivity and Habitat Opportunity Mapping Report (Thomson Ecology, 2015)  
42 Access Network and Accessible Natural Greenspace Study (South Downs National Park Authority, 2014)   
69                                                          parks and buildings can act as ‘stepping stones’ and ‘ wildlife corridors’ to enable wildlife to move 
from one place to another. If development is planned and delivered with these in mind, it can 
conserve and even enhance biodiversity and geodiversity.  
5.68 International sites support populations of species that ar e particularly threatened and/or 
vulnerable to disturbance. Under the Habitats Regulations , the Authority is required to 
demonstrate that proposals for new development avoid or adequately mitigate against impacts 
on these sites.  A Habitats Regulations Asse ssment43 (HRA) of the Preferred Options Local Plan  was 
prepared in 2015, and its recommendations have been taken into account in this version of the 
Local Plan. An HRA of the Pre-Submission Local Plan was published in 2017.  
5.69 Trees, woodland and hedgerows are  distinctive features of the National Park. Non -woodland 
trees, including those in hedgerows and street trees, make an important contribution to 
landscape character  the historic environment and ecosystem services . Hedgerows, in particular, 
have an importa nt role, by providing connections between habitats, and these need to be 
managed and maintained. Trees and woodland are important for adapti on to the impacts of 
climate change.  For example, trees in urban areas moderate summer temperatures and new 
tree pl anting in well -chosen locations can stabilise slopes and reduce the impacts of flooding.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
43 South Downs National Park Authority Local Plan Habitats Regulations Assessment (AECOM, 2015 and 2017)   
70                                                          Strategic Policy SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where they conserve and enhance biodiversity and 
geodiversity, giving particular regard to ecological networks and areas with high potential for 
priority habitat restoration or creation, and should:  
a) Retain, protect and enhance features of biodiversity and geological interest ( including 
supporting habitat and commuting routes through the site and taking due account of any 
use by migratory species) and ensure appropriate and long -term management of those 
features.  Oppo rtunities for net gains in biodiversity should be identified and 
incorporated;  
b) Contribute to the restoration and enhancement of existing habitats, the creation of 
wildlife habitats and the creation of linkages between sites to create and enhance local 
and regional ecological networks;  
c) Seek to eradicate or control any invasive non -native species present on site; and  
d) Be required to contribute to the protection, management and enhancement of 
biodiversity and geodiversity, for example by enhancing Biodiversity  Opportunity Areas, 
delivering Biodiversity Action Plan targets and delivering green infrastructure.  
2. The following hierarchy of designation will apply in the consideration of development proposals:  
a) International Sites , as shown on the Policies Map ( Special Protection Areas (SPAs), 
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and Ramsar Sites, or candidate and formally 
proposed versions of these designations):  
i. Development proposals with the potential to impact on one or more international 
sites(s) will be sub ject to a Habitats Regulations Assessment to determine the 
potential for likely significant effects. Where likely significant effects may occur, 
development proposals will be sub ject to Appropriate Assessment  
ii. Development proposals that will result in any a dverse effect on the integrity of any 
international site will be refused unless it can be demonstrated that: there are no 
alternatives to the proposal; there are imperative reasons of overriding public 
interest why the proposal should nonetheless proceed; and adequate co mpensatory 
provision is secured  
b) National Sites  (Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), National Nature Reserves  
(NNR) , Marine Conservation Zone  (MCZ) ) as shown on the Policies Map : 
i. Development proposals considered likely to have a sign ificant effect on national sites 
will be required to assess the impact by means of an Environmental Impact 
Assessment  
ii. Development proposals where any adverse effect on the site’s notified special 
interest features is likely and which cannot be either avoid ed or adequately mitigated 
will be refused, unless the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the likely 
impact to the notified features of the site and any broader impacts on the network  
of nationally protected sites   
71                                                          c) Local sites  (Sites of Nature Con servation Importance (SNCIs) /  Local Wildlife Sites 
(LWS)  / Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs), Local Nature Reserves  
(LNR  and Local Geodiversity Sites  (LGS) ) as shown on the Policies Map:  
i. Development proposals considered likely to have a significant effect local sites will 
be required to assess the impact by means of an Ecological  Impact Assessment  
ii. Development proposals that will result in any adverse effect on the integrity of any 
local si te which cannot be either avoided or adequately mitigated will be refused, 
unless exceptional circumstances outweighing the adverse e ffects are clearly 
demonstrated  
d) Irreplaceable Habitats  (including ancient woodland as shown on the Policies Map, and 
the lo ss of veteran trees):  Development proposals which result in the loss or 
deterioration of irreplaceable habitats, including ancient woodland and veteran trees will 
be refused unless the need for, and benefits of, the development in that loc ation clearly 
outweigh the loss  
e) Outside of designated sites (including Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOA) and 
habitats listed in the Biodiversity 2020 , protected species and priority species, and habitats 
list): Development proposals must have particular regard to their effects on species and 
habitats which have been designated in law as requiring protection or priority. 
Development proposals that affect those interests will be assessed strictly in accordance 
with legal requirements and will – as a minimum - be required t o avoid adverse impacts 
or, if unavoidable, adequately mitigate those adverse impacts . Development proposals 
should not prejudice  the aims of BOA and should take opportunities to deliver on the 
aims of the BOA  where possible  
Supporting Text  
5.70 The purpose of  Policy SD 9 is to set out a positive strategy to ensure the conservation and 
enhancement of biodiversity and geodiversity across the National Park. It also sets out the 
hierarchy of designated sites.   
5.71 The aim is to achieve a ‘net gain’ in biodiversity by encouraging all opportunities to enable 
conservation and enhancement as part of development proposals, planning at landscape -scale 
and taking opportunities to improve connections between habitats and designated sites.  
5.72 All applications for development must  ensure that sufficient and up to date information is 
provided regarding the wildlife sites or species or geodiversity sites that may be affected by a 
proposal  prior to determination of the development proposals . A landscape and ecology 
management plan mus t be provided which includes mechanisms for management in the long 
term.  
 
 
 
 
  
72                                                          Designated sites  
5.73 The National Park has a very high density of sites designated for their wildlife and geodiversity 
value. This includes  the following  types of designation : 
Inter national designations   
5.74 Under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 (Habitats Regulations) (as 
amended)  the Authority has a duty to give these areas44 the strongest protection against 
damaging development. If a development proposal is assessed to be likely to have a significant 
effect on one of these  sites, either alone or in combination with other plans or projects, an 
Appropriate Assessment is required to establish the implications of the scheme for the identified 
nature conservation interests of the site.  
5.75 Normally, the Authority  cannot consent to plans or projects without first having ascertained 
that they will not have an ‘adve rse effect on the integrity’ of the site. Article 6(4) of the Habitats 
Directive  provides an exemption which would allow a plan or project to be approved in very 
limited circumstances even though it would or may have an ‘adverse effect on t he integrity of a 
European site ’. A plan or project can only proceed provided three sequential tests are met  (see 
Article 6 (4)45). These tests must be interpreted strictly and can only be formally considered once 
an appropriate assessment  has been undertaken.  
5.76 Applicants should work with the Authority in the screening and assessment process and provide 
the necessary information for the Authority to make a determination.  To avoid any damage to 
the integrity of these areas and the species they support , mitigation measures or contributions 
to such measures from new development  may be required . 
5.77 The HRA has assessed the impacts arisin g from traffic movements on air quality and nitrogen 
deposition at a number of international nature conservation designation sites and identifies a 
need for monitoring.  The National Park Authority will work with partners to consider the best 
way to monito r changes in air quality and nitrogen deposition on all these European sites. This 
would include long term monitoring of the main roads that fall within 200 metres of these 
European sites.  Further information is set out in the Implementation and Monitorin g chapter 
of this plan.  
5.78 Policy SD 10: International Sites, sets out specific requirements for development in relation to 
the following international nature conservation designations: The Mens SAC and Ebernoe 
Common SAC, Singleton and Cocking SAC, Arun Valle y SPA, Wealden Heaths Phase II SPA, 
and the Solent Coast SPA’s.   
 
 
                                                      
44 International nature conservation designations covered by the Habitats Directive  include: special areas of 
conservation (SACs), special protection area s (SPAs), sites of community importance (SCIs), and candidate 
SACs. As a matter of Government policy, possible SACs, potential SPAs and listed and proposed Ramsar 
sites and sites identified or required for compensatory measures for adverse effects on such sites are also 
treated as internationally designated  sites. 
45 European Commission (1992) 92/43/EEC Habitats Directive   
73                                                          National designations  
5.79 These sites are designated under UK legislation as being of national importance  for biodiversity 
or geodiversity  and are protected from any operations likely to cause  damage to the designated 
features.  For any development to be permitted that is likely to damage these sites, the developer 
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Authority and Natural England that:  
 There are no alternative solutions; and  
 The reasons for the development clearly outweigh the nature conservation value of the 
site and the national policy to safeguard the national network of such sites.  
Irreplaceable habitats   
5.80 Development proposals that could impact upon irreplaceable habitats including  ancient 
woodland and veteran trees) , should  note that the significance of irreplaceable habitats may be 
derived from habitat age, uniqueness, species diversity and   / or the impossibilities  of re-creation.  
The term ancient woodland also includes Anci ent Semi -Natural Woodland and Plantations on 
Ancient Woodland Sites and these should be treated equally in terms of the level of protection 
afforded to ancient woodland and veteran trees.  
Local designations  
5.81 Locally designated geological and wildlife sites are va luable as a node or link in the local habitat 
network. These sites can provide valuable stepping stones as part of a wider green infrastructure 
network.  On-going surveys can reveal new areas that warrant such protection. Policy SD9 will 
be applied to any new sites or extensions to existing site .  
5.82 Ecological Impact Assessment (EcIA) is the ecological component of Environment Impact 
Assessment (EIA) and is also applied outside the EIA process to identify, quantify and evaluate 
the potential impacts of a proj ect on any ecosystem.  
Geological conservation interests  
5.83 The geological conservation interests of the National Park form an important part of the 
landscape identity and underpin s the biodiversity of the National Park , for example, the river 
corridors and chalk which underpins the species rich chalk grassland. It is therefore important 
that the integrity of the natural function of these features is conserved and enhanced. Designated 
geological sites must be conserved a nd enhanced in accordance with this policy. Wider 
landscape geological features and their associated habitats must be conserved and enhanced in 
accordance with this policy and with SD4: Landscape Character.  
Outside of designated sites and ecological netwo rks 
5.84 There are other biodiversity assets in the National Park which are not designated or legally 
protected, but which form an important element of the collective nature conservation resource. 
For example, the Habitats Directive  highlights the need for effe ctive management of linear or 
continuous features essential for species migration, dispersal and genetic exchange. Such 
features, like rivers, mature trees and hedgerows, extend across designated and non -designated 
areas. These features , in particular, wil l provide the building blocks for achieving the 
Government’s objective to restore and connect wildlife habitats and contribute towards a net 
gain for biodiversity. They are also important in providing corridors or stepping stones for 
species and to allow s pecies to adapt to climate change. The maintenance and enhancement of  
74                                                          these networks will be encouraged. These undesignated biodiversity assets are important 
components of green infrastructure . 
5.85 The National Park Authority has worked closely with partners t o map and identify priority 
habitats, habitat connectivity, and local ecological networks in and beyond its boundaries. Areas 
with high connectivity and  / or high potential for priority habitat restoration or creation will be 
given due weight in the planni ng process. These areas are outlined in the Habitat Connectivity  
Study. The Biodiversity Opportunity Area maps for Hampshire and Sussex will also be 
considered by the National Park Authority .  
Protected and Priority Species  
5.86 Some species have special protection under national legislation . This is usually because of their 
vulnerable conservation status. All wild birds are protected along with a wide range of other 
plants and animals , and there is specific legislation for the pr otection of badgers.  Legally 
protected species which are prominent in the National Park and which could be affected by new 
developments include but are not restricted to all wild birds, all native species of bat, great 
crested newt and badger and , in river s, water vole, brown trout, river lamprey and European 
eel.  
5.87 Protected species are a material consideration when considering planning applications . Where 
there is a reasonable likelihood that a protected species may be present and affected by a 
proposal, c omprehensive surveys will need to be undertaken to provide the evidence needed 
to allow a determination to be made.  
Strategic Policy SD10: International Sites   
The Mens SAC and Ebernoe Common SAC  
1. Development proposals on greenfield sites and sites that su pport or are in close proximity to 
suitable commuting and foraging habitat (including mature vegetative linear features such as 
woodlands, hedgerows riverine and wetland habitats ) within 9km of the Mens SAC or  7km of 
the Ebernoe Common SAC, as shown on the  Policies Map,  should have due regard to the 
possibility that barbastelle and Bechstein B ats will be utilising the site.  Such proposals will be 
required to incorporate necessary surveys and ensure that key features (foraging habitat and 
commuting routes) are retained, in addition to a suitable buffer to safeguard against 
disturbance46. 
Singleton and Cocking SAC  
2. Proposed use or development of the tunnels comprising the Singleton and Cocking Tunnels 
SAC will be required to demonstrate that there is no adverse  effect on the conservation 
features, inc luding hibernation habitat for B arbastelle and Bechsteins Bats, or on the integrity 
of the site. Suitable commuting and foraging habitat for the site that lies within or in close 
proximity to any proposed developmen t needs to be retained, in addition to a suitable buffer 
                                                      
46 The scale of the buffer will need to be determined on a case -by-case basis, informed by bat activity survey 
work and would take account of the species involved and their sensitivity to disturbance / artificial lighting 
and the natural screening provided by existing surrounding vegetation. It would need to be devised in 
consultation with the SDNPA  (in addition to Natural England, as require d).  
75                                                          to safeguard against disturbance.  This will ensure no loss or severance of existing commuting 
and foraging routes occurs either from direct land take or disturbances from lighting, noise and 
vibrati ons both during construction and operational phase of any development.  
Arun Valley SPA  
3. Development proposals on greenfield sites within 5km of the Arun Valley SPA, a shown on the 
Policies Map, will undertake an appraisal as to whether the land is  suitable  for wintering Bewick 
Swan. If it suitable then surveys will be undertaken to determine whether the fields are of 
importance to the swan population. If so, appropriate alternative habitat would be required 
before development could proceed.  
Wealden Heaths Phase II SPA  
4. Development proposals resulting in a net increase in residential units  within 400m of the 
boundary of the Wealden Heaths Phase II SPA, as shown on the Policies Map, will be required 
to undertake a project -specific Habitats Regulations Assessme nt (HRA).  Development 
proposals resulting in a net increase in residential units within 5km of the boundary of the 
Wealden Heaths Phase II SPA will be required to submit a screening opinion to the Authority 
for a project -specific Habitat Regulations Assess ment (HRA) which, in consultation with Natural 
England, will determine whether a likely significant effect on the integrity of the site will result. 
Likely significant effects will be assessed through the HRA and any requirement for mitigation 
identified.  
Solent Coast SPAs  
5. Development proposals resulting in a net increase in residential units, within the Solent Coast 
Special Protection Area’s (SPA) (Chichester & Langstone Harbours SPA, Portsmouth Harbour 
SPA and Solent & Southampton Water SPA) zone of influ ence shown on the Policies Map, 
defined as 5.6km from the boundary of these sites, may be permitted where ‘in combination’ 
effects of recreation on the Solent Coastal Special Protection Areas are satisfactorily mitigated 
through the provision of an appropr iate financial contribution to the de livery of strategic 
mitigation.  In the absence of a financial contribution toward mitigation, an appropriate 
assessment may be required to demonstrate that any ‘in combination’ negative effects can be 
avoided or can be satisfactorily mitigated through a developer -provided package of measures.  
5.88 The purpose of Policy SD1 0 is to set specific requirements relating to the Mens, Ebernoe 
Common, and Singleton and Cocking Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), and the Arun Valley, 
Wealden Heaths Phase II, and Solent Coast Special Protection Areas (SPA), as recommended 
by the Habit at Regulations Assessment (HRA). There are many other international nature 
conservation designation sites in and near the National Park, and requirements for these are set 
out in Policy SD1 9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity.  
 
 
 
 
  
76                                                          Habitats Regulations Assess ment (HRA)  
5.89 Policy SD 9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity, sets out the general requirements with regard to 
International Nature Conservation Designations and their protection under the Habitats 
Directive (2010). Development proposals which are likely to have significant effects on 
international sites are required to undergo an appropriate assessment in order to ascertain that 
there will not be adverse impacts on the integrity of the site.  
5.90 The requirements set out in criteria 1 -5 of this policy seek to ensure t hat development will not 
have an adverse impact on the integrity of the relevant sites, in line with the requirements of 
the Habitats Directive (2010).  
5.91 As identified in Policy SD 9 and its supporting text, the Habitats Directive contains an exemption  
to this, under very limited circumstances. The following sequential test applies:  
 There must be no feasible alternative solutions to the plan or project which are less 
damaging to the affected European site(s)  
 There must be “imperative reasons of overriding public interest” (IROPI) for the plan or 
project to proceed  
 All necessary compensatory measures must be secured to ensure that the overall 
coherence of the network of European sites is protected  
5.92 In practice it is likely that only a small minority of plans and projects will of a nature to reach 
this stage of consideration.  
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC’s)  
5.93 Policy SD1 0 protects bat populations for which the Mens, Ebernoe Common and Singleton and 
Cocking Tu nnels SACs are designated. In the absence of research detailing both flight lines and 
distances travelled by bats commuting to and from the hibernation sites at Singleton and Cocking 
Tunnels SAC, and buffer distances in relation to disturbance of bat for t he three SACs, these 
parameters will need to be determined on a case -by-case basis, informed by bat activity survey 
work and would need to take account of the species involved and their sensitivity to disturbance  
/ artificial lighting and the natural scree ning provided by existing surrounding vegetation. Surveys 
would need to be devised in consultation with the National  Park Authority and Natural  England, 
as required.  
Special Protection Areas (SPA’s)  
5.94 A very small area of the National Park is located within the zone of influence of the Solent 
Special Protection Areas (SPAs) as identified in the Solent Recreation Mitigation Partnership 
(SRMP). Through work on the SRMP, it has been concluded that any net increase in residential 
development will give rise to lik ely significant effects on the Solent SPAs, either ‘alone’ or ‘in 
combination’ with other development proposals. All new residential development within this 
zone of influence will be required to mitigate the negative impact. This mitigation can be 
provided  through financial contribution to the strategic measures set out in the emerging SRMP 
(or as subsequently adopted).   
77                                                          5.95 Consistent with the Habitat Regulations Assessment undertaken for the East Hampshire  Joint 
Core Strategy, the potential cumulative impact of development within 400m of the Wealden 
Heaths Phase II SPA is recognised. To avoid likely significant effect upon the SPA , the National 
Park Authority  will monitor all development within the 400m zone in liaison with East 
Hampshire District Council, Wav erley District Council and Natural England.  The National Park 
Authority has worked  with East Hampshire District Council on the preparation of a 
Supplementary Planning Document  (SPD)  that provide s guidance to applicants where 
development proposals in East H ampshire District, including the area that falls within the South 
Downs National Park, will result in a net increase in residential development within 400m of 
the Wealden Heaths Phase II SPA.  Any development proposed within the 400 metre buffer 
zone will need to be tested through a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA).  
Development Management Policy SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where they conserve and enhance trees, hedgerows 
and woodlands.  
2. Development proposals that affect  trees, hedgerows and woodland must  demonstrate that  
they have been informed by a full site survey, including an A rboricultural  Impact Assessment, 
Abroricultural Method Statement and associated Tree Protection Plan , and include a 
manag ement plan .  
3. The felling of protected trees, groups of trees or woodland will only be permitted in exceptional 
circumstances and in accordance with the relevant legislation, policy and good practice 
recommendations. Where protected trees are subject to fel ling, a replacement of  an 
appropriate number, species and  size in an appropriate location will be required.  
4. A minimum buffer of 15 metres will be required between the development and ancient 
woodland or veteran trees. Development proposals should also prov ide adequate protection 
zones and buffers around hedgerows and other woodland and trees to prevent damage to root 
systems and taking account of future growth.  
5. A proposed loss or damage of non -protected trees, woodland or hedgerows  should be 
avoided, and if demonstrated as being unavoidable, appropriate replacement or compensation 
will be required.  
6. Development proposals must demonstrate that a ppropriate protection measures are in place 
prior to any work on site throughout the development process  as part of  a comprehensive 
landscaping plan, and that suitable o pportunities for the restoration, enhancement or planting 
of trees, woodland, and hedgerows  are identified and incorporated.  
5.96 The purpose of Policy SD 11 is to ensure the management, including conservation and 
enhancement, of existing trees, woodland and hedgerows, and to ensure that opportunities for 
restoration and new planting is realised.  This policy should also be considered alongside Policies 
SD4: Lands cape Character and SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity.   
78                                                          5.97 The South Downs is the most wooded national park in England and Wales . The trees and 
woodland are significant features of the landscape , with a high proportion of ancient and veteran 
trees. Trees and w oodland are a significant asset with regard to ecosystem services, contributing 
to many  supporting, provision ing, regulating , and cultural ecosystem services , including for 
example carbon storage, biodiversity, air quality, and tranquillity . Hedgerows are a priority 
habitat and provide an important function as wildlife corridors. They have an important role for 
ecosystem services such as genetic dispersal and should be protected from severance.  
5.98 All development must be undertaken in line with the British Standard 5837  and all tree works 
must be carried out in accordance with British Standard 3998 .47. Ancient woodland is recognised 
as an irreplaceable habitat  – please see policy SD9.  
5.99 Forestry is one of the key sectors of the National Park’s econo my, supplying the provisioning 
ecosystem services of sustainable timber and wood fuel. The South Downs National Park 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study  highlights the potential an d importance of supporting the 
biomass  / woodfuel market, and recommends t hat development of this market should be 
supported in principle. Policy requirements and guidance on these matters are primarily 
addressed through policies SD4 (L andscape Character), SD5 (Design), SD39 (Agriculture and 
Forestry), and SD5 1 (Renewable Energy ).  
Planting new trees  
5.100  The Authority will support all suitable opportunities for new planting as part of development 
schemes, and their protection via Tree Preservation Orders, where appropriate48. Policies SD4: 
Landscape  Character, SD5: Design, SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity,  SD45: Green 
Infrastructure should  also be considered with regard to new planting as part of development 
schemes.   
Buffer zones  
5.101  It should be clearly demonstrated how development proposals will avoid any potential adverse 
impact on trees, woodland and hedgerows. Where development is permitted, mitigation 
measures may be sought and secured through condition  and / or planning obligation . Mitigation 
of impacts may include the use of a buffer zone  of semi -natural habitat  between an y significant 
development and an area of woodland  with amenity or biodiversity value.  
5.102  A minimum buffer of 15 metres will be required between the development and ancient 
woodland or veteran trees. What is an appropriate buffer will depend on the local 
circumstances, the species and size of trees, the form and nature of the trees or woodland and 
type of development. This buffer zone should not normally include residential gardens  and will 
require appropriate ma nagement after the completion of the development . The height of 
development should allow adequate sunlight to reach the buffer zone.   
 
                                                      
47 British Standards Institute (2010 and 2012) BS5837:2012 Trees in relation to design, demolition and 
construction –recommendations; and BS3998:2010 Tree Work Recommendations.  
48 Sections 197 and 198 of the 1990 Planning Act  
  
79                                                          5c. H ISTORIC ENVIRONMENT  
Introduction  
5.103  This section of the Local Plan includes five policies relating to the historic envi ronment of the 
National Park. Strategic Policy SD1 2 sets out a positive strategy for conservation and 
enhancement of the historic environment. This is followed by four development management 
policies. The first two relate to specific designated heritage as sets namely listed buildings ( Policy 
SD13 ) and conservation areas (Policy SD15 ). There are two further development management 
policies relating to climate change mitigation and adaptation of historic b uildings  (Policy SD14 ) 
and archaeology ( Policy SD16 ).  
5.104  The National Park has a rich and varied cultural heritage ranging from historic settlements and 
buildings to archaeological sites of all periods. It is critical that the historic environment is 
regarded as a positive and irreplaceable asset, valuable not o nly in cultural and economic terms, 
but as a frame and reference point for the creation of attractive places for current and future 
generations to enjoy.  
5.105  The term cultural heritage , which is part of Purpose 1 of the National Park,  includes physical 
feature s such as archaeological sites and finds , historic buildings,  fields and settlements, and 
more hidden  evidence of how people used to live such as folk traditions, customs and work by 
creative people. The term ‘historic environment’ is used in the NPPF and is a more specific and 
relevant term when setting policies relating to heritage -related planning consents. The term 
‘heritage assets’ refers to any buildings, monument s, sites, place s, area s or landscape s identified 
as having a degree of significance merit ing consideration in planning decisions because of its 
heritage interest. Heritage assets include listed buildings, scheduled monuments, archaeological 
remains , conservation areas, historic par ks and gardens and battlefields . A distinction is made 
between ‘designated’ and  ‘undesignated’ heritage assets.  
5.106  The Authority will proactively seek to conserve and enhance heritage assets by:  
 Identifying heritage assets which are considered to be at risk of irreversible harm or loss;  
 Encouraging owners to maintain the ir heritage assets; and  
 The use of Article 4 directions where the exercise of permitted development rights would 
undermine the aim to conserve and enhance the historic environment . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
80                                                          Strategic Policy SD12: Historic Environment  
1. Development proposals will only be permitted where they conserve and enhance the historic 
environment, including through the safeguarding of heritage assets and their setting.  
2. Applicants will be required  to provide a Heritage Statement  sufficient to allow an informed 
assessment of the impact of the proposed development on the significance of the heritage 
asset(s).  
3. Development proposals which affect heritage assets (whether designated or non -designated) 
or their setting will be determined with regard to the significance of the asset , including  the 
long-term conservation and enhancement of that asset.  
4. Development proposals will be permitted where  they enhance or better reveal the significance 
of heritage assets, particularly where they are considered to be at risk of irreversible harm or 
loss.  
5. Development proposals which  appropriately re-use redundant or under -used heritage assets 
with the optimal viab le use, which secures their long -term conservation and enhancement, 
including of their setting, will be supported.  
6. Development proposals for enabling development that would otherwise conflict with other 
planning policies but which would secure the future c onservation of a heritage asset will be 
permitted provided :  
a) The proposals will not materially harm the heritage values of the asset or its setting;  
b) It can be demonstrated that alternative solutions have failed;  
c) The proposed development is the minimum necessary to protect the significance of the 
heritage asset;  
d) It meets the tests and criteria set out in Historic England guidance Enabling Development 
and the Conservation of Significant Places49 (or guidance superseding it);  
e) It is subject to a legal agreem ent to secure the restoration of the asset prior to 
complet ion of the enabling development; and  
f) It enables public appreciation of the saved heritage asset.  
5.107  The purpose of Policy SD1 2 is to set out a positive strategy for the conservation  and 
enhancement  of the historic environment, including the safeguarding of heritage assets.  
5.108  It is important that proposals are based on a meaningful understanding of the historic context 
and character of an area. Proposals should be informed by  Historic Landscape Characte r 
Assessments  (HLCA ), SDILCA,  Historic Environment Records,  conservation area character 
appraisals an d the Extensive Urban Survey.  
Optimum viable use  
5.109  Sustaining heritage assets in the long term often requires investment and putting heritage assets 
to a viable use is likely to enable the maintenance necessary for their long -term conservation. 
Certain  heritage assets may have limited or no scope for new u ses and indeed may be so 
                                                      
49 Enabling Development and the Conservation of Significant Places  (English Heritage / Historic England, 2008)   
81                                                          sensitive to change that alterations to accommodate a viable use would lead to an unacceptable 
loss of significance.  
5.110  It is important that any use is viable, not just for the owner, but also the future conservation of 
the asset. The  optimum viable use may not necessarily be the most profitable one. If there is 
only one viable use, that use is the optimum viable use. If there is a range of alternative viable 
uses, the optimum use is the one likely to cause the least harm to the signif icance of the asset, 
not just through necessary initial changes, but also as a result of subsequent wear and tear and 
likely future changes. Where relevant, reference should also be made to policy SD4 1:  
Conversion of Redundant Agricultural  or Forestry  Buildings.  The National Park Authority will 
publish guidance on viability matters in due course.  
Significance of heritage assets  
5.111  Development proposals can affect  the significance of  heritage assets in a range of different ways. 
Physical impacts can range fro m minor alterations to the complete loss of the asset. Other 
impacts may not physically alter the asset but may affect its setting , which in turn may impact 
the significance of the heritage asset . Carefully considered changes to setting may well prove to 
be sympathetic and positive, but adverse impacts can create negative perceptions , a long -term 
decline or loss of significance, or of understanding and appreciation of that significance . In 
determining applications likely to have a bearing on the setting of heritage assets, guidance 
published by Historic England will be used to assess impact.  
5.112  In order to assess significance it is essential to have a sound understanding of the original 
purpose, development, use and history of the historic asset. All planning a pplications that affect 
or have the potential to affect heritage assets and their setting, including sites with archaeological 
potential, must be supported by a Heritage Statement. The Heritage Statement should identify 
the significance of the asset and se t out the impact of the development. The applicant should 
consult  the relevant Historic Environment Record (HER). The level of detail required to support 
the application should be proportionate to the significance of the heritage asset and the impact 
of the development. In all but the most trivial cases, assessment of potential impact on the 
significance of the asset will require input from conservation professionals with appropriate 
qualifications and experience.  
5.113  It is important to distinguish  between pote ntial harm that is ‘substantial’ and that which is  ‘less 
than substantial.’ Substantial harm  will relate to those impacts which wholly or partially destroy 
the significance of the heritage asset , or impinge upon the role of its setting to an extent which 
undermines its essential appreciation. However, it should be noted that less than substantial 
impacts may still prove significant, with some heritage assets being highly sensitive to change   
5.114  In cases where harm on significance is assessed to be substantial,  but justified by considerations 
of continued use, re -use or wider public benefits, mitigation by recording will be required as a 
condition of consent. This can include deposition of the record including artefacts and ecofacts 
in a publicly accessible muse um or record office, as well as the relevant HER.  However, the 
ability to record evidence should not be a factor in deciding whether such a loss should be 
permitted. In instances where some degree of harm to heritage assets or the role of their setting 
is considered justified when balanced against public benefits, these benefits must be compelling, 
measurable, realistic and capable of assured delivery.    
82                                                          5.115  On occasion, the significance of a site or building may only become apparent when a 
development proposal is conceived. These discoveries at a pre -application or application stage 
of the development process will constitute ‘ non-designated heritage assets’. The lack of a 
previous designation will no t necessarily imply lesser  importance  and the asset may  sometim es 
possess great or even national historical significance. The significance of non-designated heritage 
assets must be carefully assessed and the desirability of their conservation will be weighed 
against wider public benefits as planning applications are c onsidered and determined.   
Enabling development  
5.116  The long -term conservation of a small minority of heritage assets can sometimes present 
particular problems . This is a result of the disparity between the costs of renovating the asset 
in a suitable manner and the final end value. This disparity is known as the ‘conservation deficit’ . 
In extreme cases, a recognised way of addressing this is to allow development in a location , or 
of a nature or form, that  would normally be considered unacceptable in planning policy terms, 
which would generate sufficient funds to cover the shortfall in the renovation costs , and where  
it would bring public benefits sufficient to justify it being carried out, and which could not 
otherwise be achieved. This approach is known as ‘enabling development.’  
5.117  Enabling d evelopment  should only ever be regarded as a last resort in restoring heritage assets 
once all other options have been exhausted. Development should constitute the minimum 
required to cover the conservation deficit. It shoul d also not materially harm the heritage 
significance of the place (including its setting  where relevant) , and should produce public benefits 
which outweigh the dis -benefits of conflicting with other policies.  Enabling development should 
contribute to the s pecial qualities of the National Park and allow public appreciation of the saved 
heritage asset.  
5.118  The Authority will use the detailed and rigorous tests set out by Historic England  in order to 
determine planning applications that propose enabling developmen t. 
Development Management Policy SD13: Listed Buildings  
1. Development proposals which affect a listed building or its setting will only be permitted and 
listed building consent granted where:  
a) They preserve and enhance the significance of the listed building  and its setting by 
demonstrating that unnecessary loss of historic fabric and detail of significance, including 
internal features, floor plans and the integrity of the rooms, is avoided ; or  
b) Harm to the significance of the listed building or its setting i s considered to be  
outweighed by public benefits by the Authority, when appropriate mitigation measures 
will be expected , including archaeological investigation (including a written report) or 
recording.   
2. Development proposals will be refused planning perm ission and  / or listed building consent 
where they cause substantial harm to a listed building or its setting.  
5.119  The purpose of Policy SD 13 is to set out more detailed criteria  for to development proposals 
affecting listed buildings. This policy should also be read alongside Policy SD 5: Design.   
83                                                          5.120  There are more than 5,000 listed buildings and structures within the National Park and these 
form an important part of the historic charact er, sense of place, and wider cultural heritage of 
the National Park. It is necessary to consider the character and significance of listed structures 
in a holistic manner; the character of their interiors can be as important as their external 
appearance. T he protection and enhancement of all aspects of significance should be considered 
and great weight will be given to their preservation and, where appropriate, their restoration 
to optimal condition.  
5.121  In instances where harm or significance is unavoidable an d outweighed by public benefits, the 
record of lost or altered fabric or features should be deposited at the relevant County Record 
Office to facilitate access by the general public.  
5.122  Where listed structures are at risk of loss through decay or neglect, the  Authority will use its 
statutory powers to serve Urgent Works or Repair Notices, where appropriate, to arrest decay 
of the asset.  
Development Management Policy SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and 
Adaptation of Historic Buildings  
1. Development proposals will be permitted, and where relevant listed building consent  granted , 
for works to heritage assets to adapt to, or mitigate the effects of, climate change where it can 
be clearly demonstrated that this is consistent with all of the following:  
a) The preserv ation and enhancement of the heritage asset’s significance, character and 
appearance;  
b) The preservation and enhancement of the heritage asset’s special architectural or historic 
interest;  
c) The long -term preservation of the historic built fabric; and  
d) The set ting of the heritage asset.  
5.123  The purpose of Policy SD 14 is to set out more detailed criteria for development proposals that 
seek to  improve the energy efficiency or adaptation of heritage assets to adapt to or mitigate  
the effects of climate change.  It should be read alongside Policy  SD12: Historic Environment , 
Policy SD 5: Design and SD 48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources .  
Assessment of energy efficiency of historic buildings  
5.124  Opportunities  to reduce carbon dioxide emissions through improv ements to energy efficiency 
of existing buildings  are in principal to be welcomed . However, it is incorrect to assume that 
the older a building is , the less energy efficient it is. Many historic buildings perform well in terms 
of energy efficiency . Interventions to improve energy efficiency can have  potential to adversely 
impact the breathability of built fabric or harm features of interest. It should also be recognised 
that historic building materials are often more durable than modern replacements a nd more 
cost-effective in energy terms.    
84                                                          Alterations and adaptations of historic buildings  
5.125  Alterations to historic buildings should always be considered carefully to ensure that they do 
not cause buildings that were previously functioning well to fail. Th ere are various adaptations 
which can improve energy efficiency of buildings or improve low carbon performance, such as 
insulation to walls and roofs, solar panels and alterations  to windows.  
5.126  These alterations and adaptations can significantly impact the features and subsequently the 
overall character, historic interest and integrity of built fabric historic building . Changes to 
specific features must be considered in assessing the significance of the historic asset . For 
example, traditional windows and th eir glazing make a hugely important contribution to the 
value and significance of historic areas. They are an integral part of the design of older buildings 
and can be important artefacts in their own right.  Minor changes to windows can have a dramatic 
impact. 
Development Management Policy SD15: Conservation Areas  
1. Development proposals within a conservation area, or within its setting, will  only be permitted 
where they preserve or enhance the special architectural or historic interest, character or 
appeara nce of the conservation area. Sufficient information to support an informed assessment 
should be provided on the following matters:  
a) The relevant conservation area appraisal and management plan;  
b) Overall settlement layout and relationship to established landscape setting;  
c) Historic pattern of thoroughfares, roads, paths and open spaces, where these provide 
evidence of the historic evolution of the settlement, and the historic street scene;  
d) Distinctive character zones within the settlement;  
e) Mix of building types and uses, if significant to the historic evolution of the settlement;  
f) Use of locally distinctive building materials, styles or techniques;  
g) Historic elevation features including fenestration, or shop fronts, where applicable;  
h) Significant trees, landsc ape features, boundary treatments, open space, and focal points; 
and 
i) Existing views and vistas through the settlement, views of the skyline and views into and 
out of the conservation area . 
2. Within a conservation area, development proposals which involve the  total or substantial 
demolition of buildings or structures will only be permitted where it is sufficiently demonstrated 
that: 
a) The current buildings or structures make no positive contribution to the special 
architectural or historic interest, character or  appearance of the conservation area;  and  
b) The replacement would make an equal or greater contribution to the character and 
appearance of the conservation area.  
5.127  The purpose of Policy SD 15 is to set out more detailed criteria  for development proposals 
within or affecting conservation areas. Reference to character zones relates to the discrete 
character areas described within some individual conservation area appraisals.     
85                                                          5.128  Some historic settlements within the National Park are smal l or diffuse in nature. The 
conservation area boundaries of these diffuse settlements may not reflect the broader heritage 
interest of their surrounds. Policy SD 15 reflects the importance of setting and extends 
consideration to such locations.  
5.129  More inform ation on trees within conservation areas is provided in the introductory text for 
Policy SD 11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows.  Appendix 5 provides a list of conservation areas 
within the National Park.  
Development Management Policy SD16: Archaeology  
1. Develop ment proposals will be permitted where they do not cause harm to archaeological 
heritage assets and  / or their setting . Sufficient information in a Heritage Statement is  required 
to allow an informed assessment of the significance of the archaeological heritage asset and its 
setting, and the impact of the proposed development on that significance.  
2. There will be a presumption in favour of preservation in -situ for Scheduled Monuments and 
other archaeological heritage assets of equivalent significance.  
3. Development proposals that will result in unavoidable harm to, or loss of, an archaeological 
heritage asset’s significance, will only be permitted where there is a clear justification in terms 
of public benefits arising from the development which outweigh tha t harm and, in the case of 
substantial harm  / loss, also meet the following requirements:  
a) There is no less harmful viable option; and  
b) The amount of harm has been reduced to the minimum possible.  
In these cases, preservation by record secured through an agreed W ritten Scheme of Archaeological 
Investigation will be required.   
5.130  The purpose of Policy SD 16 is to set out more detailed crit eria for development proposals   
affecting  heritage assets with archaeological interest. Archaeological sites are finite, i rreplaceable 
and fragile resources which are vulnerable to damage, either from specific works  or from gradual 
degradation over time. Archaeology is not just the ancient remains of early people but also 
includes the recent evidence of industry and housing.  
5.131  When considering archaeological resources , the Authority will consider advice from  the 
relevant curatorial  / development management archaeologist for that purpose.  
Significance of archaeological heritage assets  
5.132  The most significant known archaeological heritage assets are usually designated as scheduled 
monuments , and are of national or international importance. It is widely recognised that there 
are sites which have an equal significance , but which are non-designat ed heritage assets . If the 
significance of such sites have been  demonstrated , they will be treated in the same way as 
scheduled monuments. In addition, there are many other archaeological sites which do not have 
such a great significance but which form a v aluable part of the National Park’s  historic 
environment . These may also be referred to as non -designated heritage assets. The relevant 
historic environment record (HER) is the definitive record of all known archaeology, including 
such sites. The nature of  the archaeological record also means that there are many sites of 
which nothing is presently known, which may be revealed during development works.   
86                                                          5.133  Planning decisions will take account of the significance of  remain s, including the wider benefits  
that con servation of the historic environment can bring. Development proposals potentially 
affecting known or suspected archaeological resources w ill be required to include a Heritage 
Statement.   
5.134  The level of detail required in a Heritage Statement should be proportionate to the heritage 
asset’s importance. It may comprise a desk -based assessment, using the known archaeology 
recorded in the HER, but it can also extend to various forms of field evaluation.  
In-situ archaeological heritage ass ets 
5.135  Preservation of archaeological assets in situ is the preferred position.  In respect of scheduled 
monuments or non -designated heritage assets of equivalent significance, the preservation of the 
archaeological remains in situ and undisturbed will usually  be required. In some cases this can 
be achieved by avoiding sensitive areas . It should be noted that development which affects a 
scheduled monument and its setting will require permission from the Secretary of State.  
5.136  If a development cannot preserve archaeological assets in situ , the significance of those assets 
should be established through a desk -based assessment , and where necessary field evaluation 
including geophysical survey and  / or trial trenching . From this a series of mitigating measures 
can be identified. The scope of these mitigation works will be set out in a Written Scheme of 
Investigation in accordance with the professional standards of the Chartered Institute for 
Archaeology.  Information from this investigation and recovered archaeologi cal assets should be 
made available as appropriate, for public understanding and appreciation.  
Written Scheme of Archaeological Investigation  
5.137  Any projects where significant archaeological interest has been established , such as  projects 
involving major inf rastructure, and/or within historic urban centres  (particularly those which are 
the subject of an extensive urban survey ), may require a p rogramme of archaeological work. 
The detai ls must be set out in the  Written Scheme of Investigation. This will include  a 
programme which promotes a wider understanding and appreciation of the site’s archaeological 
heritage in a local and regional context.  
5.138  The Written Scheme of Investigation must provide for the deposition of the record created by 
any investigation or reco rding in a publicly accessible institution such as a Record Office or 
accredited museum. It must also provide for the publication and dissemination of the 
information gathered through the Written Scheme of Investigation.  
5.139  In addition to direct physical impa cts on archaeology, development can potentially impact on 
the setting of archaeological sites and this will be assessed. Where  there is evidence of deliberate 
neglect or damage to archaeology, its deteriorated state will not be taken into account in any 
decision.  
5.140  The Authority  will require all archaeological works to be undertaken to proper professional 
standards, as defined by the Chartered Institute for Archaeologists (CIfA).  
   
87                                                          5d. WATER  
Introduction  
5.141  This section of the Local Plan includes two strategic policies relating to the protection of water 
assets. Policy SD17  seeks to protect the quality of groundwater and surface water features. 
Policy SD18  seeks to protect the open and undeveloped nature of the Na tional Park coastline . 
These policies are interrelated through the water cycle, ecosystem services and marine planning , 
which applies  up to the tidal extent of seawater in the estuaries of the rivers within the National 
Park.  
5.142  The National Park contains a diverse range of groundwater and surface water features . 
Groundwater is the water which is held underground in the soil or in pores and crevices in 
rock. Groundwater features include aquifers and sources such as headwaters and springs. 
Surface water featur es include  rivers, lakes, winterbournes, estuaries and open coastline. Water 
plays an important role in the special qualities of the National Park and also offers essential 
supporting, provisioning and cultural ecosystem services.   
5.143  Groundwater is a key pa rt of the water cycle: it provides an important source for rivers, 
sustaining flows in dry periods, and thus supporting wildlife habitats. Two aquifers , one chalk 
and one greensand,  supply people inside and outside of the National Park with high -quality 
drinking water . Both aquifers are under stress . Ground water i s a key part of the water cycle: 
it provides an important source for rivers, such as sustaining flows in dry periods, and for wildlife 
habitats.  The future demands of development from inside and outside if the National Park from 
water abstraction poses risk.  The quality of ground water is easily polluted directly and 
indirectly . It is therefore better to prevent or reduce the amount of contamination at source  
rather than treat  it afterwards.  
5.144  There  are eleven main rivers50 flowing through the National Park  shown in F igure 5.4 and 
numerous other important watercourses  and other surface water features . These do not  
function in isolation and have complex and dynamic interactions with the landscape . 
5.145  The National Park has 17.5km of largely undeveloped open coastline incorporating the whole 
of the Sussex Heritage Coast, the iconic coastline between Eastbourne and Seaford where the 
South Downs meets the sea. Heritage coasts have four purposes, three of w hich align with NP 
purposes and duty . The additional purpose is to  maintain  and improve the health of inshore 
waters affecting heritage coasts and their beaches through appropriate environmental 
management measures . Figure 5.5 is a map of the National Park ’s coastline showing its 
designations and attractions.
                                                      
50 Main rivers are usually larger streams and rivers but also include smaller watercourses of strategic drainage 
importance. It is defined as a watercourse as shown on a main  river map and whereby the Environment 
Agency has powers to carry out flood defence works.   
88                                                                                                           
      
 FIGURE 5. 5: MAP OF THE MAIN RI VERS  ACROSS THE NATIONAL PARK  
 
89                                                          
  Strategic Policy SD1 7: Protection of the Water Environment  
1. Development proposals that affect groundwater, surface water  features, and watercourse 
corridors  will not be permitted unless  they conserve and enhance  the following : 
a) Water quality and quantity, and help achieve requirements of the European Water 
Framework Directive , or its replacement ; 
b) Ability of groundwater, surface water features and watercourse corridors to function by 
natural processes throughout seasona l variations, within the immediate vicinity , and both 
upstream and downstream of the site of the proposal ; and 
c) Specifically for surface water features and watercourse corridors : 
i. Biodiversity ; 
ii. Historic significance ; 
iii. Character, appearance, and setting ;  
iv. Public access to and along the waterway for recreational opportunities ; and 
v. Ability for maintenance of the watercourse, including for food risk management 
purposes.  
2. Development within Groundwater Source Protection Zones will only be permitted provided 
that the re is no adverse impact on the quality of the groundwater source , and provided there 
is no risk to its ability to maintain a public water supply . 
3. Development proposals must incorporate measures to eliminate risk of pollution to 
groundwater and surface water features  which would harm their ecological and  / or chemical 
status.  
4. Development proposals for the provision of agricultural reservoirs that aid demand 
management, water efficiency and water storage will be permitted where they are compatible 
with th e National Park purposes.   
5.146  The purpose of Policy SD1 7 is to protect groundwater and  surface water assets; ensuring  that 
proposed development, either individually or cumulatively, does not cause the quality of 
groundwater and surface water assets to deteriorate . Development should also seek to deliver 
enhancements to groundwater and surface water features and should incorporate an 
ecosystems services approach  as set out in policy SD2: Ecosystem Services. This policy  therefore  
applies to any developmen t proposals which may impact on groundwater or surface water 
features.  
5.147  Coastal waters are included in this policy because the Water Framework Directive  (WFD) extends 
to cover coastal waters.  
 
 
 
  
90                                                          
 Watersources and watercourse  corridors  
5.148  The corridor of a watercourse can be defined as the width of the channel in which water flows, 
plus its  extensive influence on its surrounding landscape that is necessary for its natural 
functioning. This is characterised by many natural interactions between topography , hydrology, 
flooding hazards, geology, soils, climate, flora and fauna .  
5.149  The location and design of development alongside watercourses must ensure that the 
watercourse corridor is protected and must positively respond to their character and 
appearance, se tting and functions , making the most of opportunities to enhance the watercourse 
environment, including public access .  
5.150  The character, appearance and setting of watercourses  reflect both natural and human influence 
over time. Requirements regarding landscape character and appearance and setting are found 
in policies SD4: Landscape Character and SD5: Design. R eference should be made to the 
SDILCA and South Coast Seascape Chara cter Analysis when assessing the impact of potential 
development on landscape character . 
5.151  Opportunities to access and enjoy rivers relate to the second purpose of National Parks with 
many recreational opportunities such as canoeing, fishing, walking or observing their wildlife. All 
development proposals alongside watercourses should maximise opportunities to  enhanc e 
recreational p ublic access, whilst ensuring biodiversity is conserved . 
5.152  Where a watercourse is present on a dev elopment site, it should be retained or restored into 
a natural state and enhanced where possible.  Any enhancements and mitigation should inform 
the earliest stages of the design process.  The culverting of watercourses will not be permitted, 
and developme nt should wherever pos sible remove existing culverts.  
5.153  Development should be laid out to  enable maintenance of the watercourse , including for flood 
risk management purposes where appropriate. In order to protect the watercourse and its 
corridor from pollut ion, to allow for the natural function, to protect biodiversity and to support 
long term management, development should not be located within a distance of 8 metres  of the 
watercourse . Wider buffer strips may be appropriate , depending on the nature of the 
topography or sensitivity of habitat . These b uffer strips should form part of the overarching 
landscape design of the site and arrangements should be made for long -term management.    
Groundwater  / aquifers  
5.154  The quality of ground water is easily polluted dir ectly and indirectly from many types of 
development,  and is difficult to remediate. It is therefore better to prevent or reduce the 
amount of contamination at source . Consideration should be given to the requirements in 
Policies SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  and SD48 : Change  and Sustainable Use of Resources . 
5.155  The Environment Agency provides information on areas which are sensitive to groundwater 
pollution. It define s Source Protection Zones (SPZ’s) for groundwater sources such as wells, 
boreholes a nd springs used for public drinking water supply. These zones show the risk of 
contamination from any activities that might cause pollution in the area. The closer the activity, 
the greater the risk. Maps of SPZ’s are available on the Environment Agency’s website. These 
show three main zones (inner, outer, and total catchment) and a fourth zone of special interest 
to a groundwater source, which usually represents a surface water catchment that drains into 
the aquifer feeding the groundwater supply.   
91                                                          
 5.156  The Env ironment Agency may be consulted during the determination of planning applications , 
and conditions directed at preventing deterioration of water quality and quantity may be 
imposed on any approved development. This may also be achieved through the requirem ents 
of Policy SD 50: Sustainable Drainage. Particular attention will be paid to proposals for waste 
disposal, on-site sewage disposal, agriculture, and industrial and chemical processes. Advice 
should be sought at the earliest opportunity from the Authorit y on the sensitivity of a location 
in regard to aquifers.  
Water quality and pollution  
5.157  Pollution pressures  arise in part  from urban and rural surface water run -off that represent key 
challenges in meeting the WFD. Therefore, the Authority  expects that pollution prevention 
measures, water efficiency measures to reduce surface water run -off, and sustainable drainage 
measures are incorporated into new development, in accordance with Policies  SD48: Climate 
Change and the Sustainable Use of Resources and SD50: Sustainable Drainage . Site investigation 
and remediation of contaminated land is required in accordance with Policy SD55:   
Contaminated Land.  An adequate buffer zone should be provided b etween the development 
and surface water features.  
5.158  The preferred method of foul drainage is to connect to the mains system at the nearest point 
of adequate capacity.  
Agricultural reservoirs   
5.159  In general, reservoirs are not supported within the National Park due to their impact on the 
landscape. The role of small scale, agricultural reservoirs in certain circumstances is understood 
for sustainable water management. The design of any agricultural  reservoirs will be carefully 
considered in relation to a range of considerations including reservoir safety, flood attenuation 
and risk landscape character and biodiversity. Reference should also be made to Policy SD4: 
Landscape, and Policy SD 39: Agricult ure and Forestry.  
Strategic Policy SD1 8: The Open Coast   
1. Development proposals within the Sussex Heritage Coast area and the undeveloped coastal 
zone of the National Park, as defined on the Policies Map, will not be permitted unless  they: 
a) Meet one of the following two criteria:  
i. Are appropriate to the coastal location and conserve and enhance the character of 
the Heritage Coast / undeveloped National Park coastline; or  
ii. Are necessary for the operational needs of activities i n support of the Heritage 
Coast.  
and 
b) Are consistent with the Beachy Head to Selsey Bill Shoreline Manag ement Plan, or its 
replacement;  
c) Conserve and enhance coastal access to / from the coast and along the coastline;  and  
92                                                          
 d) Cause no adverse impact on any designated  Marine Conservation Zone and should ensure 
their conservation and, where possible, enhancement.  
5.160  Policy SD1 8 seeks to  protect  the undeveloped nature of the National Park coastline both within 
and outside the Sussex Heritage Coast , and ensure that vulnerab ility to any new development 
is minimised . It e nsures a level of protection consistent with the Marine Policy Statement , 
emerging South Marine Plan, the Heritage Coast Definitio n applying to the Sussex Heritage Coast , 
and the Beachy Head to Selsey Bill Sho reline Management Plan.  
5.161  The policy applies to both the undeveloped  coastal zone and the Sussex Heritage Coast  shown 
in Figure 5. 6 and the Policies Map. The undeveloped  coastal zone  outside the Heritage Coast , 
is a zone defined as 1km inland from the National Park coastal boundary extending east and 
west as far as the National  Park’s boundary  for each section of coastline.  
Character of the undeveloped coast  
5.162  The character of the undeveloped coast has been, and  continues to be, heavily influenced by 
natural and human pressures. Sensitive design that relates to the relevant seascape and landscape 
character analysis is required for this iconic location. In particular, reference should be made to 
both the SDILCA  and South Coast Seascape Character Analysis51 when assessing the impact of 
potential development on landscape character. A coordinated approach to development is 
required which takes into account the various pressures outside  / adjacent to this vulnerable 
area including coastal port infrastructure, offshore development and recreational pressures, 
which have the potential to impact on the coastal area and the seascape. In this respect their 
landscape sensitivity demands equal protec tion to the Heritage Coast  area. 
Operational needs of certain activities  
5.163  Purpose 4 of Heritage Coasts  provides the basis for criteria (b)  of policy SD1 8. Improvements 
to existing sea defence works are not usually subject to planning control although the National  
Park Authority  would expect to be consulted on any proposed changes. Planning permission is, 
however, required for new sea defence works. As sea defences can have a considerable effect 
on the coastal environment and natural beauty of the area as well as coastal access, good design 
will be essential to ensure proposals conserve their surroundings visually and enhance coastal 
access , where possible.  
Beachy Head Marine Conservation Zone  
5.164  There is one Marine Conservation Zone situated off the National Park coastline, the intertidal 
section of which intersects with the Local Plan area, namely Beachy Head West. The purpose 
of these zones is to protect the biodivers ity of our marine environment. 
                                                      
51 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ seascape -assessment -for-the-south -marine -plan-areas -mmo -
1037  
93                                                                                                          
 FIGU RE 5. 6: MAP OF THE SUSSEX HERITAGE COAST AND THE ‘UNDEVELO PED COASTAL ZONE’
 
94                                                        
 6. PEOPLE CONNECTED TO PLACES  
Introduction  
6.1 The theme for this chapter, People Connected to Places, is taken from the Partnership 
Management Plan52 (PMP). It is primarily based on the second purpose of the National Park, 
namely, to promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities 
of the National Park by the public. It is also relevant to the National Park duty . The policies in 
this chapter are divided into two sub -sections: sustainable transport  and the understanding and 
enjoyment of the National Park. 
6.2 Improving the efficiency of transport networks and t he promotion of sustainable tourism are 
both key cross -boundary s trategic issues identified by the National Park Authority for the 
purpose of f ulfilling the Duty to Cooperate.  
Local Plan Objectives  
The following Local Plan objectives are considered most relevant for this section:  
Objective 4:  To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services thus enhancing natural capital 
across the landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human health and 
wellbeing.  
Objective 5: To protect and provide opportunities for everyone to disco ver, enjoy, understand and 
value the National Park and its special qualities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
52 Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your South Downs Nation al Park 2014 -2019 (South 
Downs National Park Authority, 2013)  95                                                        
 6a. SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT  
Introduction  
6.3 This section of the Local Plan  contains two strategic policies and two development management 
policies. The first strategic policy, SD1 9: Transport and Accessibility, seeks to minimise  the 
traffic impacts of new development and facilitate improvements  to public transport. The second 
strategic policy , SD20: Walking Cycling and Equestrian Routes, is focussed on the protection 
and enhancement of the public rights of way network and the safeguarding of land for new 
routes. The first development management policy, SD 21: Public Realm , Highway  Design and 
Public Art , is about the protectio n of the existing public realm especially historic rural roads  and 
ensuring that new developments provide good quality public spaces. Finally, Policy SD 22: Parking 
Provision, covers new public vehicle parks and  parking on private developments.   
6.4 Effective planning policies on transport routes and the public realm are essential to fulfilling the 
National Park purposes and duty. Firstly, our transport policies will facilitate developments that 
make it easier for p eople to travel  to and  around the National Park by sustainable means . 
Secondly, transport policies can help support the National Park Authority’s  duty to 
communities, by focussing  growth in the most sustainable locations, so it best meets the needs 
of residents and businesses while protecting the special qualities.  Thirdly, most visitors 
experience the National Park’s special qualities mainly whilst t ravelling. Therefore the public  
realm (such as roads, pavements, public rig hts of way and open access land ) needs to be 
conserved and enhanced, to improve people’s experience of it.   
6.5 There are a number of studies supporting the transport policies in the Local Plan.  The Transport 
Study Phase 153 provides a n inventory of existing available data in relation to transport issues 
and an overview of the issues affecting the National Park. The Local Plan Transport Assessment54 
looks at the impact of the Local Plan’s proposed development in Peters field, Liss, Midhurst and 
Petworth, and at the former Syngenta site, on traffic flows through key junctions in the National 
Park. The Site Allocations Highways Assessment looks at all the housing allocations set out in 
chapter 955. Finally, Roads in the South Downs56 provides a resource and reference point for 
emerging best practice in rural and urban highway design, drawing on experience gained in other 
UK National Parks . 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
53 SDNPA Transport Study – Phase 1 Report (MTRU, 2013)  
54 Transport Assessment of the South Downs Local Plan (Hampshire Services, 2017)  
55 Site Allocations Highways Assessment (Hampshire Services, 2017)  
56 Roads in the South Downs ( Hamilton -Baillie Associates Ltd, 2015)   96                                                        
 Strategic Policy SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
1. Development proposals will be permitted provided that they are located and designed to 
minimise the need to travel or promote the use of sustainable modes of transport.  
2. Development proposals that are likely to generate a significant number of journeys  must be 
located near existing town and village centres, public transport routes, main roads  and, where 
relevant, the cycle network . Such developments  will be required to provide a transport 
assessment or transport statement.  
3. Development proposals must demonstrate the continued safe an d efficient operation of the 
strategic and local road networks.  
4. The following improvements to transport infrastructure will be supported:   
a) Public transport w aiting facilities , particularly those  with reliable and accessible 
information ;   
b) Infrastructure s upporting the transfer of freight from road to rail  and water ; 
c) Improvements to walking, cycling and bus connectivity at all transport interchanges ; 
d) Improvements to the quality and provision of cycle parking at railway stations and key 
bus stops.  
5. In town and village centres, development will be permitted which appropriately provides  for 
improved footways and cycle routes, cycle parking, and measures to restrict the impact of 
heavy goods vehicles and other traffic on historic streets.  
6.6 The purpose of Policy SD19 is to encourage development towards the most sustainable 
locations in transport terms. All new development will be expected to be located and designed 
so as to minimise the need to travel , and to maximise the availability of relevant sustainable 
transport options, so that growth in private vehicle use is kept to a minimum . 
6.7 Information to support a planning application will include a design and access statement stating 
the likely vehicle movements to be generated by the development , and, for some  developments, 
transport assessments . 
Transport Assessments and Travel Plans  
6.8 A Transport Assessment  (TA), Transport Statement  (TS), Transport Report (TR)  and / or 
Travel Plan (TP) will be required on development that generates significant amounts of traffic 
movement. This requirement will be determined in accordance with the relevant guidance and 
thresholds produced by the local highway authority for the area where the development t akes 
place, whilst having strong regard to the environmental sensitivity of the National Park. The TA, 
TS and  / or TP must set out m itigation measures that are necessary to ensure that development 
is sustainable and deliverable , and to prevent harm to the special qualities . They must also  
demonstrate the continued safe and efficient operation of the relevant strategic and local road 
networks.  97                                                        
 6.9 TAs, TSs and TPs will be secured by  condition or  legal a greement. They must be agreed with 
the Authority at the earliest opportunity, with appropriate input from the local highway 
authority  and Highways England if req uired . The impact of traffic generated from a development 
should be considered cumulatively by taking into account all committed development in the 
area.  
6.10 The HRA identified that some traffic movements may have the potential to impact on 
internationally designated nature conservation sites.  This should be duly taken into when 
considering the transport impact of new development.  Further information is s et out in Policy 
SD9:  Biodiversity and Geodiversity and its supporting text.  
Provision of Public Transport  
6.11 There is potential to improve the role of railway and bus stations as hubs by improving bus 
interchanges, cycle parking and other infrastructure.  The provision of more sympathetically 
designed and located bus shelters can make public transport a more attractive proposition. 
Connectivity and signage to walking routes into the countryside  will also be supported  and 
facilitated where possible through th e planning process . Freight transport by railway and water 
will also be encouraged, since any reduction in the movement of freight via the road network 
would be beneficial to the environment.  
Town and Village Centres  
6.12 The centres of the National Park’s town s and villages provide opportunities for developments 
to take advantage of better public transport connectivity and encourage walking and cycling. 
However , vehicle traffic has been identified as having a major negative impact on the 
environment  in some set tlements . The Authority will seek opportunities to reduce negative 
impact s from traffic,  and to give priority to the safe movement of walkers and cyclists, including 
through planning decisions.  
Strategic Roads  
6.13 Policy SD42: Infrastructure deals with projects relating to strategic roads.  
 98                                                        
 Strategic Policy SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
1. Development propo sals will be permitted provided  they contribute to a network of attractive 
and functional non -motorised travel  routes,  with appropriate signage , throughout the National 
Park. 
2. The following disused railway line routes within the National Park, as shown on the Policies 
Map, are safeguarded for existing, and potential future use as non -motorised  travel  routes. 
Development pr oposals that facilitate such use will be permitted.  Development proposals that 
adversely affect their future potential as non -motorised transport routes  will be refused : 
a) Bordon  to Bentley;  
b) Petersfield  to Pulborough (via Midhurst);  
c) Chichester  to Midhurst (Centurion Way);  
d) Wickham  to Alton (Meon Valley Trail);  
e) Guildford  to Shoreham -by-Sea (Downs Link);  
f)  Liss to Longmoor ; 
g) Devil’s Dyke Route ; and 
h) New Alresford  to Kingsworthy.  
3. The following corridors,  as shown on the Policies Map, are sa feguarded for future restoration  
to their respective historic uses.  Development proposals will not be permitted where they 
would  adversely affect  their future potential for such restoration.   Proposals for restoration to 
their historic uses will be supported : 
a) The original course of the fo rmer Lewes -Uckfield railway line ; and 
b) The Wey and Arun Canal . 
4. Development proposals will be permitted provided they protect and enhance existing crossings 
provided for non-motorised travel routes across major roads, railways and watercourses. 
Proposals for sensitively designed new crossings, and proposals to upgrade the safety of existing 
crossings, will be supported.  
5. Development proposals will be permitted provided they incorporate attractive, accessibl e 
public links through the site, which are suitable for pedestrians, cyclists , mobility scooters  and 
equestrians as appropriate, which connect to the nearest convenient point on the public rights 
of way network and  / or local footway network.  
6. Development p roposals will be permitted provided that they : 
a) Maintai n existing public rights of way;  and 
b) Conserve and enhance the amenity value and tranquillity  of, and views from, non -
motorised travel routes and access land.  99                                                        
 6.14 The purpose of Policy SD20 is to safeguard  and enhance the extensive network of routes across 
the National Park , which provide motor traffic -free travel and recreational opportunities . These 
non-motorised travel routes include public rights of way , for example footpaths, b ridleways and 
restricted byways , as well as permissive rights of way, designated cycle routes and quiet , very 
lightly -trafficked  lanes.  
6.15 These routes are a valued asset to  many types of user, including cyclists, walkers, horse riders 
and users of mobility aids. They are a fundamen tal element of P urpose 2, and greatly valued by 
local communities and visitors to the National Park alike. Being so close to many urban areas, 
the National Park should also be easily accessible from those areas by non -motorised transport 
routes . The Nation al Park Authority will work to increase accessibility by public rights of way 
and other non -motorised routes, and also take opportunities to increase connectivity between 
the rights of way network and public transport, whil st avoiding harm to the special q ualities .  
Disused railway lines  
6.16 There are a number of former railway lines running through the National Park which present 
outstanding opportunities for new non -motorised user paths . These are defined as routes for 
pedestrians, cyclists and horse -riders for leisure and  / or commuting . The use of electric 
powered vehicles may  be permissible in some circumstances, for example pedelecs (low -
powered electric bicycles) and Class 2 mobility scooters  or any updated equivalent . Some of 
these routes are already pa rtly converted to non -motorised use r paths , and development to 
extend the network is underway. The safeguarding of these routes will protect them from any 
development that would prevent future proposals to convert them to non -motorised user 
paths. 
6.17 In many cases, the exact route of development for these schemes is not yet established; some 
diversions from the original railway line route may well ultimately be necessary. If a site along 
one of the safeguarded routes  is proposed for redevelopment or conversion  then the route of 
the former railway must be protected within the proposed development.  
6.18 In instances where  the line passes in or close to designated wildlife sites  or where a survey 
reveals protected species , regard must be had to relevant policies in the  development plan  
particularly Policy SD12: Biodiversity and Geodiversity . A diversionary route may prove to be 
more appropriate.  
6.19 Development of a recreational transport route within the Singleton and Cocking Tunnels SAC 
will not be permitted and this section is left out of the safeguarding of the Chichester to 
Midhurst railway line route.  Likewise, the section of the Liss -Bordon Railway which runs through 
Longmoor and Woolmer Forest is not suitable for development; the only safeguarded section 
of this route is that between Liss and Longmoor, which already operates as a non -motorised 
transport route.  
6.20 Wherever possible, development proposals on disused railway lines should retain existing 
structures and features connected with railway use.  
 
 
 100                                                        
 Restoration of abandoned routes  
6.21 The National Park Authority  supports restoration of the short sections of the Lewes -Uckfield 
railway (near Hamsey) and the Wey and Arun Canal to railway and canal use respectively, and 
will safeguard these routes . Proposals for such restoration should provide suitable routes for 
non-motorised travel alongside the  new railway or canal, wherever feasible. Should proposals 
for a non -motorised transport route (as described in criterion 2) come forward on the route 
of the Lewes -Uckfield railway, before it is restored to railway use, these will also be supported  
Crossing major roads and railways  
6.22 Major roads and railways can often create breaks  and safety hazards  in the network of public 
rights of way and non -motorised rou tes. The result is that some leisure users may be 
discouraged from accessing the National Park. Proposals for developments to reduce the 
severance  effect of major roads and railways  will generally be supported . Policies SD 4:  
Landscape Character , SD5: Design and SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity will be of particular 
relevance in considering such applications. Existing crossing  points , including existing bridges 
across watercourses,  will be protected, and their safety conserved and enhanced  where 
possible , including thr ough Section 106 contributions. Enhancement may include the 
introduction of speed limits, signage or a change of surface or levels. Wherever new crossing 
places are installed, they should be well - signed, of a high quality and locally distinc tive design,  
respecting their setting and  convenient and safe for all non -motorised users who may 
legitimately wish to use them.  
Connections from new development  
6.23 Where new development takes place, it should provide opportunities for new or enhanced 
connec tions for pedestrians, cyclists and horse riders. This should be achieved on - site, and 
where appropriate off -site. Wherever possible, development proposals with potential to 
generate footfall, for example residential development, employment uses, and deve lopment 
open to the public, should provide the appropriate infrastructure to link routes on site to the 
nearby public rights of way network , footways and, where relevant, the routes listed in criterion  
2 of Policy SD20 .   
Protecting the amenity of public r ights of way, other non -motorised routes and access 
land 
6.24 The rights of way network, together with access land, non -motorised user paths and permissive 
paths, are some of the National Park’s most important assets in attracting visitors, and the 
Authority wi ll protect the quality of experience enjoyed by users. Development which harms 
views from, or is otherwise detrimental to the amenity value and tranquillity  of public rights of 
way and other non -motorised user routes , will not be permitted. This includes d evelopment 
that would increase vehicular traffic on the network, for example , on a public footpath that 
follows the line of a private driveway, to the detriment of its enjoyment by walkers, cyclists and 
horse riders. Developments that are likely to generat e significant additional pressure on the 
surrounding rights of way network may be required to provide a mitigation contribution to the 
Local Transport Authority towards enhancing the local network.  101                                                        
 6.25 Developments affecting public rights of way must refer to the Rights of Way Improvement Plan  
for the local area, and any relevant LTA design standards applicable to rights of way. A 
commuted sum may be required to cover future maintenance. The historic alignment of rights 
of way should  be safeguarded . In exceptio nal circumstances it may be appropriate to make 
minor diversions to rights of way, providing the amenity value and convenience for their users 
is not harmed; such changes will also be subject to application for a Public Path Order  to the 
relevant local tra nsport authority for the area.  
Development Management Policy SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and 
Public Art  
1. Development proposals will be permitted provided that they protect and enhance highway 
safety and follow the principles set out in the document, Roads in the South Downs , or any future 
replacement . 
2. Development will not be permitted where it would reduce th e biodiversity , landscape and 
amenity value and character of historic rural roads.  Particular attention will be given to new 
access points and other physical alterations to roads, and to the impacts of additional traffic.   
3. Site layout must be designed to p rotect the safety and amenity of all road users. The design and 
layout of new development must give priority to the needs of pedestrians, users of mobility 
aids, cyclists and equestrians. Movement through the site must be a safe, legible and attractive 
experience for all users, with roads and surfaces that contribute to the experience rather than 
dominate it.  
4. Street design and management proposals must be context -sensitive, responding to the specific 
character, activities, heritage, built form and layout, m aterials and street furniture of the 
location. Highway design must pay particular attention to the role and location of buildings, 
doors and entry points.  
5. Appropriately designed and located new public art will be supporte d, in particular within 
settlements . New public art should be site specific, reflecting and respecting the site and its 
context.  
6.26 The purpose of Policy SD21 is to protect and enhance  the public realm  and street scene in the  
National Park , for the benefit of all users and in support of purpo se 2 of the National Park in 
particular .  
Roads in the South Downs  
6.27 The guidance document Roads in the South Downs  developed by the local highways authorities 
and the National Park Authority , sets out broad principles and procedures which should be 
followed  by all developments involving changes to the public realm and the creation of new 
public spaces and highways. Development proposals will not be permitted where they do not 
protect highway safety whilst  follow ing the principles of context -specific design s et out in Roads 
in the South Downs . Development will be expected to contribute to  the adaptation of existing 
highways so that standard ised road infrastructure can be minimised in a way consistent with 
highway safety.  102                                                        
 Historic Rural Roads  
6.28 Historic rural roads are defined as those roads outside towns shown on the second edition of the 
Ordnance Survey57, which have  not undergone significant widening or straightening in the 
intervening period. ‘Roads’ in this context refer to the highway itself  as well as any associated 
pavements or cycle paths, verges, banks, ditches and boundary features.  
6.29 Both development proposals themselves, and their off -site traffic impacts, may impact on 
historic rural roads. Physical impacts may include the removal of portions of hedgerows and 
banks for new access points, or the construction of new kerbs and signage. Development 
proposals involving physical alterations to roads and their immediate setting should identify 
whether the roads in question are historic rural roads and if so, demonstrate that the historical 
significance, ecological, landscape and recreational  value and character of those roads are 
conserved and enhanced. The integrity of banks, hedges, walls and roadside trees must be 
maintained.  
6.30 A Design and Access Statement should demonstrate that Policy SD21 is complied with, covering 
both physical changes  arising from the development and impacts on traffic levels. The level of 
detail required in the statement should be proportional to the expected impact. As a guideline, 
any development proposal outside Lewes, Petersfield, Midhurst, Petworth and Liss which  
comprise s at least one net additional dwelling, or the addition or change of use of 100m2 or 
more of floorspace,  will generally be required to specifically address the matters set out in Policy 
SD21.  
6.31 Firstly, the  statement must detail the expected traffic flows arising from the development and 
whether any routes leading to or from the site are likely to experience a traffic increase of 
approximately 10% or more on existing hourly vehicular traffic as a result. Whe re this applies , 
the assessment should check whether these routes meet the definition of historic rural roads 
given above. If that is the case it must be demonstrated that the changes to traffic levels and 
patterns arising from the development would conser ve or enhance the ecological, landscape 
and recreational value of those roads. Cumulative impact must be taken into account.  
6.32 Current levels of agriculture and forestry related traffic are part of the rural character of the 
National Park. Whilst this policy  applies equally to agricultural and forestry developments where 
planning permission is required, there may be circumstances where benefits to the purposes of 
the National Park from specific agricultural or forestry operations outweigh a negative impact 
of traffic increases arising from those operations that would otherwise be unacceptable.  
Street layout  
6.33 This policy, specifically covering areas within the public realm, must be read in c lose conjunction 
with Policy SD5 : Design, which discusses the design of  new development more broadly.  
                                                      
57 Ordnance Survey 2nd   edition, Six -inch to the mile, England and Wales, 1891 -1914: accessible online through 
various providers  103                                                        
 6.34 Roads in the South Downs  and the national guidance documents Manual for Streets58, Manual for 
Streets 259 and the Design Manual for Roads and Bridges60 provide useful guidance in relation to 
site layout, design and the safety of all users . Street clutter should be minimised and removed 
where safe to do so. Formal traffic calming measures can be inappropriate; good design at the 
outset should limit the need for further physical measures. New and amended road layout and 
design in  rural areas should take account of the movement of large vehicles and machinery 
associated with agriculture and forestry.  
6.35 Given the ag eing population of the local area and the importance of visitors from this 
demographic group to the National Park’s econo my, it is especially important that the needs of 
disabled users of the public realm be factored into the design of new development at an early 
stage. A locally distinctive and easily legible and navigable environment is particularly important 
for people wi th visual impairments and those with dementia.  
Sensitivity to context  
6.36 Context -specific design of the public realm is important for maintaining and enhancing the 
attractiveness and distinctiveness of towns and villages. Roads in the South Downs  and the His toric 
England document, Streets for All: South East61 provide guidance on this.  
6.37 New street lighting may be considered inappropriate in areas of the National Park due to the 
need to protect dark night skies. Detail on street lighting is contained in Policy SD9 (Dark Night 
Skies).  
Public Art  
6.38 Public art is generally more characteristic of towns, villages and designed landscapes than of the 
broader countryside. The principle of new public art will be supported within settlement 
boundaries, especially when incor porated into the fabric of developments by the engagement of 
artists at an early stage in the design process. Proposals for new public art outside settlement 
boundaries, where it is subject to the planning process, will be assessed on a case by case basis 
according to the policies contained in this Local Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
58 Manual for Streets (Department for Transport, 2007)  
59 Manual for Streets 2: Wider Application of the Principles, (Chartered Institution of Highways and 
Transportation, 2010)  
60 Design Manual for Roads and Bridges (Highways England, last updated 2017)  
61 Citation for Streets for All: South East  104                                                        
 Development Management Policy SD22: Parking Provision  
1. Development proposals for new, extended or re -located public parking will be permitted 
provided that they are located in or adjacent to the  settlements listed in Policy SD2 5: 
Development Strategy, or have a strong functional link to an established cultural  heritage , 
wildlife  or landscape visitor attraction, provided that:  
a) There is evidence that overriding traffic management or recreation mana gement benefits 
can be achieved; and  
b) It is a component of a strategic traffic management scheme which gives precedence to 
sustainable transport; and  
c) The site is close to and easily accessible from main roads by appropriate rou tes, and well 
connected to the  Public Rights of W ay network.  
2. Development proposals will be permitted if they provide an appropriate level of private cycle 
and vehicle parking to serve the needs of that development in accordance with the relevant  
adopted parking standards for the locality. Wherever feasible , electric vehicle charging facilities 
must also be provided.  
3. All new private and public parking provision will : 
a) Be of a location, scale and design that reflects its context ;  
b) Incorporate appropriate sustainable drainage systems.  
4. All new public parking provision will comply with the following : 
a) Wherever feasible, electric vehicle charging facilities must be provided. W here located 
with potential for onward travel by mobility scooter, this should include charging facilities  
for such scooters ; 
b) Where located with good accessibility to the bridleway network, include provision for 
horse box parking.  
6.39 New parking areas will be expected to contribute to a range of ecosystem services while 
protecting the landscape, and their distribution will contribute to the spatial strategy for the 
National Park.  
New public car parks  
6.40 Roadside car parking is a problem at various locations, causing damage to verges and reducing 
road capacity. However , the ability of the National Park’s road network and car parks to 
accommodate an increasing number of visitors’ cars is limited. It is not practicable, nor would 
it be desir able in landscape terms, to cater for peak demand. The Authority  will direct new 
public car parking provision to locations in or adjacent to the settlements listed in policy SD 25 
(Development Strategy), where it will maximise benefits to the local economy and minimise 
harm to the landscape.    105                                                        
 6.41 The construction of new public car parks should always be justified as part of an overall traffic 
management scheme whose primary focus is increasing access to the site by public and non -
motorised transport. Large sca le car parks with supporting infrastructure such as lighting can 
be particularly obtrusive in the landscape. Development proposals for significant new car parks 
may be classed as major development within the meaning set out in Policy SD3.  
6.42 Traffic Regulatio n Orders (TROs) can be a means of improving access and preventing 
inconsiderate parking in towns and villages, and may be necessary in some cases to mitigate the 
impact of development. Associated street clutter should be avoided and additional signage kept  
to a minimum.  
6.43 There are many existing visitor attractions in the countryside away from settlements related to 
the National Park purposes, which may wish to expand or relocate their parking facilities. Policy 
SD22 criterion  1 only applies to parking areas whose primary purpose is to serve the visitor 
attraction in question.  
       Parking standards for residential and non -residential developments  
6.44 The provision of vehicle and cycle parking for new development should be in accordance with 
the local parking gu idance applicable to that area.  
Design, location and layout of new vehicle parking  
6.45 New vehicle parking areas, whether public or private, can negative ly impact on landscape , the 
local environment, biodiversity and drainage when inappropriately sited and designed. The 
cumulative impact of changes on biodiversity and surface water run -off will be given particular 
consideration  when deciding applications for the loss of existing garden space to car parking . 
6.46 Permeable parking su rfaces should be used in preference to impermeable surfaces unless there 
are overriding reasons that render their use unsuitable. Materials should be selected which are 
appropriate to the site context and predicted levels of use. Usage should be made of ex isting 
and proposed buildings , landscape features and planting to successfully integrate the parking area 
within its surrounding landscape context and avoid negative impacts on local character. Changes 
to existing parking areas to bring them into line with  the principles of Roads in the South Downs  
will be supported.   
6.47 The type of parking provided must be accessible to  all and resilient to future changes. All new 
public car parks should therefore deliver a proportion of parking spaces for disabled people  / 
blue badge holders, cyclists and motorcyclists which are compliant with the relevant national 
and local guidelines for the area. Public parking should address the needs of mobility scooter 
users, and accommodate horse boxes, in  line with the National Park’s  Purpose 2 and duty. 
Electric vehicle charging facilities must be provided for in  all new parking areas, including 
residential developments and public car and cycle parks, unless it can be demonstrated that this 
is not  viable or that adequate connections t o the electricity grid are not available .  
 
  106                                                        
 6b. UNDERSTANDING AND ENJOYMENT OF 
THE NATIONAL PARK  
Introduction  
6.48 This section of the Local Plan includes Strategic Policy SD23: Sustainable Tourism, relating to 
sustainable delivery of development proposals for visitor accommodation, attractions and 
recreation facilities, supporting the Sustainable Tourism Strategy62. It also includes Development 
Management Policy SD24: Equestrian Uses,  relating to the  planning, design and management of 
land on which horses are kept .  
6.49 The National Park is a major resource for recreation and tourism , which play a significant role 
in the lo cal economy. The South Downs Visitor and Tourism Economic Impact Study63 report noted 
that, in 2011  / 12, 46 million visitor days were spent in the National Park, generating over £464m 
of expenditure and supporting over 8,000 jobs. By supporting and promoti ng sustainable tourism 
and recreation there is an opportunity to contribute to sustainable economic growth and 
contribute to meeting Purpose 2 . Where development  proposals appear to conflict with 
Purpose  1, then the Sandford Principle  will be applied and greater weight will be given to Purpose  
1. 
6.50 The South Downs Visitor and Tourism Economic Impact Study  and the South Downs Visitor 
Accommodation Review64 found that  the tourism sector is largely leisure driven , and there are  
frequent shor tages of all types of accommodation at weekends throughout the year and during 
the week in summer. T here is strong demand for high -quality accommodation and clear 
prospects for future growth in the demand for all types of visitor accommodation . There are 
some gaps in accommodation provision, particularly  hotel accommodation in Petersfield and 
accommodation supply along the South Downs Way . A significant proportion of visits are day 
trips from those living in the National Park or in the villages, towns and c ities surrounding the 
National Park  
6.51 Enabling the provision of appropriate, properly scaled accommodation will help to manage the 
number of visitors who stay within the National Park for overnight  / multi-night stays.  
6.52 The National Park has sensitive habita ts and landscapes, and a rich and varied historic 
environment. The National Park  Authority’s  Sustainable Tourism Strategy65 has been developed 
in association with many partner organisations to guide tourism a ctivities and our work with 
partners, so that vis itors enjoy the National Park without compromising its special qualities . The 
strategy establishes four themes or ‘lands’ which seek to engage the public, building knowledge 
and patronage of the National Park. They are Adventure, Cultural, Natural and Work ing Lands.  
                                                      
62 South Downs National Park Sustainable Tourism Strategy 2015 -20, (South Downs National Park Authority, 
2016)  
63 South Downs Visitor & Tourism Economic Impact Study:  Technical Report on the Research Findings (TSE 
Research, 2013)  
64 South Downs  National  Park Visitor  Accommodation  Review:  Report of Key Findings  (Hotel Solutions, 2014)  
65 South Downs National Park Sust ainable Tourism Strategy 2015 -20 (South Downs National Park Authority, 
2017)  107                                                        
 6.53 Equestrian activities are strongly linked with the understanding and enjoyment of the National 
Park through their significant role  in shaping the National Park’s landscape, agriculture and 
industry, and their role in recreation and sport. The race meetings at Goodwood and polo 
fixtures in Midhurst are important national sporting events. The keeping of horses has the 
potential to make  a positive contribution to the local landscape and offers opportunities to 
diversify the rural economy. While the grazing of horses does not require planning permission, 
the keeping of horse s and related development does. This type of development includes  small-
scale private domestic stables, riding schools, commercial livery yards of various scales and polo 
related activity.108                                                        
 Strategic Policy SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
1. Development proposals for visitor accommodation, visitor attractions and recreation faci lities 
will be permitted where it is demonstrated that : 
a) The proposals will provide opportunities for visitors to increase their awareness, 
understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities;  
b) The design and location of the development minimises the need f or travel by private car 
and encourages access and  / or subsequent travel by sustainable means, including public 
transport, walking, cycling or horse riding;  
c) Development proposals will not detract from the experience of visitors or adversely 
affect the character, histori cal significance, appearance or  amenity of the area;   
d) Development proposals make use of existing buildings, and, if no suitable existing 
buildings are available, the design of any new buildings are sensitive to the character and 
setting;   
e) Ancillary facilities are not disproportionately large in relation to the rest of the visitor 
facilities;  
f) Any propos al does not have an adverse impact on the vitality and viability of town or 
village centres or assets of community value; and  
g) Where proposa ls are located outside settlement policy boundaries  as defined on the 
Policies Map, they : 
i. Positively contribute to the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the 
National Park ; and 
ii. Are closely associated with other attra ctions  / established tourism uses, including 
the public rights of way network; or  
iii. Are part of f arm diversification schemes or endorsed Whole Estate Plans.  
2. Development proposals that would result in the loss of v isitor accommodation, visitor 
attractions and recreation facilit ies will  not be permitted unless : 
a) Evidence is provided that the  current use is financially unviable  and  a robust marketing 
campaign of at least 12 months  has been carried out  that clearly demonstrates  there is 
no market demand for the existing use or  an equivalent tourism use;  or 
b) The current use or related development harms the special qualities.  
3. The Authority will support a year -round visitor economy , while ensuring the facility remains 
for visitor use  only. 
4. Development proposals, on their own or cu mulatively with other development uses, must not  
prejudic e or disadvantage  people’s enjoyment of other existing and appropriate tourism and 
recreation activities.  Development proposals that generate significant additional pressure upon 
the surrounding righ ts of way network will be requ ired to mitigate these impacts.  
Details of the marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 3. 
 109                                                        
 6.54 The purpose of this policy is to foster the responsible and sustainable delivery of tourism and 
recreation development in accordance with  the Sustainable Tourism Strategy . Proposals for visitor 
accommodation, attractions, recreational activities, environmental education and interpretation 
should provide opportunities for visitors to increase their awareness, enjoyment, and 
understanding  of the National Park.  They should also foster guardianship of the special qualities , 
for example , by promoting and incorporating the National Park’s natural beauty, wildlife , cultural 
heritage , and the ecosystem services the National Park pro vides. Proposals will be supported 
which reflect the four themes as set out in the SDNPA’s Sustainable Tourism Strategy  and future 
updates . There are many diverse and creative ways in which development proposals could 
address this , which  should be tailored  to the context of the proposals.  
6.55 This policy applies to  recreation facilities which will attract visitors both from within and outside 
the National Park and contribute to the visitor economy. Requirements and guidance for 
proposals for recreation facilit ies to meet local needs within the National Park such  as sports 
pitches and local parks are set out in Policy SD 46: Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational  Facilities and Burial Grounds  / Cemeteries .  
Sustainable tourism  
6.56 While the National Park Authority  will support growth in sustainable tourism, there are 
associated challenges for the environment and local communities. High numbers of visitors can 
put pressure on some locations or ‘hot -spots’, for example , by impacting on tranquil lity, 
increasing traffic and parking congestion, or  and causing  physical erosion. The Authority  will 
support proposals for sustainable attractions and recreational activities, which , by reducing or 
mitigating against any undesirable impacts, will appropria tely balance the needs of users , provide 
benefits to the economy and will not advers ely impact the environment.   
Proposals outside of settlement boundaries  
6.57 Development proposals for visitor accommodation, attractions and recreation facilities should 
be located sustainably. Locating such tourism development within existing settlements, 
particularly those identified as hubs in C hapter 3: Spatial Portrait and Strategy give most 
opportunity for access to sustainable transport and other facilities, helping to minimise use of 
the private car.  
6.58 Given the nature of some tourism -related and recreational activities, a more rural location or 
proximity to a geographically specific feature, such as the coast or a river, may be required. 
Criterion 1(g) o f Policy  SD23  seeks to ensure that these are planned for appropriately. An 
example of how a proposal might con tribute to P urpose 1  and to ecosystem s ervices, is habitat 
restoration  of a degraded site . 
6.59 Every opportunity for sustainable travel should be utilised including a ccess to the site and  / or 
subsequent travel , for example  bicycle hire provision , as part of visitor accommodation. This is 
to ensure that the proposals  are in accordance with National Park purposes and do not harm 
the special qualities.  
Retention and reuse of existing buildings  
6.60 Landscape character and built form are central to the attractiveness of the National Park as a 
destination for visitors and therefore, in the first instance, proposals should retain and utilise 
existing buildings. If existing bu ildings are not available, or are causing harm to the special 110                                                        
 qualities, then proposals for any new buildings should be accompanied by justification and 
evidence that the proposals are sensitive to the site and its wider context. Favourable 
consideration w ill be given to the removal of existing buildings which produce net gains for 
landscape.  
Retention of visitor accommodation, visitor attraction, recreation facilities and 
associated development  
6.61 The Authority  will seek to retain visitor accommodation. This  is supported by existing evidence 
in the Visitor Accommodation Review  Study, which indicates a need to increase capacity and 
potential for growth in demand for visitor accommodation . This study also identifies that due 
to the availability of sites for new  development, any loss of visitor accommodation can be difficult 
to replace. Proposals that would result in the loss of visitor accommodation will be required to 
demonstrate that it is financially unviable, by providing  evidence in accordance with part 2(a ) of 
Policy SD23, and in accordance with Appendix 3: Marketing Requirements for Change of Use 
Applications . 
6.62 The minimum marketing period required by Policy SD23 is 12 months. A longer marketing 
period may be required to cover more than one season or where the existing use is located in 
close proximity to established tourist attractions or the rights of way network . 
6.63 Redevelopment of visitor accommodation, visitor attraction, recreation facilities or associated 
development which is currently resulting in harm  to the special qualities of the National Park 
should, in the first instance, be redeveloped for other more suitable tourist or community uses .  
Year -round visitor economy  
6.64 In order to support a year -round visitor economy, the Authority  may support  proposals for the 
relaxation or removal of seasonal planning restrictions, where appropriate. Instead, conditions 
will be used to prevent the occupation of accommodation as a permanent  residential  dwelling 
and restrict continuous periods of stays by occupi ers, ensuring the facility remains for visitor 
use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 111                                                        
 Development Management Policy SD24: Equestrian Uses  
1. Development proposals for equestrian development will be permitted where they: 
a)  Are of a scale and  / or an intensity of equestrian use compatible with the landscape and 
the special qualities;  
b)  Demonstrate good design which is well located and responds to local character and 
distinctiveness;  
c) Re-use existing buildings wherever feasible  and viable;  
d) Locate new buildings, stables, yard areas and facilities adjacent to existing buildings 
provided they respect the amenities and activities of surrounding properties and uses;  
e)  Are well located  to existing utilities and transport infrastructure, includi ng vehicular and  
field accesses, tracks and bridleways;  
f) Provide new or supplementary landscape features  including  hard and soft treatments and 
planting, consistent with local character; and  
g) Demonstrate a conservation based land management approach.  
6.65 The purpose of this p olicy is to en sure the careful planning, design and management of land on 
which horses are kept . It is important that equestrian activities have a positive impact and 
protect natural beauty. Good design should be informed by local cha racter and distinctiveness, 
with particular  reference to farm buildings, layout and materials . Further criteria on landscape 
and design is set out in policies SD4 and SD5 respectively  
Fencing and subdivision  
6.66 The subdivision of fields into small turnout paddocks can affect landscape character  and relates 
to many of the criteria of this policy . Fencing which subdivides large fields into individual 
paddocks can have a significant v isual impact on the landscape. Sensitive and well thought out 
fencing which r espects the existing field pattern and contours, together with appropriate levels 
of grazing , can enhance a site leading also to improvements in biodiversity and the quality of 
grazing. The removal of hedgerows from existing field boundaries will be strong ly resisted.  
Stables, field shelters and new buildings  
6.67 The location of new buildings like stables, field shelters, and tack storage can change the 
character of the land and views, particularly when poorly sited substantial and intrusive 
earthworks take pla ce including maneges . Equine buildings on sites which are open, exposed, 
elevated or sloped are likely to have particular landscape impacts that may make it difficult to 
achieve sensitive design solutions. Wherever viable, existing buildings should be re -used to avoid 
additional buildings in the countryside . 
6.68 New buildings should be sited next to existing buildings and new structure s should be kept to 
a minimum. The layout of buildings should seek to contain and enclose yard areas for storage, 
parking and ot her activities. Equestrian development such as new barns and maneges should be 
sensitively lit in accordance with Policy SD 8: Dark Night Skies. Examples of equestrian 
development that can impact on dark night skies include barns with extensive glazing and roof 
lights, floodlit maneges  and other intrusive lighting may not be permitted.   112                                                        
 Jumps, feed bins, general storage  
6.69 Equestrian equipment like jumps and open storage can harm views. Careful design and layout 
should mitigate against these impacts through the siting of buildings and permanent structures 
to screen and protect them from the elements. Management of manure and  waste should take 
account of the amenities of local residents and other uses as well as environmental protection 
requirements.    
Utilities and transport infrastructure  
6.70 Development proposals should be well located to existing transport infrastructure and utilities 
infrastructure, including water, electricity, and gas. Access for cars and larger vehicles is often 
required as part of an application. Car parking, trailer storage and manure arrangements can 
create clutter and have urbanising influences in the landscape. This should be addressed through 
good design and the careful location of these areas in relation to existing landscape features and 
boundaries.  Sites that are well located adjacent to the bridleway network can reduce pressures 
on the land and pr ovide good recreational opportunities.  
Landscape features and treatments  
6.71 Where new or supplementary landscape features such as planting or hard landscape features 
and boundary treatments are required, these should reflect the local character of the site an d 
wider area and planting should consist of a locally appropriate native species mix. Further 
requirements on this m atter can be found in Policy SD4 : Landscape Character and SD 5: Design.  
Conservation based land management  
6.72 The National Park Authority  seeks  to encourage owners to adopt a best practice approach 
towards managing the land, depending on the breed, size and purpose of keeping horses, which 
supports horse welfare as well. A conservation based land management approach is strongly 
encouraged. This c ould include a range of measures such as: species rich grazing with a locally 
native seeding mix, incorporation of headlands around paddocks (ungrazed areas along 
hedgerows), grazing rotation programme, on site hay production, native tree planting in group s 
and restoration hedgerows as a framework for paddock subdivision and track grazing systems.  
This approach may also be influenced by soil type and natural drainage patterns  where the 
support of natural drainage processes through management of ditches and water courses can 
contribute to the resilience of the soil to wear, and increase biodiversity habitats . 
6.73 It will be appropriate in some cases for management plans to be devised and submitted to 
support planning applications to demonstrate how this approach will be delivered. Advice should 
be sought from the Authority at the earliest opportunity and prior to submitting an application 
on whether a management plan would be needed.  113                                                        
 7. TOWARDS A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE  
Introduction  
7.1 The theme for this chapter, Towards a Sustainable Future, is taken from the Partnership 
Management Plan66 (PMP). It is primarily based on the duty of the National Park Authority, 
namely, to s eek to foster the economic and social well -being of the local communities within 
the National Park . The chapter begins with the development strategy for the National Park and 
is followed by the strategic and  development management policies relating to homes, 
employment , town centres and retail, agriculture and forestry,  infrastructure, green 
infrastructure , climate change , advertisements and pollution . 
7.2 The delivery of new homes, including affordable homes and pitches for Gypsies and Travellers 
and Travelling Showpeople, the development of the local economy and green infrastructure are 
all key cross -boundary strategic issues identified by the National Par k Authority for the purpose 
of fulfilling the Duty to Cooperate.     
Local Plan Objectives  
The following Local Plan objectives are considered most relevant for this section:  
Objective 4:  To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services thus enhancing natu ral capital 
across the landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human health and 
wellbeing.   
Objective 6: To adapt well to and mitigate against the impacts of cli mate change and other 
pressures.  
Objective 7:  To conserve and enhance the villages and market towns of the National Park as thriving 
centres for residents, visitors and businesses.  
Objective 8:  To protect and provide for the social and economic wellbeing of National Park 
communities supporting local jobs, affordable homes an d local facilities.  
Objective 9 : To protect and provide for local businesses including farming, forestry and tourism 
that are broadly compatible with and relate to the landscapes and special qualities of the National 
Park. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
66 Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your South Downs National Park 2014 -2019 (South 
Downs National Park Authority, 2013)  114                                                        
 7a. DEVELOPMENT  
Introduction  
7.3 This sub -section of the Local Plan contains strategic Policy SD25: Development Strategy. This 
responds to the spatial  strategy , set out in Chapter 3,  to plan for a medium level of growth 
dispersed across the towns and villages of the National P ark. The development strategy reflects  
the vision and objectives of the Local Plan and p romotes sustainable development.  It should be 
read in conjunction with the spatial portrait relating to the five broad areas that characterise 
the National Park: the We stern Downs, the Western Weald , the Scarp Slope, the Dip Slope, 
the Coastal Plain,  and the four river corridors formed by the Rivers Arun, Adur, Ouse and 
Cuckmere.  
7.4 There are  53 settlements  that are well -placed to accommodate some level of growth  as set out 
in Policy SD25 . This sets a clear framework for accommodating the local housing, employment 
and other development needs of communities. In particular, it provides a starting point for 
positively identifying settlements that can help meet the Pl an objectives, as set out in Policy 
SD26: Supply of Homes, Policy SD 35: Employment  Land and Policy SD 36: Town  and Village  
Centres. Figure 7.1 is a map  of the 53 settlements distributed across the broad areas and river 
corridors . 
7.5 The development strategy recognises that Neighbourhood D evelopment Plans (NDPs) 
constitute an important element  of the statutory development plan. A number of settlements 
listed in Policy SD2 5 are within parishes or town council areas that are developing or have made 
NDPs. These r eflect the vision and objectives of the local community, and should help to  deliver 
the objectives and strategy of this Local Plan  by making positive provision for development in 
line with Policy SD25 . It is important that NDPs meet Local Plan as well as l ocal objectives, as 
they provide the principal framework for determining planning applications within the parish.  
7.6 As shown in Figure 7.2, the Local  Plan only seeks to allocate sites where an NDP has not done 
so. This is usually because there is no ma de NDP, nor one being developed . An important 
exception to this is that the Local Plan allocates  strategic sites and strategic  housing  allocations  
across the National Park . 
115                                                                     
     FIGURE 7.1: SETTL EMENTS IDENTIFIED IN  POLICY SD25: SPATIAL  STRATEGY  
 
 
116                                                   
 FIGURE 7.2: NEIGHBOURHOOD DEVELO PMENT PLANS AS PART OF THE 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN  
       
 
   
 
 
Strategic Policy SD25: Development Strategy  
1. The principle of development within the following settlements, as defined on the Policies 
Map*, will be supported, provided that development:  
a) Is of a scale and nature appropriate to the character and function of the settlement  in 
its landscape context ; 
b) Makes best use of suitable and available previously developed land in the settlement ; 
and 
c) Makes efficient and appropriate use of land.  
Western Downs  
 Chawton  
 Cheriton   / Hinton Marsh   
 Itchen Abbas   
 Farringdon (Lower and Upper)  
 Stroud  
 
Western Weald  
 Binsted  
 Easebourne  
 Fernhurst  
 Fittleworth  
 Greatham   
 Milland  
 Northchapel  
 Petersfield  
 Petworth  
 Rogate  Settlement A  
 
Has a made NDP  Settlement B  
 
Has an NDP at an 
advanced stage 
of preparation  Settlement C  
 
Does not have 
an NDP in place  
 Strategic Site  
or  
Strategic 
Allocation  
 
NDP allocates sites for housing and 
other uses  Local Plan  allocates sites for housing 
and other uses  
NDPs, the Local Plan and minerals and waste plans make up the Development Plan 
for the South Downs National Park   
117                                                   
  Liss (including Liss Forest and West 
Liss)  
 Lodsworth  
 Midhurst   Sheet  
 South Harting  
 Stedham  
 
Scarp Slope  
 Buriton  
 Bury  
 Cocking  
 Ditchling  
 East Meon  
 Graffham   
 Poynings  
 Selborne  
 Steep  
 Washington  
 West Meon  
 
Dip Slope  
 Compton  
 Corhampton and Meonstoke  
 Droxford  
 East Dean and Friston  
 Findon  
 Hambledon   
 Owslebury  
 Pyecombe  
 Singleton  
 Slindon  
 Twyford  
 
Coastal Plain  
 Funtington  
 Lavant ( includi ng Mid Lavant and East 
Lavant)   
 West Ash ling 
River Arun  Corridor  
 Amberley  
 Coldwaltham   
 Watersfield  
 
River Ouse  Corridor  
 Kingston near Lewes  
 Rodmell   
 Lewes  
River Cuckmere  Corridor  
 Alfriston    
118                                                   
 2. Exceptionally, development will be permitted outside of settlement boundaries, where it 
complies with relevant policies in this Local Plan, responds to the context of the relevant 
broad area or river corridor, and:  
a) It is allocated for development or safeguarded for the use proposed as part of the 
Development Plan;  or 
b) There is an essential need for a countryside location ; or 
c) In the case of community infrastructure, there is a proven need for the development 
that demon strably cannot be met elsewhere;  or 
d) It is an appropriate reuse of a previously developed site , excepting residential gardens,  
and conserves and enhances the special qualities of the National Park.  
3. In considering development proposals outside settlement b oundaries within rural estates and 
large farms, positive regard will be had to the following:  
a) The development proposals are part of a Whole Estate Plan or Large Farm Plan that 
has been endorsed by the National Park Authority; and  
b) The development proposals deliver multiple benefits in line with the purposes and the 
special qualities of the National Park and in regard to ecosystem services.  
*Additionally, a portion of the Arundel settlement boundary is shown on the Policies Map. Othe r 
settlements not listed in Policy SD25 may also be shown on the Policies Map if an NDP has allocated, 
designated or safeguarded sites or areas within the National Park.  
Principles of development  
7.7 The purpose of Policy SD2 5 is to identif y towns and villages across the broad areas and river 
corridors of the National Park that are able to accommodate growth of a scale and nature 
appropriate to the their character and function . These have been identified in line with two 
principle criteria:  
 The future sustainability of the settlement, in terms of its facili ties and services;  and 
 The form and character of the settlement within its landscape context.  
7.8 Evidence to support the inclusion of these settlements includes the South Downs Integrated 
Lands cape Character Assessment67, and the Settlement Facilities Study68, which form part of the 
Local Plan evidence base. 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
67 South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (SDILCA) (LUC, 2005, updated 2011)  
68 Settlement Facilities Assessment (South Downs National Park Authority, 2015)   
119                                                   
 Settlement Boundaries  
7.9 Settlement boundaries  are defined on the Policies Map. They have all been comprehensively 
reviewed as part of the Local Plan process  unless this was done through an  NDP. The 
methodology for determining the boundaries is set out in the Settlement Boundary Methodology 
Paper69, which forms part of the Local Plan evidence base. Poli cy SD2 5 sets a clear distinction 
between land within a settlement boundary and open countryside. Within the settlement 
boundary, the principle of further development is established subject to other policies in this 
Plan. Outside of settlement boundaries, l and will be treated as open countrysid e. Settlements 
that are more scattered or diffuse in their form have not been given settlement boundaries , and 
will be treated as open countryside for the purposes of Policy SD2 5. 
Exceptional development outside settlements  
7.10 Policy SD2 5 acknowledges exceptional circumstan ces whereby development outside 
settlements may be acceptable. For example, particular uses of land relating to agriculture or 
countryside recreation may only be able to function successfully in fu lly rural locations. 
Community uses that are crucial for sustaining thriving communities, such as extensions to 
schools or health centres, may only be achievable through minor incursion into the countryside. 
Other exceptions to the development strategy are  set out in other policies in this Local Plan, 
for example Polic ies SD23: Sustainable Tourism and SD29: Rural Exception sites. Robust 
evidence will need to be provided to support applications for such developments to 
demonstrate that an exceptional approac h is fully justified.  
Development on Previously Developed Land  
7.11 In order to conserve  wider landscape character and minimise the footprint of development, it 
is important to focus development on previously developed land  (PDL), which is often referred 
to as ‘brownfield’ land. Therefore the Authority will expect developers to make best use of PDL 
within settlement boundaries, subject to other locational and physical constraints. Policy SD2 5 
also provides some limited flexibility, in exceptional circumstances, to allow ‘brownfield’ 
development outside settlement boundaries, where demonstrably necessary to meet the wider 
objectives of this Local Plan. An example would be where development nece ssary to uphold the 
purposes of the National Park can be provided on previously developed land as an alternative 
to encroaching on undeveloped countryside.  
7.12 However all development on PDL must always be within the context of a ‘landscape first’ 
approach whe reby previously developed sites will not automatically be the best in landscape 
terms. Any proposal for re -use of PDL outside settlement boundaries must have full regard to 
Purpose 1  and the special quality of an environment shaped by centuries of farming . Wider 
development needs and pressures will not be accepted as a reason to develop on any site 
outside of settlement boundaries.  
 
 
 
                                                      
69 Settlement Boundary Review: Methodology Paper  (South Downs National Park Authority, 2015 and updated 
2017)   
120                                                   
 Efficient use of land  
7.13 Throughout the National Park, development pressures are great, whilst availability of land 
suitable fo r development is scarce. Furthermore, many of its villages and town s are characterised 
by relatively densely clustered, small buildings. Therefore it is important to make efficient use 
of land that does become available and is suitable for development. This approach is likely to 
encourage a design of new development that re spects traditional patterns of built form, whilst 
reducing demand for additional land supply to meet local communities’ needs.  
7.14 It is equally important to recognise that efficient use of land does not translate to 
overdevelopment of sites in the context of the surrounding area and setting. In some contexts, 
a more diffuse built form may be more appropriate. Principles and criteria relating to design and 
mix of housing are set out elsewhere in this Local Plan.  
Whole Estate Plans and Large Farm Plans  
7.15 Estates and farms across the National Park have an important role to play in the conservation 
of the landscape, the development of a sustainable rural economy and ecosystem services.  
Policy SD2 5 recognises that Whole Estate Plans and Large Farm Plans may be able to 
demonstrate particular material considerations, relating to the purposes and special qualities of 
the National Park that  justify development outside of settlement boundaries. The Authority will 
only give weight to such plans where they have been endorse d by the National Park Authority, 
in line with the Whole Estate Plan Guidelines70. 
7.16 Where new dwellings are proposed as part of a Whole Estate Plan or Large Farm Plan, these 
should meet the priority housing needs of the local area, hence should be affordable  homes, or 
accommodate full -time, rural w orkers as defined by Policy SD32  and its supporting text. An 
exception may be made where to do so would make the delivery of multiple benefits to 
ecosystem services and the special qualities of the park unviable, pr ovided clear evidence is 
provided in the endorsed Estate or Farm Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
70 Whole Estate Plans Preparation  Guidelines (South Downs National Park Authority, 2015 and u pdated 2016)   
121                                                        
   7b. HOMES  (STRATEGIC POLICIES)  
Introduction  
7.17 This sub -section of the Local Plan includes two strategic policies namely SD 26:  Supply of Homes 
and SD27: Mix of Homes . 
7.18 Provision of housing to meet local needs is crucial to ensure the sustainability and vitality of 
communities within the National Park. An objective for the Local Pla n is to conserve  and 
enhance the villages and market towns as thriving centres for residents, visitors and businesses, 
whilst conserving and enhancing the landscape of the National Park. Housing to meet local needs 
is important to sustain future generations and communitie s, and to support rural enterprise by 
providing homes for local workers.  However, the provision of housing should not be at the 
expense of a nationally protected landscape. The NPPF cites national parks as areas where 
development should be restricted and o bjectively assessed need not met.  
7.19 The Local Plan determines the level of housing provision and types of homes to be delivered. 
To inform this, the National Park Authority commissioned a Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA)71 which forms  part of the evidence base for this 
Local Plan. This updated the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) to incorporate new 
national population projections and new household projections. Over the 19 year period 2014 -
2033, the HEDNA identifies an objectively assessed need of 447 homes per year  and separately 
identifies a need for 293 affordable homes  per year . Policy SD2 5: Development Strategy 
provides the starting point with regards to settlements considered. Policy SD2 6 sets out the 
overall housi ng provision  for the National Park along with specific figures  for the market towns 
and a number of villages.  
7.20 The Local Plan incorporates the overall levels of housing proposed within the adopted Joint 
Core Strategies , updated where relevant by made NDPs. For example, the housing figure for 
Petersfield is based on the East Hampshire Joint Core Strategy  and the Petersfield Plan . This Local 
Plan meets the commitment  in the East Hampshire Joint Core Strategy  to deliver a total of 1,694 
dwellings in  that part of  East Hampshire  within the National Park. This equates to approximately 
100 dwellings per annum until the East Hampshire Joint Core Strategy  end date of 2028 . 
7.21 National policy states that the Local Plan should plan for a mix of housing based on current and 
future demographic trends, market trends, and the need for different groups in the community. 
The HEDNA and SHMA identif y a need for a mix of dwelling sizes ac ross the National Park, 
with a much greater level of need for small and medium -sizes homes, and limited need for larger 
houses of 4 or more bedrooms. Consultation on this local plan has indicated that local 
communities favour a policy that ensures a good m ix of dwelling sizes to meet local needs . 
                                                      
71 Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (G.L. Hearne, 2017)   
122                                                         
  Strategic Policy SD26:  Supply of Homes  
1. The National Park Authority  will make overall provision for approximately 4,750 net additional 
homes over a 19 year period between 2014 and 2033.  
2. These will be delivered through:  
i) The development of strategic sites and the allocation of land for  housing in the Local 
Plan and Neighbourhood D evelopment Plans; 
ii) The implementation of planning permissions; and  
iii) The development of land previously unallocated or identified (windfall).  
3. Sites will be allocated in this Local Plan or in Neighbourhood Development Plans to 
accommodate approximately the following levels of housing in addition to extant planning 
permission s granted prior to 1st April 2015, and windfalls:  
Settlement  Housing provision  
Alfriston  15 
Amberley  6 
Binsted  11 
Buriton  10 
Bury 6 
Cheriton  / Hinton Marsh  14 
Coldwaltham  38 
Corhampton and Meonstoke  18 
Ditchling  15 
Droxford  30 
Easebourne  50 
East Dean and Friston (East Sussex)  11 
East Meon  17 
Fernhurst (including Syngenta)  220 
Findon  30 
Fittleworth  6 
Greatham (Hampshire)  38 
Itchen Abbas  9  
123                                                         
  Kingston near Lewes  11 
Lavant  (including Mid Lavant and East 
Lavant)  20 
Lewes (including North Street Quarter)  875 
Liss (including West Liss and Liss Forest)  150 
Midhurst  175 
Petersfield  805 
Petworth  150 
Pyecombe  8 
Rogate  11 
Selborne  6 
Sheet  31 
South Harting  13 
Stedham  18 
Steep  10 
Stroud  28 
Twyford  20 
West Ashling  19 
West Meon  11 
 
4. Neighbourhood Development Plans that accommodate higher levels of housing than is set out 
above will be supported by the National Park Authority providing that they meet local housing 
need and are in general conformity with the strategic policies of the de velopment plan.  
The Amount of Housing  
7.22 The purpose of this policy is to set out figures for how many new homes will be provided in 
town and villages across the National Park in line with the spatial strategy for the Local Plan.  
7.23 The process for determining the amount of housing to be delivered starts with the identification 
of the ‘objectively assessed need’ for housing. This is followed by consideration of the extent to 
which meeting need within the National Park can be reasonabl y met. The Local Plan must first 
and foremost reflect the purposes of the National Park, and is therefore capacity -based. 
Pursuant to the purposes, the Local Plan must also reflect the duty of the National Park  
Authority , and therefore should seek to foste r the economic and social wellbeing of local 
communities.   
124                                                         
  7.24 Policy SD2 6 sets a level of new housing provision which totals 4,750 over the Plan period, 
representing a net increase of 250 homes per year. This is informed by the evidence from the 
HEDNA72, inclu ding the great need for affordable housing to meet locally generated housing 
needs. It is equally informed by a robust body of evidence on constraints and opportunities, 
which includes the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment73 (SHLAA) (incorporating site -
specific landscape assessments), and the Settlement Facilities Study . These evidence based studies 
form part of the Local Plan evidence base. The components of supply to deliver the target set 
in Policy SD2 6 are set out in Figure 7.3. 
7.25 There are particular challenges posed by the National Park’s protected  status and uncertainties  
on NDP progress.  It is therefore appropriate that the supply of homes  set out in Figure  7.3 is 
slightly more  than the Local Plan housing provision figure  set in Policy SD26. An up -to-date 
housing trajectory is published each year in the Authority Monitoring Report . 
FIGURE 7 .3: ELEMENTS OF HOUSIN G DELIVERY IN THE SO UTH DOWNS 
NATIONAL PARK  
 Element of Delivery  Dwellings  
a Allocations in the Development Plan, including those to come forward in 
NDPs and on strategic sites  2,787 
b Implementation of extant planning permissions  granted before 1st April 
2015 on sites that have not been allocated  965 
c Anticipated windfall development  714 
d Completions in monitoring years 2014  / 15 and 2015  / 16 511 
 Total  4,977 
                                                      
72 Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (G.L. Hearne, 2017)  
73 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)   
125                                                         
  The Location of Housing  
7.26 Policy SD2 6 sets out set out figures for how many new homes will be provided in  individual 
settlements. This approach provides clarity to local communities on the amount of development 
to be provided, which will be of particular importance in designated neighbourhood plan areas. 
The starting point for the housing provision figures  is the spatial strategy for a medium level of 
dispersed growth across the National Park. A further key driver is the estimated capacity of 
each settlement to provide for growth, whilst safeguarding Purpose 1. Key evidence includes 
the Strategic Housing La nd Availability Assessment74 incorporating site -specific landscape 
assessments and the Settlement Facilities Study , which form part of the Local Plan evidence base. 
Levels of local growth have additionally been informed by consultation with local communitie s, 
in particular with Parish and Town Councils.  
7.27 The housing provision figures  have been calculated firstly taking account of opportunities and 
constraints , primarily landscape context, then settlement facilities , and secondly the estimated 
supply of suitab le and available housing land. The figures  are approximate, and actual delivery in 
individual settlements may vary should the land supply position change. Nevertheless, it is 
expected that the National Park Authority, p arish and town councils and other partners will 
work together to deliver at least these numbers.  
Allocation of strategic sites and housing sites  
7.28 An important element of housing delivery in the National Park is the allocation in the Local Plan 
of strategic sites to include provision of hous ing, and a number of smaller sites in settlements 
across the National Park.  
7.29 There are two previously developed strategic sites allocated in  chapter 8 of  this Local Plan: 
North Street Quarter in Lewes,  and the former Shoreham Cement Works  in Upper Beeding .  
The former Syngenta site  is allocated as a strategic site in the Fernhurst NDP . North Street 
Quarter and Syngenta will deliver  a considerable number of homes  as part of mixed use 
development schemes. There are two strategic housing allocations in Chapter 9 namely Old 
Malling Farm, Lewes and the  former Brickworks  and West Sussex County Council Depot  in 
Midhurst . 
7.30 Non-strategic Local Plan housing site allocations are being made in areas of the National Park 
where there is currently no emerging NDP, or where the NDP does not allocate land for 
housing in  line with  Policy SD2 6. In areas where NDPs  are emerging or have been made, these 
are expected to allocate sites sufficient to meet the settlement level housing provision figures  
set out in Policy SD2 6.  
7.31 The allocation of land in a n NDP which  will deliver a greater number of homes than is specified 
in Policy SD2 6 will be supported, where it meets an identified local housing need in that 
settlement or locality and is  supported locally . 
7.32 A list of made and em erging NDPs can be viewed on the  National Park Authority’s website . 
 
 
                                                      
74 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)   
126                                                         
  Windfall allowance  
7.33 The development of previously unallocated or unidentified land , known as ‘windfall sites’ , will 
count towards the Local Plan housing provision figure . This is known as a ‘windfall allowance’, 
and is not attributable to particular settlements. Therefore windfall sites will not count towards 
settlement -specific housing provision figures . A review of past planning permissio n 
implementation , using dwelling  completion records , has provided strong evidence that there has 
been consistent delivery on windfall sites as a prop ortion of total dwellings built;  therefore 
allowance of a modest element of windfall housing supply is justified. However , in the context 
of a National Park, it is appropriate to adopt a conservative allowance. The windfall allowance 
is calculated as 51 dwellings per year for the National Park area, based on an analysis of past 
trends, whilst taking into account the emphasis on future growth taking place primarily within 
tightly drawn settlement boundaries , generally in the form of infill development.  
Strategic Policy SD27: Mix of homes  
1. Planning permission will be granted for residential development that delivers a balanced mix 
of housing to meet projected future household needs for the local area. Proposals should  
provide numbers of dwellings of sizes to accord with the relevant broad mi x. 
a) Proposals for affordable housing delivered as part of a market housing scheme should  
provide the following approximate mix of units:  
 1 bedroom dwellings:  35%*  
 2 bedroom dwellings:  35% 
 3 bedroom dwellings:  25% 
 4 bedroom dwellings:  5% 
b) Proposals for market housing should  provide the following mix of units:  
 1 bedroom dwellings:  at least 10%  
 2 bedroom dwellings:  at least 40%  
 3 bedroom dwellings:  at least 40%  
 4+ bedroom dwellings:   up to 10%  
2. Planning permission will be granted for an al ternative mix provided that:  
a) Robust evidence of local housing need demonstrates that a different mix of dwellings is 
required t o meet local needs;  or 
b) It is shown that site -specific considerations necessitate a different mix to ensure 
National Park Purpose 1 is met . 
3. Development proposals will be permitted for residential development that provides flexible 
and adaptable accommodation to meet the needs of people who are less mobile, or have adult 
homecare requirements. Development proposals of 5 or more homes will be permitted 
where it is clearly demonstrated that evidence of local need for older people’s or specialist 
housing is reflected in the types of homes proposed.  
*1 bedroom affordable dwellings may be substituted with 2 bedroom affordable dwellings   
127                                                         
  Meeting the needs of local households  
7.34 The purpose of this policy is to ensure that development proposals provide a mix of homes that 
reflects th e need and community aspiration for small and medium -sized homes.  
7.35 The precise mix of homes within each proposal should be informed by the latest  evidence of 
strategic and local needs, including the currently published HEDNA  or future reviews as 
relevant.  However, given clear evidence in the HEDNA  of future household needs, it is 
important that new housing development focuses on providing smaller and medium size 
dwellings, to reflect the National Park duty to foster the well -being of the local communities.  
7.36 The mix of dwellings set out in Policy SD27 is in line with the recommendations of the SHMA  
(and confirmed by the HEDNA) , which is based on detailed modelling of housing market trends 
up until 2033. The SHMA and HEDNA recomm ends that market housing , in particular , should 
be explicitly focused on delivering smaller family housing for younger households.  This approach 
also complements Policies SD 30:  Replacement Dwellings  and SD 31: Extensions to existing 
dwellings, annexes and outbuildings,  which similarly seek to retain smaller dwellings.  
7.37 It is recognised that many housing sites are small  and in such instances it may not be possible to 
achieve the exact proportions set out in Policy SD27. Nevertheless the requirements should be 
broadly met. For all proposals for standard occupancy housing, the onus will be on providing 
smaller homes, some of w hich should be suitable for families with children.  
7.38 Affordable 1 bedroom dwellings may be substituted with 2 bedroom dwellings, in recognition 
that 2 bedroom dwellings are more adaptable to changing needs , for example, where a couple 
have children whilst l iving there.  
7.39 For avoidance of doubt, any room in a proposed dwelling that is not a main reception room, 
kitchen, bathroom or WC, and has dimensions that allow for a single bed, will be counted as a 
bedroom. This will include studies and additional receptio n rooms.  
Alternative mix of homes  
7.40 The Authority recognises that future development will need to respond appropriately to local 
needs . Policy SD27 therefore allows for regard to be had to bespoke local housing need evidence  
relating to the parish . This woul d normally be in the form of a housing need survey. Such 
evidence should be robustly and independently prepared, and agreed in writing with the 
Authority as an appropriate evidence base for informing new residential development.  Where a 
made NDP proposes a n alternative  housing mix based on robust local evidence, this should be 
used in place of the mix proposed in Policy SD 27. 
7.41 Exceptionally, the effect of unit types and sizes on a scheme’s financial viability may be a material 
consideration, where this has been clearly evidenced through independent viability appraisal.  For 
avoidance of doubt, the overall proportion of affordable housing with tenure mix to reflect 
Policy SD2 8:  Affordable Housing  will be prioritised, if exceptionally necessary, over the norma l 
mix of market housing.  
7.42 The delivery of each element of supply will be subject to ongoing monitoring.  
 
 
  
128                                                         
  Older people’s housing  
7.43 The evidence from the SHMA , and confirmed by the HEDNA,  demonstrates the importance of 
making provision for older people’s housing. Furthermore, providing smaller homes suitable for 
older people encourages ‘downsizing’ which in turn frees up larger dwellings more suited to 
larger households.  
7.44 The National Park has a higher than average proportion of its population within the ‘older 
person’ category of 55 years old or over, with further growth in this age demographic predicted. 
In particular, there is predicted to be strong growth in the 85+ age category.  
7.45 The HEDNA identifies an indicative demand for some 90  homes per annum suitable to meet 
the needs of older people. This represents some 20% of the total objectively assessed housing 
need. Figure 7.4 indicates the different types of older people’s housing need. There is a particular 
need for more sheltered housing in future.  
  FIGURE 7.4: ESTIMATED NEED FOR S PECIALIST HOUSING FO R OLDER      
PEOPLE , 2014 -33 
 Affordable  Market  Total  
 2014 -33 Per Annum  2014 -33 Per Annum  2014 -33 Per Annum * 
Sheltered  506 27 758 40 1,264  67 
Enhanced  
sheltered  81 4 121 6 202 11 
Extra -
Care  101 5 152 8 253 13 
Total  688 36 1,031  54 1,719  90 
       *Note total differs from sum of rows due to rounding  
Source: South Downs Housing & Economic Development Needs Assessment (GL Hearne, Sep 2017)  
7.46 All proposals for new residential development should include smaller homes that are designed 
to meet the living requirements of older people, for example , allowing step -free access to and 
within the home. Proposals of 5 or more dwellings are considered most likely to provide 
opportunity to achieve this. Sites that can reasonably accommodate a comprehensive mix of 
housing types should demonstrate that opport unities for specialist older people’s 
accommodation have been fully investigated and, where appropriate, incorporated into the 
development. This should be of a type which reflects local or strategic needs, including 
affordability.  
Other housing needs  
7.47 The National Park Authority recognises that there are other specialist housing needs that exist 
in local communities. People with disabilities may have particular requirements in respect of how 
their homes are designed to function, that is, the need for ‘access ible and adaptable homes’.  
7.48 The national requirements and advice in respect of addressing such needs are set out in statutory 
building regulations (Approved Document Part M) . The Authority is supportive of proposals that go 
beyond meeting the statutory mini mum standards.   
129                                                         
  7c. AFFORDABLE HOMES  
Introduction  
7.49 This sub -section of the Local Plan includes two strategic policies namely SD28: Affordable 
Homes  and SD2 9: Rural Exception Sites.  
7.50 Policy SD2 8: Affordable Homes , relates to the proportion of affordable housing to be delivered 
from development schemes. Provision should be on -site as required by the NPPF unless  off-site 
provision or a financial contribution of broadly equivalent value can be robustly justified.  
7.51 The National  Park Authority  supports the principle of rural exception sites, which provide 100 
per cent affordable housing delivery on sites which may not be suitable for market housing. 
Policy SD2 9 sets out the basis for this type of development which is par ticularly relevant to a 
national park.  
7.52 The affordability of housing is a major barrier to sustainable communities in the National Park. 
In 2016, the average house price was 13.6 times average earnings, making it the second least 
affordable National Park in  the UK. House prices in the National Park increased by 45% from 
2006 to 2016. With relatively high house prices, jobs that tend to be lower paid and a 
comparatively small proportion of affordable homes, it can be difficult for people working in the 
Nation al Park to afford to live within it. Young people and young families, in particular, struggle 
to find low -cost housing which creates a significant local housing need. The HEDNA  concluded 
that there is strong justification for policies seeking to maximise d elivery of affordable housing, 
given that 294 affordable homes per year are needed to meet the full need for affordable housing.  
7.53 The Local Plan must balance meeting these local housing needs with upholding the purposes of 
the National Park. It responds to the challenge posed by a large proportion of housing in the 
National Park being delivered on small sites of 10 or fewer homes – especially in the National 
Park’s smaller settlements, where the long-term impacts of housing unaffordability are most 
keenly fe lt. The National Park Authority has prepared a robust evidence base to demonstrate 
the deliverability of the Local Plan, including those policies that that seek to deliver affordable 
housing on the majority of housing sites. This evidence also takes into a ccount the adoption of 
CIL which came into force on 1st April 2017.  
7.54 Community Land Trusts (CLT) are supported as one mechanism for delivering affordable 
housing. They facilitate community ownership of land, homes and other assets to deliver long -
term commu nity benefits such as affordable housing, low cost workspace and local services.  
Partnership working between Housing Authorities, CLTs and other community -led and legally 
constituted organisations is essential to maximise the delivery of affordable homes.  
7.55 It is crucial for the Local Plan to deliver affordable housing that truly meets the needs of those 
on low incomes, such as affordable rented tenures. The National Park Authority also recognises 
the complementary role of housing provided for rural workers by large -scale landowners, as 
part of their historic stewardship role and commitment to local communities. Opportunities for 
these less formal types of arrangement will be encouraged through Whole Estate Plans.  
 
 
  
130                                                         
  Strategic Policy SD28: Affordable Homes  
1. Development proposals for new residential development will be permitted that maximise the 
delivery of affordable housing to meet local need, and provided that, as a minimum, the 
following are met:  
a) On sites with  gross  capacity to provide 11 or more homes, a  minimum of 50% of new 
homes created will be provided as affordable homes on -site, of which a minimum 75% 
will pro vide a rented affordable tenure   
b) On sites with  gross  capacity to provide between 3 and 10 homes, a proportion of 
affordable homes will be prov ided in accordance with the following sliding scale, 
applied to new homes created:  
3 homes  Meaningful financial contribution, to be negotiated case -by-
case 
4-5 homes  1 affordable home  
6-7 homes  2 affordable homes, at least 1 of which is a rented affordable 
tenure  
8homes  3 affordable homes, at least  1 of which is a rented affordable 
tenure  
9 homes  3 affordable homes, at least  2 of which is a rented affordable 
tenure  
10 homes  4 affordable homes, at least 2 of which is a rented affordable 
tenure  
Development proposals of 3 to 10 net dwellings will provide affordable housing on -site. 
Exceptionally, at the discretion of the Authority, financial contributions in lieu will be 
accepted.  
2. Where , exceptionally,  provision of affordable housing which complie s with the above is 
robustly shown to be financially unviable, priority will be given to achieving the target number 
of on -site affordable homes over other requirements set out in this policy.  
3. Development proposals will be permitted provided that affordabl e housing units are 
integrated throughout the development, are indistinguishable in design and materials from the 
market housing on the site, and , where feasible , will remain affordable in perpetuity.  
4. Occupancy conditions and local connection criteria will  be applied to affordable housing to 
ensure local needs are met.  Specific criteria will be determined by the Authority, in close 
partnership with established community -led and legally constituted organisations or CLTs 
where applicable.  
5. Developers may not circumvent this policy by artificially subdividing sites.  
 
  
131                                                         
  Applying Policy SD2 8 to residential development  
7.56 The purpose of policy SD28 is to maximise the delivery of affordable homes across the National 
Park as part of market -led housing schemes.  
7.57 All development falling within Use Class C3 is subject to Policy SD28, including  any retirement 
or assisted living accommodation within this use cla ss. The policy applies to all developments of 
3 or more new homes, and applies to all residential units on the site that have been created by 
building new structures or converting existing structures.  
Amount of affordable housing  
7.58 Policy SD2 8 sets out a sliding scale of requirement for developments to provide affordable 
housing. This recognises the greater chall enges that exist for small site developers in making 
such provision. These requirements have been tested for viability, taking account of the different 
market circumstances across the National Park. Where the calculation of the on -site affordable 
housing r equirement results in a fraction of a unit, the requirement will be rounded up to the 
nearest whole number.  Applications proposing a lower proportion of affordable home provision 
should present robust evidence to demonstrate constrained viability or other exceptional 
circumstances . 
Mix of affordable housing tenures  
7.59 The SHMA , as confirmed by the HEDNA  recommends that 75% of new affordable homes should 
be either Social Rented or affordable rented tenure to reflect evidence of need, with the 
remaining 25% bein g provided as intermediate forms of housing , such as shared or low -cost 
ownership. However the SHMA also recognises that different communities within the National 
Park have different needs and aspirations.  
7.60 Policy SD2 8 reflects the SHMA strategic tenure mi x (as confirmed by the HEDNA)  as a 
requirement for new housing development, whilst allowing flexibility to reflect local need.  
Evidence of local need can include, but is not limited to : local housing needs survey, relevant 
housing market assessment publish ed by a local authority,  and housing registers (waiting lists).  
If a tenure mix is proposed which departs from the strategic tenure mix set out in Policy SD2 8, 
robust evidence must be provided, which is supported by the relevant housing enabler.  
7.61 The Nation al Park Authority considers that social rent tenures are the most affordable to those 
in greatest need, and should be prioritised over other forms of rented tenure. Levels of rent for 
affordable rented homes must be genuinely affordable, and must not excee d the relevant Local 
Housing Allowance.  
Local connections  
7.62 Local connections  will be assessed in a cascade manner : to include the needs of the relevant 
settlement ; then the parish; and then the wider area including nearby settlements and parishes  
within the National Park , as necessary. Rural local connection criteria, which is linked to 
parishes, will take precedent over other needs .  
132                                                         
  7.63 Local connections  will be determined by the Authority , parish council and relevant housing 
authority , having primar y regard to the relevant housing register allocations policy . Where a 
Community Land Trust (CLT) is to be the managing body for the homes provided, regard will 
be given to the CLT’s objectives and strategy. The Authority will also have regard to evidence 
of local need which is specific to a rural estate or large farm , particularly where this is set out in 
a Whole Estate Plan that has been endorsed by the National Park Authority . 
Viability  
7.64 The South Downs Whole Plan and Affordable Housing Viability Study75 demonstrates that for the 
great majority of sites, the requirements of Policy SD28 can be achieved. The Vision and Circular 
on English National Parks and the Broads76 states  that new housing should  be focused on affordable 
housing requirements, and support  local employment opportunities and key services. Insufficient 
affordable housing provision  which runs contrary to Policy SD28 will be a significant factor 
weighing against approval, irrespective of any viability barriers.  
7.65 In exceptional cases  where viability is a genuine barrier to delivery , the Authority  will require  
the applicant to  demonstrate this by submit ting a robust viability appraisal . This should show 
that the cost of land reflects the existing value of land in its current use, plus a reasonable, but 
not excessive, uplift which provides an incentive for the land to be sold. The Authority will not 
accept a land cost assumption that factors in ‘hope’ value. It  will expect also that land purchase  
/ sale negotiations have ensured due dilige nce, and have fully taken into account the whole cost 
of development, including all adopted and emerging development plan  policies , CIL, and any 
abnormal costs  reasonably identifiable ahead of development,  as a prerequisite for development 
potential.  Affor dable housing provision and other planning obligations should therefore result in 
reduced residential land values which reflect these factors . 
7.66 In cases  where viability is, having had regard to the above , still an issue, developers will be 
expected to contribute as fully as possible to mixed and balanced communities , by assessing 
development options in accordance with  the following cascade : 
i) Firstly, reduce the proportion of rented affordable tenure homes in favour of 
intermediate housing that best refle ct local need;  
ii) Secondly, reduce the overall percentage of housing provided as affordable units;  and 
iii) Thirdly, provide a financial contribution for affordable housing to be delivered off -site. 
7.67 The viability appraisal must be done on an independent and open-book basis, and  must be 
undertaken  by a professionally qualified member of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors 
(RICS) to establish the appropriate form and level of contribution.  Where the Authority does 
not agree that the appraisal has been un dertaken robustly and fairly, it must be independently 
audited at the cost of the developer  and subsequently reviewed if necessary .  
                                                      
75 South Downs Whole Plan and Affordable Housing Viability Study  (BNP Paribas, 2017)  
76 Vision and Circular on English National Parks and the Broads (DEFRA, 2010)   
133                                                         
  7.68 Where a lower proportion of affordable housing is accepted by the Authority  as an exception, 
a clawback clause will be incl uded in the Section 106 Agreement to secure higher affordable 
housing contributions , up to the requirement in Policy SD 28, if market conditions improve 
before the completion of development.  
7.69 The National Park Authority will publish guidance on viability mat ters in due course.  
Providing for affordable housing on -site 
7.70 Affordable homes  should be provided on-site. The options for achieving this should be discussed 
in full with both the Authority and the relevant housing enabler . 
7.71 Exceptionally, off-site provision or a financial contribution of broadly equivalent value to the 
normal on -site provision may be justified. Only when all options for on -site provision are shown 
to have been reasonably explored, without success, will a financial contribut ion to provide 
affordable housing off -site be accepted. On larger sites of 11  or more homes, this will usually  be 
due to  a lack of financial viability, ascertained by working through the cascade set out under 
Viability above . On smaller sites of 10 or fewe r homes, there may on occasion be other site -
specific practical constraints that make on -site provision of a policy -compliant mix of housing 
tenures unfeasible.  
7.72 Financial contributions secure d in lieu of  affordable housing must directly address local needs  
within the National Park , and support achievement of mixed and balanced communities . In such 
cases, a legal agreement will be required that sets out the terms of payment, and that limits its 
spending to relate only to schemes that address local needs. The  calculation of financial 
contributions will be based on the most up -to-date policy or guidance published or used by the 
local housing authority within which the site is located. The National  Park Authority will publish 
its own guidance on this matter in d ue course, which will supersede other guidance.  
7.73 In some cases, the Authority may be willing to accept serviced plots as payment -in-kind, either 
on the application site, or on an equivalent site that equally addresses local need and is in other 
respects sui table and deliverable. This, together with any additional payment necessary,  should 
represent a value equivalent  to the financial contribution  which would  otherwise be calculated 
and paid to the Authority  in the absence of acceptance of the serviced  plot. 
Design and mix  
7.74 Affordable homes  must be integrated throughout the development and be of vi sually 
indistinguishable design. They should be  located throughout the site in a manner that supports 
integration but can also be managed efficiently by the relevant housing association.  The mix of 
dwelling types and s tandards of design for affordable housing are considered under other 
development management policies alongside all other types of housing.  
Artificial subdivision of sites  
7.75 The Authority  will not accept the artificial subdivision of sites where an obvious consequence 
of doing so would be to fall under the relevant policy threshold requiring either on -site provision 
of affordable housing, or a financial contribution proportionate to the to tal sum of development. 
For the purposes of housing provision, the Authority  will consider a site to be a single site if the 
current arrangements , in either functional and  / or legal land ownership terms , can be considered 
part of a wider whole.  
  
134                                                         
  Affordabl e housing delivery  
7.76 Affordable housing provision will be secured at the granting of planning permission by a Section 
106 legal agreement . The National Park Authority will work in close partnership with the 
relevant Local Housing Authority to ensure that aff ordable housing is delivered effectively. 
Affordable housing should remain as such in perpetuity.  
7.77 Community Land Trusts (CLTs) provide an opportunity for local community ownership of land 
for long -term affordable housing provision.  Affordable housing provided by CLTs  and most 
housing associations  are exempt from the “Right to Buy”, allowing affordable housing to  remain 
affordable in perpetuity.  
 
Strategi c Policy SD29: Rural Exception Sites 
1. Proposals for new residential development of 100 per cent affordable housing outside of 
settlement boundaries as shown on the Policies Map will be permitted, provided that the 
following are met:  
a) Affordable housing is provided in perpetuity;  
b) The site selection process has considered all reasonable options, and the  most suitable 
available site in terms of landscape, ecosystem services and overall sustainability  has 
been chosen;  
c) The scale and location relates well to the existing settlement and landscape character; 
and 
d) It is shown that effective community engagement has fed into the design, layout and 
types of dwellings proposed.  
2. The size (number of bedrooms), type and tenure , (for example, social and affordable rented, 
intermediate, shared ownership or older people’s housing) of affordable homes for each 
proposal wil l be based on robust and up -to-date evidence of local community need.  
3. Occupancy conditions and local connection criteria will be applied to affordable housing to 
ensure local needs are met. Specific criteria will be determined by the Authority, in close 
partnership with  established community -led and legally constituted organisations or CLTs 
where applicable.  
7.78 The purpose of Policy SD29 is to encourage the delivery of rural exception sites. These  sites 
provide a critical source of affordable housing in perpetuity to meet local needs , which are not 
served by the market, on land that would not normally be used for housing. Rural exception 
sites seek to address the needs of the local community by acc ommodating households who are 
either current residents or have an existing family or employment connection.  
 
 
 
  
135                                                         
  Mix of tenures  
7.79 The National  Park Authority  believes that a policy of allowing market housing would reduce the 
number of affordable homes coming forward and may reduce the willingness of communities to 
support the princ iple of rural exception sites. The emphasis on rural exception sites in national  
parks should be on 1 00 per cent affordable housing.  If a viability appraisal has robustly 
demonstrated that viability genuinely risks preventing  a rural exception site  from coming 
forward , and there are no alternative , more viable, sites, the Authority will work with the 
landowner, community and other stakeholders to establish the optimum alternative option 
which best meets the local need . 
Site selection, scale and location  
7.80 Policy SD29 (1) (b) requires the most sustainable, available site to be chosen . It is important to 
ensure that locations , which  have an  overall positive impact on the ability of the natural 
environment to contribute to ecosystem services , work best within the landscape and 
settlement form, allow  better access to local services, and are most suitable in other respects , 
are preferred.  
Community and stakeholder engagement  
7.81 “Effective community engagement” should be demonstrated by the applicant in both the site 
selection and application design processes. This can include liaison with the rel evant parish 
council(s), community groups and neighbours.  It is also essential that the advice of the relevant 
Rural Housing Enabler feeds into these processes, so that any practical difficulties regarding 
management issues are identified and overcome at a n early stage of design.  
Local need and local connection  
7.82 Occupation of affordable housing brought forward on both rural exception sites and market -led 
sites is subject to conditions to ensure the needs of local people are being met. The meanings 
of “local need” and “local connection” are set out in the supporting text to Policy SD2 8:  
Affordable Housing . Rural exception sites should  also take into account the aspirations of the 
local community, for example , as expressed in the relevant NDP  or Parish Plan Vil lage Statement.  
The type and tenure of dwellings on rural exception sites will need to balance the provision of 
local needs with the character of the existing settlement and the landscape  within which it is 
located.    
Delivery of rural exception sites  
7.83 The Authority will expect all rural exception sites to reflect local needs and aspirations. An 
effective way to achieve this is through establishing CLTs to drive the delivery of sites. Local 
partnership arrangements will generally be appropriate for deliverin g on sites, for example , 
between CLTs, Parish or Town Councils, Specialist Housing Associations and  / or Rural Housing 
Enablers (RHEs). Whichever delivery model is used, the Authority will seek to ensure that 
affordable housing remains affordable in perpet uity. 
 
   
136                                                         
  7d. HOMES (DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT 
POLICIES)  
7.84 This sub -section of the Local Plan includes three development management polici es relating to 
housing namely: SD30: Replacement Dwellings, SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings,  and 
provision of  annexes and outbuildings and SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers ’ 
Dwellings.  
Development Management Policy SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
1. Development proposals for replacement residential dwellings  outside settlement boundaries , 
as defined on the  Policies Map, will be permitted where:   
a) The structure , constituting all new and existing development , does not result in a net 
increase of more than 30% compared with the gross internal area of the existing 
dwelling ; and 
b) The replacement dwelling is not overbearing or of a form which would be detrimental 
to the amenity of nearby residents by virtue of loss of light and  / or privacy .  
2.  Development proposals for the replacement of one residential dwelling with two or more 
separate residential dwellings w ill be permitted where:  
a) Criteria 1 (a) and (b)  are satisfied;  
b) The replacement dwellings are ‘small’ and designed with appropriate layouts and internal 
arrangements; and  
c) There is sufficient scope within the existing dwelling and its curtilage  to provide 
satisfactory private amenity space, landscaping, boundary treatments, external storage 
and vehicular parking for each dwelling . 
3. Where permission is granted future extensions may be controlled by the removal of permitted 
development rights.  
7.85 The purpose of this policy is to reduce the loss of small homes in the National Park through 
replacement by substantially larger homes. A key consideration is demonstrating that there is 
no increase in the overall visual impact of the replacement dwelling(s) on the landscape of the 
National Park.  
Applying Policy SD 30 to development proposals for replacement dwellings  
7.86 The term ‘existing dwe lling’ for the purposes of this policy refers to  the residential unit that 
existed on 01 April 2011. This is the date that the National Park Authority became the local 
planning authority for the National Park. 
7.87 Where outbuildings were utilised for ancillary  domestic purposes on 01 April 2011,  and where 
the number of outbuildings would be rationalised to improve the appearance of the site, the 
GIA of the outbuildings may be considered in the assessment of whether the proposed extension 
is materially larger th an the existing dwelling.   
7.88 It is expected that the residential curtilage (domestic garden area) of a replacement dwelling 
would be no larger than that of the existing dwelling. The Authority will need to be satisfied that 
the dwelling to be replaced has a lawful use for residential purposes. The policy relates to a  
137                                                         
  dwelling as it existed on 01 April 2011 , or as the dwelling was originally built or legally 
established, if the residential use  post-dates 01 April 2011 . Where residential use may have been 
abandoned, used for some other purpose or is in an uninhabitable condition, the advice of the 
Authority should be sought at an early stage.  
7.89 Within the broad principles set out in criteria 1c above, proposals for replacement dwellings 
will be expected to be  of a high standard of design  in accordance with Policy SD5: Design . 
Proposals should take account of local and traditional elements of design and should not 
introduce discordant or intrusive features in the landscape. It will be appropriate to maintain 
existing gaps between dwellings to ensure that the existing rural character is not prejudiced. 
Any replacement dwelling will normally be expected to be located on the site of the existing 
dwelling it is to replace. However, where a re -siting within the resid ential unit is proposed it 
must be demonstrated that there would be no harmful impact on the landscape of the National 
Park. 
Increase in number of dwellings  
7.90 Where proposals include a net increase in the number of dwellings on the site, a ‘small’ dwelling 
is defined as having a total Gross Internal Area (GIA) of 120m2 or less. Proposals must not result 
in cramped, impractical and  / or contrived layouts and internal arrangements. Such proposals 
must ensure that each dwelling has suitable vehicular parking, b in and cycle storage and private 
amenity space. Features such as fencing, entrance gates, lighting, new driveways and additional 
hardstanding can have a considerable urbanising effect on rural areas and as such proposals 
which do not respect, or are not in  keeping with, the rural character of the area will not be 
permitted.  
Permitted development rights  
7.91 In determining planning applications for replacement dwellings, consideration will be given to 
the removal of permitted development rights to ensure that fu ture development of the site 
respects the identity and character of the built form, landscape character and neighbouring 
amenity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
138                                                         
  Development Management Policy SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and 
provision of annexes and outbuildings  
1. Development proposals for extensions to existing dwellings, and the provision of annexes and 
outbuildings will be permitted where:  
a) The proposal does not increase the floorspace of the existing dwelling by more than 
30% unless there are exceptional circumst ances;  
b) The proposal respects the established character of the local area; and  
c) The proposal is not overbearing or of a form which would be detrimental to the amenity 
of nearby residents by virtue of loss of light and  / or privacy.  
2. Proposals for annexes shou ld demonstrate the functional and physical dependency on the host 
dwelling.  
3. Proposals for outbuildings should demonstrate that they are required for purposes incidental 
to the use of the host dwelling.  
4. Where permission is granted future extensions may be controlled by the removal of permitted 
development rights.  
7.92 The purpose of this policy is to  avoid  the over-extension of existing dwellings and the adverse 
impact that this has on the character and appearance of both settlements and the countryside .  
This policy relates to the extension of existing houses and the provision of new annexes and 
outbuild ings a cross the National Park. Within the broad principles set out in Policy SD 31, 
proposals will be expected to be of a high standard of design and compliance with any size limits 
will not alone be sufficient in itself to secure planning permission. Proposals s hould respect local 
character and complement the scale, height, massing, appearance and character of the existing 
dwelling.  
Applying Policy SD31 to development proposals for extensions  
7.93 The term ‘existing dwelling’ for the purposes of this policy refers to  the residential unit that 
existed on 01 April 2011.  
7.94 With respect to the size of extensions and annexes the Authority will generally seek modest 
proposals which increase the Gross Internal Area (GIA) of the existing dwelling by no more 
than 30%. A larger p roposal may be permitted where it can be clearly demonstrated that there 
will be no harmful intrusive impact in the landscape and that there is an enhancement in the 
appearance of the host dwelling.  
7.95 Proposals for outbuildings should be sensitively sited t o the side or rear of the host dwelling. 
Single or double detached garages of appropriate dimensions and design may be permitted if 
they are not intrusive upon the local area, remain subordinate to and do not detract from the 
character and appearance of th e main dwelling.  
7.96 Proposals for annexes to provide additional ancillary accommodation must demonstrate a 
functional link between it and the host dwelling. The annexe must be in the same ownership as 
the main dwelling and share utility services, access, vehi cular parking and private amenity space. 
An annexe should usually be incorporated within or physically attached to the host dwelling. 
Where an extension to provide an annexe is not practical, consideration will also be given to 
the size of the detached ann exe and sub -ordinance to the host dwelling.   
139                                                         
  7.97 For the purposes of applying this policy, the use of outbuildings to support home working and 
home -based businesses will generally be supported where this does not involve a change of use 
of the main dwelling or have an adverse impact on the residential amenities of adjoining residents 
or the landscape  of the National Park.  
Permitted development rights  
7.98 In determining planning applications for extensions, annexes and outbuildings, the impact of 
cumulative additions will be taken into consideration as well as the removal of permitted 
development rights to ensure that future development of the site respects the identity and 
character of the built form, landscape character and neighbouring amenity.      
Develop ment Management Policy SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry 
Workers’ Dwellings  
1. Development proposals for agricultural and forestry workers’ dwellings will be permitted 
where it has been demonstrated that the nature and demand of the work concerned make it 
essential for one or more people engaged in agricultural and forestry enterprises to live at, or 
very close to, the site of their work.  
2. Applications for new agricultural and forestry workers ’ dwellings will need to demonstrate 
that:  
a) The agricultural or fo restry enterprise is established, extensive, viable and contributes 
to the special qualities of the National Park;  
b) There is an essential functional need for the agricultural and forestry dwelling that could 
not be fulfilled either by another residential d welling on the enterprise or existing 
residential accommodation in the local area which is suitable and available for 
occupation by the workers concerned;   
c) No other residential dwellings either on or closely connected to the enterprise have 
been sold off separately or alienated from it in the past five years unless the reason for 
separation is justified through robust evidence;  
d) Full consideration has first been given to the conversion of an existing building within 
the enterprise; and  
e) The proposed agricul tural or forestry dwelling should be well -related in terms of siting 
to existing buildings or dwellings within the enterprise, result in  and remain as  a total 
habitable floor space not exceeding 120m² (gross internal area) and be sensitively 
designed .  
3. Applications for the removal of occupancy conditions will not be permitted unless it can be 
demonstrated through robust evidence that there is no longer a current or possible renewed 
need for the dwelling for the authorised use for the foreseeable future, and will only be made 
available on the open market when it has been robustly demonstrated that its use as an 
affordable dwelling would be unviable or unsuitable or unnecessary.  
4. Temporary dwellings for agricultural and forestry workers will be permitted wh ere they are 
essential to support the agricultural or forestry enterprise, whether new or established, 
provided that it is demonstrated that:   
140                                                         
  a) There is a firm intention and ability to develop the enterprise;  
b) There is a clear functional need to support the  enterprise;  
c) The enterprise has been planned on a sound financial basis;  
d) The location would be suitable for a permanent agricultural or forestry worker’s 
dwelling; and  
e) It is easily dismantled and  / or taken away . 
5. Where permission is granted for new dwelli ngs under this policy, future extensions may be 
controlled by the removal of permitted development rights.  
7.99 The purpose of this policy is to address an essential need for agricultural or forestry workers 
to live either permanently or temporarily at, or closely sited to, their place of work. The 
Authority wishes to ensure that any proposal for a dwelling is not an abuse of the concession 
that the planning  system makes for such dwellings and as such will be subject to strict criteria 
and conditions to ensure that they are only used for the purpose intended.  
Demonstration of need  
7.100  Permanent dwellings will only be permitted to house full -time, rural workers and their 
immediate family on established (at least 3 years old) and extensive (at least 5 hectares) 
agricultural or forestry enterprises in line with the criteria set out in the policy. The functional 
test is necessary to establish whether it is essential  for proper functioning of the enterprise for 
one or workers to be readily available at most times. Occupiers will need to be engaged in actual 
operational work, actively contributing to the management of the land. This is because non -
operational work, alt hough it may be associated with the business, can be achieved away from 
the enterprise and as such these cases will not meet the exception test needed to justify new 
dwellings in the open countryside.  
7.101  Applicants should provide suitable information which c learly sets out the economic viability of 
the enterprise.  
7.102  Applicants should also provide an independently corroborated statement from an appropriately 
qualified individual which suitably demonstrates that the functional requirement cannot be 
accommodated by either another dwelling on the enterprise or other available and suitable 
accommodation in the local area, and that no dwellings on or closely connected with the 
enterprise have recently (at least the last five years) been disposed of, for example, by s ale or 
by removal of restrictive conditions so that the dwelling can be let out on the open rental 
market.  
7.103  Where there is an essential need for accommodation, and a new dwelling is proposed, the 
applicant should first demonstrate through structural survey s undertaken by a suitably qualified 
individual that redundant buildings, both agricultural and non -agricultural, within the enterprise 
are not capable of, or suitable for, being converted to residential use under Policy SD49:  
Conversion of Redundant Agri cultural Buildings.  
7.104  The Authority will seek appropriately sited dwellings to avoid isolated dwellings in remote 
locations. Proposals should respect the local vernacular and provide appropriate boundary 
treatments to reduce the potential impact on the rural  landscape. Proposals which include 
disproportionately large private amenity spaces will not be permitted.   
141                                                         
  Occupancy conditions  
7.105  The use of agricultural and forestry workers’ dwellings will be secured through occupancy 
conditions, which will not be removed  while there is a need for such dwellings in the local area. 
The implementation of new agricultural or forestry workers dwellings submitted as part of a 
larger development proposal shall be controlled through suitable planning obligations and 
conditions to  ensure appropriate phasing of development. If the need on a given enterprise 
disappears, there may still be a need for agricultural and forestry workers to live close to other 
holdings in the local area and as such their continued use for such purposes wo uld contribute 
towards maintaining a sustainable rural economy.  
7.106  Applications seeking the removal of occupancy conditions will only be permitted where the 
enterprise has been marketed unsuccessfully for a minimum of 12 months. The scope of the 
marketing ex ercise required to demonstrate the lack of need for agricultural and forestry 
worker housing will comprise an independently corroborated statement from a suitably qualified 
individual demonstrating that there is no longer the immediate requirement for a un it of this 
type within a suitable catchment, and the marketing of the property at no more than 70% of 
deemed open market value, through advertisements in the local press, internet and other 
publications including at least one agricultural publication, for at least 12 months. The unit will 
then be made available as an affordable dwelling in the first instance. Only if it can be robustly 
demonstrated that such use would be unviable, unsuitable or unnecessary at the location, will 
release on to the open market  be deemed acceptable.  
Temporary dwellings  
7.107  The need for a temporary dwelling for an agricultural or forestry worker to live on or in close 
proximity to the enterprise in order to be readily available at most times, will also be subject to 
a functional test  demonstrated by robust evidence. The Authority will specify the period for 
which the temporary permission is granted and the date by which the temporary dwelling will 
have to be removed or reverted to agricultural use. Successive extensions to a temporary  
permission will not normally be granted unless material considerations indicate otherwise.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
142                                                       
  7e. GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND  
TRAVELLING SHOW  PEOPLE  
Introduction  
7.108  This sub -section contains Policy SD33: Gypsies, Travell ers and Travelling Showpeople. It 
safeguards permanent lawful sites, establishes the need for new sites and sets the criteria against 
which applications will be considered. Site allocations for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  are set out in Chapter 9.  
7.109  It is important to try to address the housing needs of all people within our community.  This 
includes the needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople.  The National Park has 
small resident and transient communitie s of each group. There are currently around 45 
permanent pitches for gypsies and travellers, 30 transit pitches and 4 permanent plots for 
travelling showpeople.  
7.110  The need for all types of sites i s identified through Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessments  (GTAA) . Recognising the cross boundary nature of these assessments, the 
National Park Authority  has worked in partnership with all local authorities across the National 
Park to identify the  need for further accommodation. This has resulted in six studies which 
together combine to cover the National Park.  There are inherent difficulties in obtaining 
accurate data given the transient activities of some groups and the level of statistical info rmation 
available at a National Park level. Notwithstanding this, a proportionate approach has been taken 
in the various assessments, the results of which have been collated and are set out in the Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Background Paper77 .  
7.111  A summary of the need for permanent and transit pitches within the National Park as of the 1st 
December 2016 is presented in Figure 7.5. The slight variation in the periods covered reflects 
the different dates of the studies.  The assessment of need is undertaken by the relevant Local 
Authority and any subsequent updates will need to be taken into account as appropriate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
77 Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Background Paper (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)   
143                                                       
  FIGURE 7 .5: PERMANENT PITCH NEED WITHIN THE NATI ONAL PARK FOR 
GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING SHOWP EOPLE  
Area  (Within National 
Park)  Permanent Pitch Need  Showpersons ’ Plot Need  
Brighton & Hove  13 (2016 – 2028)  0 
Coastal West Sussex (Arun, 
Adur, Chichester, Worthing)  0 0 
East Sussex (Lewes, 
Eastbourne, Wealden)  8 (2016 – 2028)  0 
Hampshire (East Hampshire, 
Winchester)  11 (2016 – 2027)  4 (2016 – 2027)  
Horsham  0 0 
Mid Sussex  0 0 
Total  32 4 
7.112  In addition there is a need for around 8 transit pitches within the East Sussex area.  
7.113  Work to identify suitable sites has been undertaken jointly with those groups of districts and 
boroughs where a need has been identified.  The methodology used and the list of all sites 
considered is set out in the Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Background Paper . The 
result s of this work are: 
 The allocation of a small number  of sites within the National Park for permanent pitches  
in chapter 9  of this Local Plan ;  
 The intensification of the usage of some sites; and  
 The safeguarding of existing authorised sites from other uses  under policy SD33 .  
7.114  The outcome of this work is tha t the National Park Authority is not able to identify sufficient 
sites to meet the entire identified need for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
within. Very limited opportunities have been put forward by land owners or other interested 
parties for consideration and the National Park Authority  does not own any land on which sites 
might be provided.  All Local Authorities  with land within  the National Park  have reviewed their 
land holdings as part of these studies.   
7.115  As Local A uthorities review the ir Gypsy & Traveller Needs Assessments the outcomes will be 
shared with the National Park  Authority  and will also be a consideration in determining planning 
applications.   
7.116  Considerable joint working with neighbouring Local Authorities has taken place to come to this 
current position. The provision of sites for Gypsies and Travellers is rarely a static matter tha t 
can be concluded in its entirety through a Local Plan, therefo re this joint working will continue 
through the plan period.  In response to the limited allocations that have been possible, the 
policy includes criteria that will be used to determine applications on unallocated sites.    
144                                                       
  Strategic Policy SD33: Gypsies an d Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
1. Lawful permanent sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople will be safeguarded 
from alternative development, unless acceptable replacement accommodation can be provided 
or the site is no longer required to meet any identified need.  
2. The Natio nal Park Authority  will seek to meet the need of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  up to 2027  / 28, by the allocation of permanent pitches and the granting of 
planning permission on currently unidentified sites for approximately : 
a) 13 pitches in  that part of the National Park located in Brighton & Hove;  
b) 8 pitches in that part of the National Park located in Lewes District;  
c) 11 pitches in that part of the National Park located in East Hampshire and Winchester 
Districts.  
3. Development proposals to mee t the needs of the Gyspy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
community (as defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (2015)  or any subsequent policy) will 
be permitted where they:  
a) Can demonstrate a local connection;  
b) Can demonstrate that there is no alternative available pitch which could be used in the  
locality;  
c) Do not result in sites being over -concentrated in any one location or disproportionate 
in size to nearby communities;  
d) Are capable of being provided with infrastructure such as power, water s upply, foul 
water drainage and recycling  / waste management without harm to the special qualities 
of the National Park;  
e) Provide sufficient amenity space for residents;  
f) Do not cause, and are not subject to, unacceptable harm to the amenities of 
neighbouring uses and occupiers;  
g) Have a safe vehicular and pedestrian access from the public highway and adequate 
provision for parking, turning and safe manoeuvring of vehicles wi thin the site; and  
h) Restrict any permanent built structures in rural locations to essential facilities.  
4. Proposals for sites accommodating Travelling Showpeople should allow for a mixed use yard 
with areas for the storage and maintenance of equipment.  
7.117  The purpose of this policy is to safeguard per manent lawful sites, establish the need for new 
sites and set the criteria against which applications will be considered.   
Safeguarding  
7.118  Given the limited availability of suitable and available sites it is important to safeguard all existing, 
lawful permanent and transit sites.  Existing sites are identified in Appendix A of the Gypsy, 
Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Background Paper .  Where proposals involve the loss of a pitch 
or plot, applicants will need to identify a suitable alternative site or establish that the existing 
site is no longer required. This should be assessed against t he relevant GTAA  and any  
145                                                       
  subsequent update or asse ssment.  Alternative sites should not be any less suitable than the 
existing pitch or plot proposed to be lost.  
Meeting the Need for sites  
7.119  The Local Plan allocates 13 pitches within the National Park for G ypsies & Travellers. A 
summary of the allocations and remaining need is presented in Figure 7.6 . 
FIGURE 7. 6: SUMMARY OF LOCAL PLA N ALLOCATIONS AND PERMANENT 
PITCH NEED WITHIN TH E NATIONAL PARK FOR GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS 
AND TRAVELLING SHOWP EOPLE    
Area (Within 
National Park)  Perm anent 
Gypsy & 
Traveller Pitch 
Need  Permanent 
Showpersons’ 
Plot Need  Allocations in 
the Local  Plan Remaining 
unmet need  
Brighton & Hove  13 (2016 – 2028)  0 0 13 
Coastal West 
Sussex (Arun, 
Adur, 
Chichester, 
Worthing)  0 0 0 0 
East Sussex 
(Lewes, 
Eastbourne,  
Wealden)  8 (2016 – 2028)  0 5 3 
Hampshire (East 
Hampshire, 
Winchester)  11 (2016 – 2027)  4 (2016 – 2027)  8 (Gypsy & 
Traveller)  3 Gypsy & 
Traveller), 4 
(Travelling 
Showpeople)  
Horsham  0 0 0 0 
Mid Sussex  0 0 0 0 
Total  32 4 13 19 (Plus 4 
Travelling 
Showpeople)  
7.120  Within the Coastal West Sussex area a need for 6 Gypsy & Traveller and 10 transit pitches was 
identified.  Since the completion of the study 16 pitches have been supplied within the South 
Downs National Park. In addition it is expected that 2 pitches will become available throug h the 
movement of people to bri cks and mortar accommodation. This results in the provision of 1 8 
pitches which is 12 above the identified need of 6 in the period to 2027.  A transit site containing 
9 pitches has also bee n completed just outside the National Park in Chichester.  
  
146                                                       
  New Sites for Gypsies & Travellers  
7.121  National policy makes clear that, as with any other form of development, planning permission 
for sites should only be granted in the National Park where it is dem onstrated that the objectives 
of the designation will not be compromised by the development. As a result the National Park 
Authority will only permit a development, in addition to those sites allocated within the Local 
Plan, when there is an identified nee d. That need should be a local rather than regional or 
national one and will be judged on a case -by-case basis taking into account family history , the 
availability of alternative sites in the area  and the most up to date need assessment  
7.122  New sites should respect the scale of, and not dominate, the nearest settled community.  
Observing this principle can help with community  cohesion .  Sites should be well related to 
settlements with services and facilities, but it is recognised that throughout the National Park 
sites are often in very rural locations.  
7.123  Any planning permission will include a planning condition or obligation to ensure that occupancy 
of the site is limited to persons as defined in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  (2015) or any 
subsequent poli cy. Applicants should also consider the Caravan Sites and Control of Development 
Act 1960  which specifies a separation distance of 6m or more between each caravan.  
  
147                                                         7f. EMPLOYMENT  
Introduction  
7.124  This sub -section includes two  strategic  policies relating to employment . The first policy is about  
sustaining the local economy. The second policy sets employment land requirements for the 
National Park and safeguards existing employment sites.  
7.125  Within the National Park the challenge is to encourage sustainable development within the limits 
of the environment and to ensure Purpose  1 and 2  are not compromised by  meeting the socio -
economic duty , given that the duty is pursuant to the purposes. A Local Plan objective derived 
from the Vision  is to protect and provide for local businesses including farming, forestry and 
tourism that are b roadly compatible with and relate to the landscapes and special qualities of 
the National Park.  
7.126  The National Park is home to about 10,000 businesses and generates £19,450 GVA per head. 
The business base is focused on small and micro businesses and there is  a high level of self -
employment. Although the main centres of employment are within the market towns, the 
economy is mainly rural.  
7.127  The Employment Land Review  (ELR)78 is the main evidence based study supporting the Local Plan 
policies on employment .  A sit e focused update of the ELR was published in 2017  (ELR Update)79 
to support the allocation and safeguarding of employment sites in the Local plan.  An updated 
calculation of employment land need is set out in the South Downs National Park Housing and 
Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA)80 published in 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
78 South Downs National Park Employment Land Review 2015 (G.L. Hearne, 2015)  
79 South Downs National Park Authority Employment Land Review 2017 Update (South Downs National Park 
Authority, 2017)  
80 South Downs National Park Housing and Econom ic Development Needs Assessment (G.L. Hearn, 2017)   
148                                                         Strategic Policy SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
1. Development proposals that foster the economic and social well -being of local communities 
within the National Park will be permitted provided that they meet one or more of the 
following:   
a) Promote and protect businesses linked to the National Park’s key se ctors of farming 
forestry and tourism ; 
b) Promote and protect green businesses linked to ecosystem services;  
c) Support rural supply chains across the National Park and its environs and encourage 
closer ties between rural businesses;  
d) Provide for  and support smal l and micro businesses through the provision of small, 
flexible, start -up and move -on business units  including incubator uses ; 
e) Provide flexibility  for established businesses to secure future resilience and protect local 
jobs; 
f) Intensify the commercial use of an employment site and make a more efficient use of 
brownfield land;  
g) Promote  smart economic growth and advances in information and communications 
technologies, particularly superfast broadband.  
7.128  The purpose of this policy is  to promote and protect local businesses without compromising 
the purposes of the National Park. The policy is consistent with the spatial strategy of a medium 
level of development dispersed across the National Park. It should be read in conjunction with 
the development strategy set out in policy SD25 , which identifies settlements where the 
principle of development is accepted.  
Key sectors  
7.129  Following on from the State of the Park Report , the Local Plan identifies three key sectors or 
clusters of economic activity , namely farming, forestry and tourism.  These sectors are all rooted 
in the National Park purposes and are linked to ecosystem service s, particularly provisioning 
and cultural services. This Local Plan supports  the expansion of  these existing business sectors 
where  to do so is compatible with the landscape and special qualities.   
7.130  Food and beverages form an important economic sector.  Vineyards and wineries are an 
expanding part of this sector , with the soils and weather patterns on the south facing dip slopes 
being ideal for grape production.  The provision of ancillary facilities such as bottling plants should  
support local production , and be compatible with , and not harm , the special qualities of the 
National Park.  Climate change and market forces will continue to influence the landscape leading 
to new enterprises, and increasing opportunities for producing alternative energy, for example , 
wood fuel.  
7.131  The South Downs is England’s most wooded national park , and w ood-related activities are 
located primarily in the Western Weald. The specific development requirements for agriculture 
and forestry are set out in Policy SD 39: Agriculture  and Fore stry.  
149                                                         7.132  Policies on t ourism and the visitor economy are  set out  in the Local Plan section on 
Understanding and Enjoying the National Park.  
Green businesses  
7.133  The National Park Authority  will encourage green business proposals particularly when they 
are linked to the special qualities. A green business is defined as an enterprise that has a positive 
impact on the local and/or global environment. Green businesses are linked to ecosystem 
services, for example, a coppicing  business provide s ‘provisioning ’ services with a renewable 
source of wood.  
Rural supply chains  
7.134  Rural supply chains link products, services, finance and information from the producer to the 
customer. Policy SD27 seeks to enc ourage rural supply chains within and across the National 
Park in order to nurture and grow rural businesses. This is particularly important for the local 
food network. Rural supply chains are not, however, linked exclusively to food and drink, for 
example , the use of local building materials contributes positively to sustainable landscape 
management and local employment. The market towns have both a traditional and future role 
as hubs for rural supply chains including traditional markets , networking, train ing and services.  
Small and micro businesses  
7.135  There are thousands of small and micro businesses in t he National Park. A  small business 
employs less than 10 people and a micro business employs less than 5.  Although the main 
centres of employment are within the market towns, there are a significant number of rural 
business units. The ELR found that 88 per cent of workplaces employ fewer than 10 people and 
98 per cent of enterprises employ fewer than 50 people. These proportions are significantly 
higher than n ational and regional levels. It indicates a strong entrepreneurial employment base 
reliant on small companies and start -ups. 
7.136  Policy SD27 seeks to promote and protect small businesses. This could be through the provision 
of affordable ‘move on space’ for ex panding home -based businesses and flexible ‘move in  / move 
on’ accommodation  for start -up companies. Policy SD47 deals with small businesses as par t of 
farm diversification .   
7.137  Many micro  businesses are home based and collectively  they make a significant co ntribution to 
the local economy. Home working provides a cost -effective solution to finding accommodation 
for new and micro businesses, and reduces the need to travel from home to the workplace. It 
is important that home based businesses do not cause unacc eptable harm to the amenity of 
neighbours in terms of traffic, smell, loss of privacy, outlook, noise and overlooking.  
Resilience  
7.138  Provision of workspace is only one part of encouraging new business start -ups and developing 
existing businesses. It is also i mportant that businesses are resilient to changes in the local and 
international economy , for example having the ability to adapt or expand premises to respond 
to a changing market . The planning process also has a role in supporting the availability of advice 
and training, and on -going business support . These types of services  help to ensure the  survival 
and development of small businesses  and thus improve their resilience .  
150                                                         Intensification  
7.139  The development strategy set out in P olicy SD25 prioritises the d evelopment of previously 
developed land. Commercial development on existing employment sites should make an efficient 
use of existing buildings and previously developed land through intensifying uses , provid ed that  
this does not compromise the special qual ities of the National Park.  
Smart economic growth  
7.140  Smart economic growth seeks to achieve economic growth at a lower environmental cost and 
with a more positive impact on quality of life.   Superfast broadband is key ingredient for achieving 
it, but signific ant areas of the National Park are currently severely disadvantaged by slow and 
unreliable internet connections. The proliferation of ‘not spots’ is a major barrier to sustainable 
economic growth particul arly for home -based businesses. Policy SD44 deals wi th 
telecommunicat ions and other utilities.   
151                                                         Strategic Policy SD35: Employment Land  
1. The SDNPA will make overall provision for the  following amounts of new employment land 
between 2014 and 2033:  
 Office (B1a/b):   approximately 5.3 hectares  
 Industrial (B1c/B2) : 1.8 hectares  
 Small-scale warehousing (B8): 3.2 hectares  
2. Development proposals for the change of use of redundant B2 premises a nd land to 
accommodate the need for new offices and/or warehousing  will be permitted  provid ed that 
there would not be a potentially adverse impact on the landscape and other special qualities of 
the National Park including by reason  of traffic, noise or po llution.  
3. The Authority will safeguard all existing employment sites and allocations that are fit for 
purpose from development proposals for non -employment uses. Change of use applications 
that would result in a loss of employment land will only be permitte d provided that e vidence 
of a robust marketing campaign of at least 12 months clearly  demonstrates that there is no 
market demand for the business premises.  
4. The principal  and local employment sites are shown on the Policies Map , to which  further 
protection  applies as follows:  
a) On principal  employment sites : B class employment uses will be safeguarded from 
development proposals for non -B class uses and evidence of a robust marketing campaign 
of at l east 18 months will be required  
b) On local employment sites : commercial uses will be safeguarded from development 
proposals for non -commercial uses and evidence of a robust marketing campaign of at 
least 18 months will be required  
Details of marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 3. 
7.141  The purpose of this polic y is to set out employment land provision figures  for the National Park 
and safeguard existing employment sites.  
Employment land requirements  
7.142  Policy SD35 sets out the employment land provision figures , which meet the objectively assessed 
need for employmen t land identified in the ELR  and HEDNA . Evidence indicates that this amount 
of development is deliverable on sites across the National Park, particularly in the market towns, 
without harming the special qualities.   
7.143  The methodologies for calculating the em ployment land provision figures  are explained in full in 
the ELR  and HEDNA .  The provision figures  build upon the evidence supporting the employment 
policies in the East Hampshire, Winchester and Lewes Joint Core Strategies . Due to the difficulties 
of undertaking economic forecasts in a national park, the employment need figures should be 
treated with caution and will be kept under review. It is important to take a flexible approach 
to the allocation and designation of emplo yment land to ensure that the purposes are not 
compromised in order to meet its socioeconomic duty.   
152                                                         7.144  A sufficient supply of employment sites is available to meet the provision figures set out in Policy 
SD35 whilst taking into account that there will be some losses of existing employment land . The 
new employment provision is focused in Petersfield, Lewes and the smaller market towns of 
Midhurst and Petworth. These sites fall within the Functional Economic Mar ket Areas (FEMA) 
of Central Hampshire, Brighton and Chichester  / Bognor respectively.  There are three tranches 
of future employment land supply, which make up the core supply. These are set out in Figure  
7.7. The first tranche of sites is made up of sites with planning permission that are not allocated 
in this P lan or an NDP.  The second tranche is NDP allocations , most significantly  the Petersfield 
Plan, which allocates approximately 3 hectares of land for employment , and the Petworth NDP  
which allocates a bout a hectare of land as an extension to an existing employment site.  There 
is one Local Plan allocation in Lewes, which is set out in Chapter 9 of this Plan.    
7.145  In addition, there is limited additional potential supply on the strategic sites of Shoreham  
Cement Works and the former Syngenta site. The redevelopment of North Street Quarter in 
Lewes will deliver higher -quality business premises. All these sites are allocated for exceptional 
mixed -use redevelopment in this Local Plan.  The detailed policy for  Syngenta is set out in the 
Fernhurst Neighbourhood Development Plan . The strategic policy for Shoreham Cement Works is 
set out in Policy SD56 and detailed policies will be contained in the Area Action Plan . Policy SD 57 
forms the detailed policy for North Street Quarter.  
         FIGURE 7.7: EMPLOYMENT LAND SU PPLY IN THE SOUTH DO WNS 
NATIONAL PARK  
Source of employment land  Amount (hectares)  
Sites with extant planning permission for employment 
development (excluding Local Plan and NDP allocations)  5.35 
NDP allocations  4.69 
Local Plan allocations  1.72 
Total  11.76  
Flexible approach to change -of-use applications  
7.146  The ELR forecasts a growth in demand for both office (use class B181) and small -scale warehouse 
accommodation (use class B8). Business support services, head office and management 
consultancy and other professional services are the major growth sectors underpinning the 
demand for office floorspace. A growth in warehousing and the postal sector , along with a 
smaller growth in wholesale trade , underlies the forecast need for warehouse floorspace.  
                                                      
81 The Town and Country Planning (Use C lasses) Order puts uses of land and buildings into various categories 
known as 'Use Classes'.   
153                                                         7.147  In contrast, the ELR forecasts that there will be a continued and significant decline in 
employment in manufacturing, although manufacturing may contribute to growth in economic 
output linked to productivity improvements. This, in turn, will lead to a decl ine in demand for 
B2 floorspace although some manufacturing businesses may see a decline in jobs which does not 
translate directly through to floorspace.   
7.148  The Authority will take a flexible and pragmatic approach to change of use applications in order 
to maximise the opportunities to re -use existing but vacant manufacturing premises for other 
forms of employment for which there is a demand. This will make an efficient use of previously 
developed land , and will reduce the impact of new development on the la ndscape.  It may also 
offer opportunities to remediate land contamination. Some of the predicted losses in B2 
accommodation could be converted into meeting the need for small -scale B8 uses. Both uses 
broadly require similar premises in locational terms – out of centre with strategic road access.  
7.149  Robust evidence will need to be submitted and approved by the Authority that there will be no 
adverse effect on the landscape and other special qualities through traffic, noise or pollution. 
Advice on these matters will be sought from other statutory bodies, particularly the county 
councils and Highways England on the amount and type of traffic generation and the impact on 
the National Park’s rural roads.  
Safeguarding  
7.150  It is important to safeguard premises for local b usinesses  that are fit for purpose  both within 
towns and the wider rural area.  In order to be considered fit for purpose , the business premises 
need to be of a necessary standard for its intended use as defined by the Use Class Order  (UCO). 
This will help to support the long -term future of communities , by providing local employment 
opportunities for local residents , and by reducing out commuting to employment centres 
outside the National Park. The ELR and ELR Update  provide robust information on existing 
employment sites across the National Park.  
7.151  Change of use applications that would result in the loss of employment land need to be 
supported by robust evidence. Guidance  on the evidence required to prove that a robust 
marketing exercise has been carried out t o support relevant  application s is set out in Appendix 
3.  Advice should be sought from the local planning authority at the earliest opportunity to agree 
the details of the exercise.  
7.152  There are a small number of principal  employment sites in Petersfield, Midhurst and Lewes, 
which are large -scale, good -quality employment sites providing jobs and services across a wide 
area. The National Park Authority  supports the continued use of these sites for B class 
employment and will  resist development proposals for alternative commercial uses and housing. 
The following p rincipal  employment sites are identified on the Policies Map and safeguarded  for 
employment uses : 
 Bedford Road, Petersfield  
 Holmbush Industrial Estate, Midhurst  
 Centr al Lewes  
 Cliffe Industrial Estate, Lewes   
154                                                         7.153  There are a number of local employment sites located in towns and villages identified in policy 
SD25. It is important to protect these sites as they contribute to the sustainability of the 
settlements in which they are located , by providing jobs and services to the local community.  
Many of these local employment sites are protected in NDP s. The Local Plan will safeguard 
those local employment sites outside designated neighbourhood planning areas that are 
identified on the Policies Map : 
 Abbas Business Centre, Itchen Abbas  
 Farringdon Business Park, Lower Farringdon  
 Farringdon Industrial Estate, Lower Farringdon  
 The Old Piggery, South Harting  
 The Wharf, Midhurst  
 Midhurst Business Centre, Midhurst  
 Hampers Common Industrial Estate, Petworth  
7.154  The Authority  will take a more flexible approach to change of use applications on these sites by 
allowing other forms of economic development  that provide jobs, generate wealth or produce 
an economic output . Propo sals for alternative uses will need to provide evidence that the 
proposed uses will not adversely impact on the exi sting and future B class uses. Any proposals 
for main town centre uses will need to comply with Policy SD37 on town and village centres.   
7.155  Because the National Park’s economic base is focused on small businesses it is not practicable 
to identify all these sites on the Policies Map. It is  important to protect all existing small business 
premises , extending beyond identified principal and local  employment sites,  unless it can be 
proved that the site and the premises are not fit for purpose. Proposals that would result in a 
loss of employment floorspace will need to provide evidence  in line with Appendix  3.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
155                                                         7g. TOWN CENTRES AND RETA IL 
Introduction  
7.156  This sub -section contains the strategic policy on town and village centres . It also includes  a 
development management policy that sets out more detailed criteria for development in these 
centres. There is a further development management policy on shops outside centres, which 
sets out requirements for retail impact assessments.  
7.157  The market towns of Petersfield, Midhurst, Petworth and Lewes are the principal town centres 
within the South Downs National Park.  A brief description of each town  centre , along with the 
village centre of Liss , is set out below . The main findings of the recent retail evidence study for 
Liss, Midhurst and Petworth  is also set out . 
Lewes  
7.158  The county town of Lewes offers a special shopping environment, with many shops and services 
occupying listed buildings and lying in the Lewes Conservation Area. The historic retail units 
have facilitated small, independent and niche retailers. There are also a range of larger multiple 
chain stores in the town , and two supermarkets. T he independent shops are intrinsic to the 
town’s character . However, the evidence shows that there is also a need for additional purpose 
built retail units in order to claw back expenditure that is currently being leaked to bigger 
centres outside the distr ict, such as Brighton and Eastbourne. This is primarily for comparison 
goods, but there is also a limited, largely qualitative, need for convenience floorspace.  In order 
to address this, Strategic Site P olicy SD57 : North Street Quarter and adjacent Eastga te area, 
Lewes  allocates land for this use . The strategic site,  and the town centre boundary, primary and 
secondary shopping frontages are shown on the Policies Map. Lewes NDP  does not deal with 
retail and the town centre.   
Liss 
7.159  Liss village centre contai ns a mix of Victorian and modern premises. The modern development 
in the centre of the village has not been sympathetic to the character of the village. Liss has a 
small number of national multiples , and the centre provides adequately for the day -to-day re tail 
needs of the community. However it lacks a bank , and residents depend heavily on Petersfield 
for most retail need. The village centre of Liss has a vacancy rate that is higher than the national 
average , and the profile of the centre has been impacted by the loss of several small convenience 
stores.   
7.160  Further planning policies including the village centre boundary are contained within the Liss 
NDP. No primary or secondary frontages are identified.  
Midhurst  
7.161  Midhurst has a very traditional, attractive, li near shopping street, with the addition of a beautiful 
market square, which is somewhat separate  from the main shopping area. The town has low 
vacancy rates overall.   
156                                                         7.162  The shopping offer  includes  ladies outfitters, equestrian goods and clothing, several coff ee shops 
and eateries , both multiples and individual . There are also two pharmacies, and a florist. There 
is some  provision for everyday small electrical items and hardwar e, and this is complemented 
by independent retails including a  delicatessen, book sho p, and jewellers . The town has a number 
of banks , and there are a number of well -presented charity shops.  
7.163  The convenience goods sector is dominated by two supermarkets (one medium and one small) , 
with a range of supporting smaller independent stores. The centre performs a healthy top - up 
function for local residents.  
7.164  A town centre boundary for Midhurst is shown on the Policies Map. It incorporates land at the 
Grange , adjacent to the public car park,  in order to encourage a new medium sized supermarket. 
Should permission be sought, the National Park Authority  would , expect the development to 
be accompanied by a range of measures to ensure there is improved connectivity between the 
site and the historic town centre. There will also be a need to consider parki ng provision and 
landscaping , particularly incorporating the South Pond improvements  as well as the more day -
to-day development management issues such as design, noise, drainage (ensuring there is no 
increase in pollution of  the pond) and amenity . Primary and secondary frontages for Midhurst 
are also shown on the Policies Map.  
Petersfield  
7.165  Petersfield’s historic centre attracts visitors to enjoy food and drink in attractive and pleasant 
surroundings. The demand for retail space is buoyant with very low vacan cy rates. The town is 
well supplied with supermarkets with the main competition being from Chichester, Portsmouth  
/ Southsea and Southampton. The town centre is well equipped with pubs, restaurants and cafes 
which have increasingly boosted the night -time e conomy. The profile of the shops has changed 
over the years . Petersfield has weathered this well , by offering increased numbers of specialist 
shops that appeal to leisure shoppers at weekends , and leisure -based services such as beauty, 
hairdressing and caf és. At the same time it has retain ed the larger chains.  Planning policies for 
Petersfield town centre are contained within the made Petersfield NDP , which designates a town 
centre boundary along with primary and secondary frontages.  
Petworth  
7.166  Petworth  is an attractive, historic market town , which is heavily oriented towards the antique 
sector .  This appeal s to visitors to Petworth House  and is a draw for visitors to the town centre 
itself.  The centre contains a small convenience store, DIY store, pharm acy, bank and a range of 
restaurants, pubs and community buildings. There are also a large number of independent shops  
including delicatessens, florist, top of the range ladies and clothing and homeware retailers and 
a fine wine shop. The centre has low va cancy rates but there is a lack of diversity in its 
comparison goods offer. The convenience goods offer is limited, with one convenience  store 
providing only for top -up shopping. Petworth also benefits from a successful and popular 
monthly farmers market, held in the town square.    
7.167  Further p lanning policies , including the town centre boundary and primary shopping frontage 
for Petworth town centre , are contained within the Petworth Neighbourhood Development Plan .  
No secondary frontage is identified.   
  
157                                                         2016 Retail Evidence Study  
7.168  The 2016 Retail Study  considered the Midhurst, Petworth and Liss centres. It concluded that 
there was capacity for up to 1,200 sq m net of new convenience goods floorspace in the Midhurst 
/ Petworth area within the plan period. This wo uld equate to a single store of approximately 
2,500 sqm gross or two smaller food stores. Although the development of a main food store 
within the Midhurst / Petworth area would be highly desirable, there have been no deliverable 
sites identified at this p oint in time. Therefore the Local Plan identifies a town centre boundary 
for Midhurst which is sufficiently broad to facilitate this type of development within the town 
centre should market forces become more favourable later in the plan period. This inclu des the 
inclusion of land next to The Grange within the Midhurst town centre, which may have potential 
for a new medium sized supermarket development.  A similar approach is taken to the boundary 
of Petworth Town Centre in the Petworth NDP . 
7.169  In terms of com parison goods, the assessment shows that there is capacity for between 2,700 
and 4,300 sq m net of new floorspace in the plan period in the Midhurst / Petworth area.  
However, meeting this capacity would require building a development tantamount to a small  
retail park, which is inappropriate within a National Park.   
7.170  The potential for town centre floorspace development is highly constrained , with all cent res 
containing significant numbers of listed buildings and an already tightly packed street scene.  
There are few areas of derelict land of any significant size, nor are there opportunities for larger -
scale redevelopment , with the exception of land at Nort h Street Quarter and adjacent Eastgate 
area in Lewes. Suitable e dge–of-centre  or out -of-centre opportunities are not currently 
available . Proposals for large -scale out of centre retail parks / supermarkets would not be 
appropriate in the context of a Natio nal Park.  
Strategic Policy SD36: Town and Village Centres  
1. Development proposals for town centre development will be permitted where they promote 
or protect the following hierarchy of identified centres as defined on the Policies Map:  
a) Market Town Centres: Petersfiel d, Midhurst, Petworth and Lewes  
b) Larger Village Centre: Liss  
c) Smaller Village Centres: Alfriston, Ditchling, Fernhurst and Findon  
2. Within the smaller village centres, d evelopment proposals  for retail purposes will be permitted 
where they are compatible with its historic nature and of a scale appropriate to the community 
they sit within. Such development should be well related to any existing shops and services 
within the village unless it c an be demonstrated that this is not feasible or practicable . 
3. The loss of units in Use Class A that are fit for purpose  will not be permitted within smaller 
village centres unless evidence of a marketing campaign of at least 24 months demonstrates 
that there is no market demand for the premises , and that its continued use for retail purposes 
is not viable.  Details of marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 6.   
158                                                         7.171  The purpose of this str ategic policy is to identify a hierarchy of existing town and village centres 
across the National Park. This is based on evidence of the current state of the market town  
centres and village centres, their realistic role and function, and how they relate to  those centre s 
outside of the National Park. The establishment of a hierarchy of centres allows their relative 
positions to be monitored, and if a centre is in decline it enables strategies to put in place to 
either rejuvenate or manage that decline positi vely. Policy SD37 sets the more detailed criteria 
against which development in these centres will be judged.  
7.172  The purpose of this policy is to recognise and support the vitality and viability of the retail 
function of the mar ket town and village centres. I t is important  that all residents within the 
National P ark have access to a range of essential services and facilities, where possible, and the 
smaller village centr es have a vital role to play. P roposals that would result in the loss of these 
services and facilities will not be supported unless there is evidence of marketing and that 
alternative uses have been sought in the first instance as set out in Appendix 3. 
Towns and larger village centres  
7.173  The town centres of Lewes, Petersfield, Midhurst and Petworth , and the large village centre of 
Liss, provide a range of comparison and convenience goods, and community services and 
facilities, as described in the introduction to this chapter. These centres are therefore crucially 
important to meet the needs of commu nities across the National Park.  Development Management Policy SD37: Development in Town and Village 
Centres  
1. Within the  town and  larger  village centre s as shown on the Policies Map , development 
proposals for main town centre uses , in particular those that promote or protect local markets 
and retailers linked to supply chains across the National Park will be permitted  providing  they 
do not harm the retail function of the centre , and are compatible with its scale and historic 
nature.  
2. Within the defined primary shopping frontage s as shown on the Policies Map, the loss of units 
in Use Class A will not be permitted . 
3. Planning permission will be granted for  retail uses  and for non -retail main town centre uses 
within the secondary shopping frontage  as shown on  the Policies Map . 
4. Development that supports the evening economy  within the defined town and larger village 
centre , particula rly for visitors / tourists, will be permitted  provided the use would not result 
in adverse impacts on the a menity of residents and  businesses.  
5. Within the smaller village centres, d evelopment proposals for retail purposes will be permitted 
where they are compatible with its historic nature and of a scale appropriate to the community 
they sit within. Such development should be well rel ated to any existing shops and services 
within the village unless it can be demonstrated that this is not feasible or practicable . 
6. The loss of units in Use Class A that are fit for purpose  will not be permitted within smaller 
village centres unless evidenc e of a marketing campaign of at least 24 months demonstrates 
that there is no market demand for the premises , and that its continued use for retail purposes 
is not viable.  Details of marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 3.   
159                                                         7.174  Non-retail town centre uses relate to a range of leisure, entertainment and sports uses as 
defined in the Glossary. Uses relating to the evening economy include pubs, bars, restaurants 
and late -opening cafes; where such use s are proposed, regard should be had to the amenity of 
existing neighbouring uses, including residents.  
Smaller Village Centres  
7.175  There are a number of smaller village centres. These centres offer vital rural services and contain 
small collections of shops , but are not generally sufficient to meet the day -to-day needs of the 
community.   
7.176  Communities preparing Neighbourhood Development Plans with small centres not identified in 
policy SD36 are able to define boundaries and prepare policies for these areas in order to seek 
to meet the future needs if supported by evidence.   
160                                                          Development Management Policy SD38: Shops outside Centres  
1. Development proposals for small convenience stores will be permitted where they:  
a) Have a net sales area less than 150m2; and 
b) Are to meet the everyday shopping needs of the local community.  
2. The loss of units in Use Class A that are fit for purpose will not be permitted unless evidence 
of a marketing campaign for at least 18 months demonstrates that there is no market demand 
for the p remises , and that its continued use for retail purposes is not viable. Details of 
marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 3.  
3. Development proposals for new farm shops or extensions to existing farm shops will be 
permitted provided that: 
a) The scale and scope would not harm the retail offer in the immediate area. Such shops 
should aim to sell:  
i. At least 40 per cent of goods that are own produce plus local foods;  
ii. 40 per cent of goods that are regional; and  
iii. 20 per cent are from elsewhere.  
b) The proposal has re -used or replaced existing buildings, unless it is demonstrated that 
this is not feasible.  
4. Development proposals for new garden centres, or extensions to existing garden centres, will 
be permitted where:  
a) It is demonstrated that the primary  use of the centre is, and will remain, the sale of 
plants and horticultural products ; 
b) The scale of operations is appropriate to the location;  
c) It is demonstrated that the use proposed is directly related to the supply chain  of local 
horticultural business es; and 
d) The proposal has re -used or replaced existing buildings, unless it is demonstrated that 
this is not feasible , in which case it should be related physically and functionally to 
existing buildings associated with the business.  
5. A retail impact assessment will be required for retail development outside of the defined 
Market Town and Larger Village Centre boundaries but within the settlement policy 
boundaries, where the proposal exceeds the following thresholds for retail floorspac e: 
a) Market Town: 750 m2 
b) Larger Village: 500 m2 
6. A retail impact assessment will be required for retail development outside of Market Town 
and Larger Village settlement policy boundaries where the proposal exceeds 150m2. 
7. All retail development outside centres  should consider and take opportunities to increase 
people’s awareness, understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of the National Park . 
  
161                                                         7.177  The purpose of this policy is to support the development and expansion of small -scale shops 
that m eet day -to-day shopping needs. The National Park is  home to many individual shops , 
which are  sometimes run by the local community . Their development for alternative uses needs 
to be carefully considered in order not to put at risk an existing shop that mig ht be the only 
service within a small village.   
Farm shops  
7.178  Farm shops can support farm diversification, which in turn supports farm incomes. To be 
considered a farm shop, a premises should aim to sell fresh produce and/or local foods that are 
grown, picke d, reared or produced on the farm or on land close to where the shop is located.  
However, the percentages given in the policy are a guideline and it is acknowledged that seasonal 
variation does occur. Whether the percentage is measured by volume or floor area will have to 
be considered on a case by case basis due to the varying nature of the goods sold. For the 
purposes of this policy local food is considered to be that which has come from no further than 
30 miles away82 and regional is considered to be tha t which has come from Hampshire, Surrey, 
West Sussex and East Sussex i.e. counties with land within  or that abuts the National Park.  
7.179  Wherever possible , development proposals for farm shops should utilise disused or obsolete 
agricultural buildings in accord ance with Policy SD40 on Farm Diversification.   
Garden centres  
7.180  Diversification  in relation to garden centres can help to even out the seasonal fluctuations and 
meet customer expectations. These types of retail can be of value to local communities and 
visitors alike , but can also lead to increases in traffic and activity in previously tranquil areas. In 
some cases they detract from the primary purpose of a garden centre, which is to sell plants 
and gardening related products, and become intrusive urbani sation in an otherwise rural 
landscape.  
7.181  The expansion or diversification of a garden centre should be part of a long term strategy for 
the business. The preparation of a business plan or similar document identifying how the 
development supports the long term viability of the business  and local horticultural suppliers , 
complies with the relevant parts of SD38 and justifies development outside of the settlement 
boundary will assist in the consideration of an application.   
Retail Impact Assessments  
7.182  The purp ose of this test is to assess whether the impact of a proposal for retail development 
outside the defined market town and village centres would have an adverse impact on an existing 
retail centre. Due to the nature of the town and village centre , and the l imited opportunities 
for retail development in these locations , any significant retail development outside of these 
centres is likely to  divert trade from them . As a result , it is appropriate to set lower thresholds 
than the NPPF default position , as devel opments considerably smaller than those defined in the 
NPPF  could have a substantial effect on the ro le and function of the centres.  In addition , any 
assessment should also consider the impact on nearby essential rural services.  
 
                                                      
82 CPRE definition of local food.   
162                                                         Understanding and enjoymen t of the National Park  
7.183  In all retail development outside centres the Authority would encourage applicants to consider 
and take opportunities to increase people’s awareness, understanding and enjoyment of the 
special qualities of the National Park. This mig ht range from leaflet distribution to cycle hire or 
facilities for walkers and horse riders.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
163                                                         7h. AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY  
Introduction  
7.184  This section of the Local Plan includes three development management policies on agriculture  
and forestry. Firstly, there is a policy on the construction of new agricultural and forestry 
buildings. The second policy is on farm diversification, which is intended to increase the long -
term viability of farming in the National Park by enabling farmer s to set up additional income 
streams to their core business. The third policy is on the conversion of redundant agricultural 
buildings, which seeks to ensure that farmers can re -use redundant assets in a way that 
safeguards their agricultural character an d contributes to the economic and social wellbeing of 
the National Park’s communities.  
7.185  Land used for farming and forestry covers most of the National Park , and is the most important 
provider of its ecosystem services. These range from the provisioning of f ood, biomass and 
other materials such as timber to the regulation of water and soil q uality. Farming and forestry  
include the provision of habitats to many of the National Park’s most distinctive species, and the 
cultural benefits arising from the protecti on of beautiful and centuries old landscapes that attract 
visitors. This Local Plan aims to protect and enhance the delivery of multiple ecosystem services 
which arise from farmland and woodland, and the buildings associated with them, in line with 
Core Po licy SD 2: Ecosystem Services .  
7.186  Farming and forestry are also a crucial part of the National Park’s economy. The fourth special 
quality is an environment shaped by centuries of farming and embracing new enterprise. The 
existing agricultural buildings make a n important contribution to this special quality, and any 
new development or conversion should conserve and where possible enhance the agricultural 
character of such buildings and their setting.  
7.187  There are a wide range of permitted development rights availa ble to farms, both for agricultural 
development and for the change of use of agricultural buildings, without the need for planning 
permission. There are several differences between the permitted development rights in National 
Parks and those elsewhere. The  following policies apply to developments which do not come 
under the category of permitted development.  
  
164                                                         7.188  The purpose of this policy is to enable farm and forestry enterprises to grow in a way that 
conserves and enhances the special qualities of the National Park.  
Agricultural or forestry need  
7.189  It is important that the construction of new or extended buildings for agricultural and forestry 
must meet an identified operational need within the context of the National Park  purposes and 
duty. As they will normally be outside settlement boundaries, the y should be built at the 
minimum scale required to meet that need. An analysis of reasonable alternative sites should  
demonstrat e that the chosen site is  optimal in r espect of the special qualities. This analysis 
should include  sites outside the National P ark boundary  where this is a feasible option for the 
applicant . 
 
 Development Management Policy SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
1. Development proposals for new buildings or structures for the purposes of agriculture o r 
forestry will be permitted where:  
a) There is an agricultural or forestry need for the development within the National Park 
and its scale is commensurate with that need;  
b) It has been demonstrated that available alternative sites , including  where feasible sites 
outside the National Park,  which might better protect and enhance the special qualities 
have been considered, and are unsuitable to meet the need;  
c) The buildings are in keeping with local character, and of a design that reflects the 
proposed agricultu ral or forestry use ; 
d) The proposals include structure planting to integrate the development into the existing 
local landscape framework;  
e) The development re -uses or replaces existing buildings where feasible . Where this is not 
feasible,  the development should be related physically and functionally to existing 
buildings associated with the enterprise,  unless there are exceptional circumstances 
relating to agricultural or forestry necessity for a more isolated location;  
f) A building has not b een disposed of or converted to an alternative use at the holding in 
the past three years , which could have met the need of  the development proposed; and  
g) Existing buildings which have a negative landscape impact are removed . 
2. Development proposals for new o r improved access tracks for forestry or agriculture will be 
permitted where:  
a) The proposal is essential for the sustainable management of the land;  
b) It has been demonstrated that it is not feasible  to accommodate the proposed traffic  
using existing accesses ; 
c) The layout and design is located to minimise impacts on the special qualities; and  
d) Where appropriate , the track is opened as a path for permissive public usage .  
165                                                         Design and landscape  
7.190  Appropriately sized and located agricultural and forestry buildings are part of the rural character 
of the National Park, and their generally functional and minimal des ign is related to their integral 
relationship with the management of the surrounding land. New agricultural and forestry 
development should follow the same principle, and not be disguised as any other type of 
development.  
7.191  The landscape impact of new devel opment should be minimised. Often this can be achieved by 
location close to existing buildings. The scale, massing and colour of agricultural buildings is 
particularly important. Different parts of the National Park also have different traditions in the 
design and layout of agricultural buildings. Advice should be sought from the Authority  on these 
matters at an early stage in the design process.  
Replacement buildings  
7.192  Unnecessary proliferation of buildings in rural locations will be  resisted . The loss of existing fit -
for-purpose buildings that may be needed for future operations  is discouraged , therefore n ew 
buildings to replace those recently disposed of will not normally be permitted . Exceptions may 
be made to this where the applicant can provide strong evidence that a need could not 
previously have been anticipated or planned for. Where the opportunity  arises  to enhance the 
landscape through appropriate replace ment of  a building, this must be taken.  
Forestry development  
7.193  Any forestry related development o f buildings or structures within woodland should have 
particular reference to policies SD9 : Biodiversity and Geodiversity  and SD11 : Trees, Hedgerows 
and Woodland. Consideration should also be given to the protection of the mycology and health 
of forest soi ls, mitigating the negative effects of development, where possible.  
Tracks and Infrastructure  
7.194  Proposals for  new, or alterations to, agricultural and forest tracks and roads shoul d be in keeping 
with the local geology and landscape character. Proposals should consider all relevant 
agricultural or forestry activity including turning circles at track junctions, timber stacking and 
loading areas and access to trunk roads. The design an d layout of tracks should fit in with the 
pattern of existing contours and vegetation, and should deliver ecosystem services by protecting 
and enhancing drainage patterns , protecting heritage assets (including archaeology) and 
incorporating features of bio diversity value wherever possible.  
7.195  New access tracks that relate to existing Public Ri ghts of Way and public roads used by non -
motorised users should, w herever feasible and compatible with the needs of agriculture, 
forestry, landscape and biodiversity, pr ovide a meaningful connection with the road and public 
right of way network . These should  be designated as permitted paths or public rights of way.  
Such designation may be secured through a planning condition or legal agreement.  
Exceptional use of removal condition  
7.196  In exceptional circumstances, it may be considered appropriate for reasons of supporting the 
National Park purposes to grant permission for an agricultural or forestry building which does 
not comply with one or more of the criteria  in Policy SD39 . In such circumstances a condition 
will be attached to  the planning permission requiring the demolition of the relevant building 
should it fall out of use and remain so for a period of ten years or more.   
166                                                         Development Management Policy SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
1. Development proposals relating to farm and forestry diversification will be permitted where:  
a) A diversification p lan is submitted, which demonstrates that:  
i. The proposed development (s) would contribute to the first purpose of the National 
Park by provid ing long-term benefit to the farming or forestry business as an 
agricultural  / forestry  operation ; 
ii. Diversification activities remain subsidi ary to the farming or forestry operation, in 
terms of physical scale and income  stream ; and 
iii. The proposed development does not cause severance or disruption to the 
agricultural holding . 
and  
b) The development re -uses or replaces existing buildings where feasible . Where this is not 
feasible , the development should be related physically and functionally to existing 
buildings , be of an appropriate scale, and retain  agricultural character ; and 
c) Any o utdoor storage is provided  as a minor ancillary element of other uses.  
7.197  The purpose of this policy is to support the  long term viability of the National Park’s farm and 
forestry enterprises , which contribute to the first purpose of the National Park  by their land 
management activities. This will be achieved by  facilitating  farm diversification projects , which 
will also deliver  multiple benefits for the National Park purposes and duty. The Partnership 
Management Plan states that farm d iversification that supports the appropriate re -use of 
redundant or ne glected traditional build ings presents  a particular opportunity for  delivering  
multiple benefits.  
Subsidiary nature  
7.198  The principle aim of a farm diversification proposal should be to supplement the core farm 
enterprise and not to replace it. This need not mean that income from the  diversified business 
be less than from the farm, but the diversified elements of the business should contribute a long -
term sustainable income stream to the farm which allows the main business  to withstand periods 
of sustained low returns. The Authority will therefore resist proposals which could harm the 
long-term viability of farm holdings , i.e. those proposals that  lead to the piecemeal loss of assets 
from farms.  
7.199  A diversification plan will show how the development proposal (s) will contribute to the v iability 
of the farming  business  over the long term. The preparation of this P lan should be proportionate 
to the scale of the diversification project . 
7.200  The Authority may use a planning condition or legal agreement to ensure that the ownership 
and control of  new development is retained , and ensure that income will be used to support  
appropriate management of the landscape. In addition, the physical scale of the diversified 
business uses should not overwhelm that of the farming activities on the site or disrup t them. 
No diversification activities should preclude the future return of the land to agricultural use. 
The cumulative impacts of diversification developments, including on traffic generation, will be 
taken into account in assessing applications against t his criterion.    
167                                                         Existing and new buildings  
7.201  Farm diversification should make the best possible use of existing, appropriate buildings. In 
instances where the reuse of existing buildings would cause harm to a heritage asset, a new 
building may be preferable.  
7.202  Where n ew buildings  are deemed necessary, they  should generally be in close proximity to 
existing buildings  and respond to the context of an agricultural farmstead . A functional design 
may be appropriate, provided that the buildings are modest in scale.  
Specific uses  
7.203  Examples of possible farm diversification  may include:  
 Farm shops selling local produce;  
 Educational facilities directly related to the farm  / countryside location;  
 Leisure facilities promoting the quiet enjoyment and understanding of the special qualities, 
including increased access to the countryside;  
 Tourist accommodation;  
 Small-scale generation of electricity or heat from local renewable sources of energy, 
primarily for use on site or in the local area;  
 Appropriately scaled processing facilities for the outputs of the unit or of other agriculture  
/ forestry businesses in the local area; or  
 Services to the agriculture or forestry sectors that contribute to the sustainable 
maintenance of the landscape of the National Park.  
  
168                                                         Development Ma nagement Policy SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural 
or Forestry Buildings  
1. The conversion of redundant agricultural or forestry buildings outside of defined settlement 
boundaries to an alternative use will be permitted where:  
a) The location is sufficiently well related to existing infrastructure, amenities and services;  
b) The existing vehicular access is suitable in landscape terms for the use proposed ; 
c) The original building is structurally sound, is not derelict and of an appropriate design and 
scale for conversion to the proposed new use, without the need for substantial 
reconstruction, significant extensions or ancillary buildings;  
d) Conversion will not result in the need for another agricultural or forestry building on the 
holding ; 
e) If the buildin g proposed for conversion is not a traditional one, there are no redundant 
traditional buildings within the holding capable of being  re-used in the first instance; and 
f) There is no adverse impact on the character of the building and its setting , in particular 
its agricultural  / forestry character, and  
g) For residential uses, the proposed development is restricted to occupation by local 
workers  who need to be accommodated outside of defined settlement boundaries . 
2. The conversion of redundant agricultural or forestry buildings outside of defined settlement 
boundaries  identified as heritage assets  will be permitted where : 
a) Part 1 of this policy is complied with;  
b) The optimal viable use is proposed to conserve and enhanc e its architectural and historic 
significance and setting;  
c) Wherever possible, essential utilities and other functional requirements do not ha rm 
significant internal or external fabric;  and 
d) Existing historic fabric and features of architectural or historic  significance are retained . 
7.204  The purpose of the policy is to enable the conservation of agricultural or forestry buildings 
which are heritage assets, and allow for the beneficial re -use of other rural buildings to support 
the rural economy, tourism and local communities whilst protect ing and enhancing the character 
of the countryside.  
Suitability of agricultural or forestry buildings for conversion  
7.205  Many but not all agricultural or forestry buildings will be suitable for conversion. Buildings which 
are generally not  suitable for conver sion include those in isolated locations, or with poor access 
arrangements; buildings which would require substantial reconstruction or structural works to 
accommodate the new use; buildings which are subject to a planning condition or condition of 
prior a pproval which requires their removal on cessation of agricultural use; or buildings which 
have a negative landscape impact only justified in a National Park setting by their agricultural or 
forestry usage.  
  
169                                                         Future needs  
7.206  Conversion of agricultural or forestry buildings should not result in the need for another building 
on the holding. An assessment will be made as to what extent the building has been designed 
and used for agricultural purposes, its age, how long it has bee n unused and the potential for it 
to be used for agriculture again in future.  
Non-traditional farm buildings  
7.207  The use of non -traditional  farm buildings for alternative uses should only be considered after 
considering the conversion of  traditional buildings  on the holding, as these are likely to be more 
worthy of being retained. The removal of disused buildings that have a negative landscape impact 
will be encouraged.   
Design considerations  
7.208  Conversion should be achieved through minimal changes and retention  of the existing structure 
and its characteristics. Small-scale localised rebuilding may be acceptable , but any significant 
rebuilding  would be considered new -build rather than a conversion, which would instead be 
subject to Policy SD25 and other relevant Local Plan policies as applicable. It will be necessary 
to assess which features are original , and which are newer alterations , and which of thes e is 
worthy of being retained.  
Extensions and Ancillary Buildings  
7.209  Minor extensions as part of conversion may be acceptable only where they can safeguard the 
character of the  main buildings and farmstead. Where unavoidable, they should be subordinate 
in scale and should not compromise the setting of the building or farmst ead.  
7.210  New ancillary buildings can detract from the agricultural character of farm buildings and 
adversely impact on surrounding views. Re -using existing ancillary structures is encouraged,  and 
any new structures will be carefully scrutinised .   
Setting  
7.211  A sensitive conversion respects the relationship the building has with the surrounding landscape. 
It is the buildings in their setting and not just the buildings themselves which are important to 
the special qualities of the National Park. The relationship of each building to others in the group 
should be considered. Existing boundaries around and within a farmstead are likely to be of 
value and should be respected from the start of the design process.  
7.212  Where a farmstead is proposed for conversion into multip le units, care must be taken in the 
subdivision of surrounding land, as, for example, new separate gardens can greatly affect setting 
of the group by eroding the scale and proportion of the existing building. There is a risk that 
the subdivision of shared spaces can also create problems between the new use and any 
continuing agricultural use.  
Use 
7.213  The priority use for redundant agricultural or forestry buildings will be for farm diversification 
projects, in line with policy SD47.  
  
170                                                         7.214  If it can be robustly demonstrated that this cannot be delivered in line with the relevant policy, 
examples of potentially acceptable conversion to other uses inclu de: 
 Employment uses in line with policy SD34: Sustaining the Local E conomy  
 Local community u ses in line with Policy SD4 3: New and Existing Community Facilities  
 Visitor accommodation in line with policy Policy SD2 3: Sustainable Tourism  
 Housing for local workers who need to be accommodated outside settlement boundaries  
7.215  Residential conversion is mor e likely than other uses to require a high degree of change and 
intervention. There are often conflicts with the potential desire for a more domestic character 
by occupiers, and the likelihood of outdoor domestic paraphernalia. Housing development is 
there fore unlikely to meet the criteria in Policy SD41 and elsewhere in this Local Plan , except 
where less harmful  uses have been demonstrated not to be viable. Agricultural and forestry 
workers housing will be an exception to this since it has to be located on  or adjacent to the 
farm or forestry unit in any event, and the alternative to conversion may be a new build dwelling.  
Conversion to housing for other local workers may be acceptable where a similar level of need 
can be demonstrated for a location outside settlement boundaries; for example, where a worker 
on a farm diversification project or tourist accommodation needs to  be on site at all times,  
Heritage assets  
7.216  Where a traditional agricultural or forestry building is considered a heritage asset, the optimal 
viable use should be sought to secure its future. This may include a mix of uses which are 
sympathetic to the histor ic fabric. Further information on optimal viable use is set out under 
Policy SD12:  Historic Environment.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
171                                                         7i. INFRASTRUCTURE  
Introduction  
7.217  This section of the Local Plan includes three policies relating to infrastructure development. The 
first, a strategic policy,  sets out an overarching approach for infrastructure development  in the 
National Park . This is followed by two development management policies relating to  new and 
existing community facilities , and telecommunications & utilities. Many types of infrastruct ure 
are also addressed by other  Local Plan policies such as Policy  SD19 : Transport and Accessibility 
and Policy SD45 : Green Infrastructure . 
7.218  Infrastructure is the services and systems that communities need to function . It includes b oth 
‘grey’ and ‘green’ infrastructure and is interlinked with multiple ecosystem services such as water 
flow and flood. The impact of new infrastructure and the expansion of existing infrastructure 
on the special qualities are a particular concern  for the National Park Authority . Under Section 
62 of the 1995 Environment Act  there is a duty for all relevant bodies, including statutory 
infrastructure providers, to have regard to National Park purposes . As such, all infrastructure 
development proposal s should reflect the nationally protected landscape, be appropriately 
designed and consider carefully the impact upon the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage 
of the area.  
7.219  Some infrastructure development proposals  will be deemed to  constitute  major development  
by the National Park Authority . In line with national policy there is a presumption against major 
infrastructure development in the National Park and, as such, proposals will be subject to the 
tests set out in policy SD3 of this P lan. 
7.220  All proposals relating to strategic roads will be dealt with in accordance with the National Park 
Authority’s Position Statement83 on the A27 , or any successor guidance . This  also applies to other 
major infrastructure proposals . 
Strategic Policy SD42: Infra structure  
1. Development proposals for new , improved  or supporting infrastructure will only be permitted 
where:  
a) It represents the least environmentally harmful option reasonably available , also  having 
regard to the operational requirements  and technical limitations  of the proposed 
infrastructure ; and  
b) The design minimises the impact on the natural beauty, wildlife  and cultural heritage  of 
the National Park  and the general amenity of local communities . 
2. Development proposals will only be permitted where appropriate, necessary and reasonable 
infrastructure investment has been secured either in the form of suitable on -site or off -site 
works, and/or financial contributions to mitigate its impact.  
3. Infrastruc ture delivery should be integrated with development phasing to ensure timely 
provision . Financial contributions towards future infrastructure maintenance will, where 
necessary, be secure d by means of a legal agreement . 
                                                      
83 Position Statement on A27 route corridor  (South Downs National Park Authority, 2014)   
172                                                         7.221  The purpose of this policy is to sup port the development of appropriate new infrastructure, 
while seeking to conserve and enhance the National Park. It relates to all applications for 
infrastructure development within the National Park.   
Impact on the National Park  
7.222  All planning applications  for new or improved infrastructure will need to provide evidence that  
the works proposed are  the least e nvironmentally harmful option. The preparation of this 
evidence should be proportionate to the impact of the development on the special qualities.  
Infrastructure investment  
7.223  New development should be adequately supported by existing infrastructure, or make sufficient 
provision for any new infrastructure that is required to make the development acceptable in 
planning terms. As such, the Authority  will negotiate, where appropriate, a suitable package of 
supporting infrastructure to mitigate the impact of development to make it acceptable in 
planning terms. Necessary infrastructure will be secured through a suitable combination of 
planning obligations, fo r example, Section 106 Agreements, and tariffs, for example Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL), contributions.  
7.224  A live document known as the Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (IDP) sets out existing infrastructure 
deficiencies and what is required to support su stainable development in the plan period. Given 
the limited level and scale of development in the National Park , and that most of the local 
infrastructure is owned and/or managed by other local authorities or service providers, the 
National Park Authority will need to work with partners and review the IDP periodically to 
inform its position on the CIL. For example, the National Park Authority  will publish an up -to-
date list to clearly define what infrastructure is to be provided through either planning 
obligations or CIL  (known as the ‘regulation 123 list’) .  
Phasing  
7.225  The final phasing, timing, funding and construction details of infrastructure is complex and should 
be worked up during pre -application discussions. Where appropriate, infrastructure will be co-
ordinated and delivered in partnership with site promoters, public agencies, the  relevant  county 
council and other relevant authorities.  
7.226  Infrastructure is often considered to be essential , and necessary to be delivered within the early 
phase of a develo pment or prior to occupation . In these instances,  the Authority will work 
closely with site promoters to source early funding or innovative means to enable delivery. In 
such circumstances, the Authority will require a proactive approach from site promoters  and 
land owners.  
7.227  Financial contributions  may also be sought when future maintenance of infrastructure is required 
to ensure that the development proposal is acceptable in planning terms , and the body carrying 
out the maintena nce would not be the developer.  
 
 
  
173                                                         Development Management Policy SD43: New and Existing Community 
Facilities  
1. Development proposals for new and/or expanded community facility infrastructure will be 
permitted where:  
a) They d emonstrate a local need;  
b) The scale of the proposed infrastructure is proportionate to the local area;  
c) There has been prior local community engagement;  
d) They a re accessible and inclusive to the local communities they serve; and  
e) Appropriate consideration has been given to the shared use, re -use and/or 
redevelopment of existing buildings in the host community .  
2. Development proposals that would result in the loss of, or have an unacceptable adverse 
impact upon, an existing community facility, will not be permitted unless :  
a) For commercially run community facilities, evidence is provided of a robust marketing 
campaign of at least 12 months that clearly demonstrates there is no market demand 
for the existing use or an equivalent community use; or  
b) For community - or publicly -owned or  managed facilities, it can be robustly 
demonstrated that there is a lack of need for the existing facility, or an equivalent 
community use, or  
c) Alternative community facilities are provided that are accessible, inclusive and available 
without causing unrea sonable reduction or shortfall in the local service provision.  
Details of the marketing requirements are set out in Appendix 3. 
7.228  The purpose of this policy is to provide  new and protect existing community facilities that serve 
the local communities of the National Park.  
7.229  There is a wide range of community infrastructure facilities that are vital in maintaining the 
sustainability of both larger settlements and rural communities. Community infrastructure 
facilities enable essential public services to be provided as locally as possible and, as such, there 
is a presumption that they should be retained or replaced with proposals of at least an equivalent 
standard. Appropr iately sized proposals , which would provide inclusive shared services through 
the joint use of facilities in accessible locations , will be supported in principle.  
7.230  For the purposes of policy SD43, community inf rastructure facilities include:   
 Cultural facil ities 
 Education  
 Healthcare  
 Libraries  
 Public Houses  
 Recreational open space  
 Sports pitches, pa vilions and leisure centres   
174                                                          Town and village halls  
New c ommunity facilities  
7.231  It is important that local people are involved in decisions about their community facilities. All 
planning applications for new community facilities  will need to provide evidence  of a community 
engagement exercise to  gauge the need for the current  and proposed  community uses.  The 
preparation of this evidence should be proportionate to the scale of the development . 
7.232  The Authority will not look favourably at development proposals for new community facilities 
located outside settlement boundaries that would replace more sustainably located community 
facilities within settlement boundaries.  
Existing c ommunity Facilities 
7.233  The Authority will safeguard all existing community facilities that are fit for purpose from 
development proposals for non -community us es. Where a development proposal could lead to 
the loss of a community facility or reduce its scope and/or viability, the Authority will expect 
applicants to provide very strong justification for this loss or diminishment. Policy SD43 
particularly seeks to guard against short -termism, since loss is often irreversible.  
7.234  Proposals for losing a community facility must not be based solely on the needs of the current 
owner  / tenant  or their chosen business model. Where the loss of a commercially run facility, 
such as a pub or village shop , is proposed, r obust evidence of an appropriate marketing campaign 
of at least 12 months will be require d to demonstrate that there is no market demand for the 
existing use. The loss of a community facility owned or managed by the community, or run as a 
non-commercial public service, should be supported by an assessment  of local need. This should  
show that t here is no longer a need for the facility, or that there is no opportunity for an 
equivalent use to move into the premises. Proposals to provide an alternative facility in line with 
part 2(c) of the policy will also be considered.  
 Assets of Community Valu e 
7.235  The National Park Authority  encourages communities to register important community 
infrastructure facilities as ‘Assets of Community Value’ under the 2011 Localism Act . This could 
ensure an added layer of statutory protection against possible harmful losses of these facilities, 
and could offer communities the opportunity to formulate their own proposals to safeguard the 
future of that facility. However, the absence of a n entry on the register will not be taken as 
meaning a facility does not have intrinsic value to the local community. Where the exercise of 
a permitted development right for a change of use could threaten a valued local community 
infrastructure facility, t he Authority  will consider whether an immediate Article 4 Direction  should 
be made to protect the sustainability of local communities.  
  
175                                                         Development Management Policy SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities 
Infrastructure  
1. Development proposals for new tele communications and/or utilities infrastructure will be 
permitted where:  
a) The identified need cannot be met using existing infrastructure or other appropriate 
structures ; 
b) They are  of an appropriate design that would not have a n adverse impact on the special 
qualities;  
c) They make  use of all available technologies and suitable mitigation designed to minimise 
the impact on the landscape and general amenity;  
d) They m inimise other relevant environmental impacts; and  
e) They remove , reduc e in prominence, or move underground related existing  
infrastructure , where feasible.  
2. All new residential dwellings should be served by a superfast broadband connection , or an 
equivalent alternative technology , installed on an open access basis. All other n on-residential 
buildings proposed to be regularly occupied must also be provided with this standard of 
connection when available, unless it can be demonstrated through consultation with relevant 
service providers that this would not be deliverable.  
7.236  The p urpose of Policy SD44  is to provide appropriate new telecommunications and utilities 
infrastructure without harm to the special qualities. Telecommunications and other utilities 
infrastructure often constitutes development in its own right, and Policy SD44  relates to such 
development.  Access to superfast broadband is an issue within the National Park, which 
currently has more ‘not spots’ than ‘hot spots’ and as such the key sectors of farming, forestry 
and tourism are notably disadvantaged by slow and unrel iable internet connections.  
7.237  Telecommunications infrastructure includes development proposals related to the supply and 
management of broadband, mobile services and telephone land lines.  Utility infrastructure 
includes development proposals related to the s upply and management of water, waste water, 
gas and electricity.  
Siting, mitigation and de sign 
7.238  Telecommunications and utilities infrastructure development proposals should be supported by 
a suitable survey setting out the potential deployment options and justification for the selected 
option. Applications must also be accompanied by full details of all new landscaping, screening 
and of any trees or vegetation to be retained on the site, and also of associated developments, 
including access roads and other ancillary buildings to service the development, and their likely 
impact upon the environment.  All cabling should be undergrounded.  New development 
proposals should make  maximum possible use of technologies with lower landscape impact, 
before technologies with greater l andscape impact are considered.  
7.239  Proponents of new telecommunications masts must demonstrate that they have exhausted all 
the opportunities for use of exist ing masts and other str uctures. This should include, where 
appropriate, siting apparatus on  buildings , where this means that  the impact of the use of a roof  
176                                                         for telecommunications infrastructure would not be as detrimental in landscape terms as the 
erectio n of a new mast.  
7.240  The visual impact of telecommunications infrastructure will generally be lower when it can be 
located in close proximity to existing buildings, where this would not damage the setting of 
buildings that contribute to the special qualities.  
Mitigating impacts of existing infrastructure  
7.241  Before the establishment of the National Park, infrastructure, in particular telecommunications 
masts and electricity pylons, were erected that have a negative impact on the landscape. 
Opportunities  will sometimes arise from proposals for new telecommunications or utilities  
development to mitigate these impacts.  Examples of how  new development  may achieve this 
include  remov al or underground ing of  such facilities, screen ing with appropriate landscaping in 
compliance with Policy SD5 (Landscape Character) , or replac ing them with facilities that are 
less prominent or otherwise have a less negative impact . Policy SD44 requires that such 
opportunities  should be taken. Undergrounding and/or landscape screening wil l be supported 
provided that this is compatible with relevant policies, for example biodiversity and archaeology.  
Improving telecommunications through new development  
7.242  Given the critical importance of internet access to communities in the National Park, all  new 
residential dwellings, irrespective of their location, should be provided with suitable superfast 
broadband connectivity as an essential utility. Non -residential buildings, particularly those for 
commercial or community use , should also have superfast  broadband connectivity unless it can 
be clearly demonstrated that this is not viable. If technological advancements are made within 
the plan period , all relevant proposals should provide suitable up -to-date alternatives. The 
broadband connectivity will be  secured through suitable planning conditions and/or obligations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
177                                                         7j. GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  
Introduction  
7.243  This sub-section includes policies related to green infrastructure provision. It includes one 
strategic policy providing the overarching requirements for green infrastructure (Policy SD45).  
It also includes two development management policies on specific requireme nts for open space, 
sports and recreation facilities or other amenity space and burial grounds (Policy SD46) and on 
Local Green Space designation (Policy SD47).  
7.244  Green infrastructure is the multifunctional network of natural and semi natural features, urban 
and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits 
for local communities. Green infrastructure is a vital tool  for the delivery of ecosystem services 
benefits, for resilience to climate change, and for health and wellbeing. The National Park as a 
whole is a nationally significant green infrastructure asset through its role as the green heart of 
the South East, and  its green infrastructure network is recognised to extend beyond its 
boundaries . Accordingly, green infrastructure is identified as one of the six key strategic cross 
boundary issues (see Chapter 4 of the Local Plan).    
7.245  The emerging South Downs Green Infr astructure Framework  sets out a roadmap for green 
infrastructure planning for the National Park and the wider sub -region.  It aims to ‘ create, protect 
and enhance a connected network of multifunctional assets; which sustainably meet the needs of local 
comm unities and supports the special qualities of the South Downs; by achieving a consensus about the 
strategic principles for planning, delivery and management of green infrastructure’ .  
7.246  National Parks have traditionally been places for informal recreation an d this is widely 
recognised in the National Parks Vision and Circular . As the local planning authority, the National 
Park Authority has an additional responsibility to plan for the provision of formal sports and 
recreational facilities for the health and w ellbeing of its population. Such provision needs to be 
based on robust and up ‑to‑date assessments of the needs for facilities and opportunities for 
new provision.  
7.247  The National Planning Policy Framework introduces the concept of Local Green Space designatio n 
as a way to provide special protection for green areas that are demonstrably special and holds 
a particular local significance for local communities. The designation would rule out development 
other than in very special circumstances. The Local Plan desi gnates and protects Local Green 
Spaces which were nominated by local communities.  
 
  
178                                                         Strategic Policy SD 45: Green Infrastructure  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where they  demonstrate that they : 
a) Maintain or enhance green infrastructure assets, green infrastructure links and the overall 
green infrastructure network; and  
b) Provide new green infrastructure , or improvements to existing green assets and green 
linkages , which are integrated into the development design , that meets the needs of 
communitie s both within and beyond the site’s boundaries.  
2. Green Infrastructure proposals must contribute to  multifunctional landscapes which:  
a) Strengthen connectivity and resilience of ecological networks;  
b) Incorporate green infrastructure measures that are appropriat e to the type and context 
of the development proposal as part of an overall landscape design;  
c) Maximise opportunities to mitigate, adapt and improve resilience to climate change;  
d) Maximise opportunities for cycling and walking , including multi user routes  and, where 
possible, facilitate circular routes; and  
e) Support health and wellbeing and improve opportunities for understanding and 
enjoyment of the National Park and its special qualities.  
3. Development proposals that will harm the green infrastructure network must incorporate 
measures that sufficiently mitigate or offset their effects.  
4. Where appropriate, the Authority will seek to secure via planning condition or legal agreement  
provision for the future management and/or maintenance of green infrastructure.    
7.248  The purpose of this policy is to promote the provision of new green infrastructure whilst  
protecting existing assets and the integrity of the green infrastructure network a s a whole . This 
network extends well beyond the boundaries of the National Park.   
Enhancing existing and provision of new green infrastructure  
7.249  Both green infrastructure assets and the green infrastructure network as a whole are important 
considerations in  determining planning applications. Green infrastructure assets in this context 
may relate to a wide range of natural or semi -natural features . For example , a development may 
undermine the viability of a larger habitat through fragmentation.   
7.250  New developme nt should be designed in a way that enhances green infrastructure and avoids  
harm . The National Park Authority will  seek contributions as appropriate for the future 
management and maintenance of the new infrastructure.   
7.251  Improvements to existing or provision of new infrastructure should be an integral part of the 
design of development proposals, and should be landscape led, planned around existing green 
infrastructure assets, and should be multifunctional. Opportunities sh ould be identified and 
taken for improving and creating new connections between habitats,  
7.252  It is acknowledged that green infrastructure assets serve not only residents within the immediate 
locale, but also the wider community both locally and further afiel d. Wherever possible both  
179                                                         new and enhanced green infrastructure will be planned to deliver benefits to as wide a cross -
section of National Park users as possible.  
Multifunctional and connected green infrastructure  
7.253  Green Infrastructure that is multifunction al and connected provides multiple benefits for people 
and wildlife. There are many ways in which green infrastructure can be multifunctional . In order 
to maximise opportunities for multifunctional green infrastructure, proposals must be informed 
by the co ntext and address potential conflicts between users , for example between recreational 
uses and also between people and wildlife .  
7.254  The multifunctional role of green infrastructure can strengthen climate change resilience 
through sustainable drainage and flo od storage provision, and mitigate against climate change 
through carbon storage and providing sustainable transport options. Where appropriate, green 
infrastructure should be integrated into the built form of development proposals, for example , 
through gr een roofs and swales.  
7.255  Green linkages can include green areas of land which connect habitat, green corridors which 
support movement of wildlife (for example, hedgerows), and public rights of way, Public rights 
of way provide linkages  between GI assets and also between villages and towns and can be 
multifunctional for the movement of both people and wildlife. Where appropriate, p roposals 
for public rights of way should take opportunities for multi user and inclusive access.  
  
180                                                         Development Management Policy SD 46: Provision and Protection of Open 
Space, Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds  / Cemeteries  
1. Residential development will be required to provide open space on site or within proximity  to 
the site, in line with  the National Park Authority’s adopted standards as set out in Figure 7.8, 
or their replacements. Development proposals for open space should  demonstrate how they : 
a) Are of a type determined by the scale and type of development and the needs of the 
area;  
b) Are of high quality d esign which reflects the landscape character and setting;  
c) Are safe and accessible for all members of the community; and  
d) Include provision for the long -term management and maintenance of any recreation or 
open space facilities provided.  
2. Development proposa ls for new buildings that provide local sport and recreational facilities 
should be located within settlement boundaries as defined on the Policies Map. Outside of 
settlement boundaries new buildings for local sport and recreational facilities will be limi ted to 
those ancillary to and essential for the use of the land for outdoor sport and recreation. Robust 
evidence of a sequential search for sites and the ancillary nature of the building will need to be 
provided and agreed with the Authority.  Development proposals for new or improved playing 
surfaces should be located within or close to settlement boundaries as defined on the Policies 
Map.   
3. Development proposals will be refused where they would result in the loss of open space 
unless provision of equal or  better quantity, quality and accessibility is made in close proximity 
to the existing open space.  Robust evidence must be provided to demonstrate  the following:  
a) Alternative provision is available in the vicinity without causing an unreasonable 
reduction or shortfall in meeting the local need;  
b) It has been demonstrated that the land cannot reasonably be converted to another form 
of open space provision for which there is an identified deficit; and  
c) The development will provide alternative, sports, recreatio n or open space facilities, the 
need for which clearly outweighs the loss of the open space.  
4. Development proposals for new cemeteries and burial grounds will be permitted where they 
are: 
a) Appropriately sited with regard to impact on local amenity;  
b) Designed to make the most of opportunities to improve and/or create new biodiversity, 
habitats and green infrastructure; and  
c) Will have no adverse impact on groundwater and surface water.  
7.256  The purpose of Policy SD46 is to ensure provision is made for open space, sports and 
recreational facilities commensurate with assessed need and protects existing facilities that are 
valued by the communities they serve.   
  
181                                                         Adopted open space standards  
7.257  The National Park Authority , as the local planning authority, works with the twelve local 
authorities that are responsible for the delivery of sports and recreation facilities within their 
district , borough or city  both in and outside of the National Park. The South Downs National P ark 
Open Space, Sports and Recreation Evidence Study84 review ed the open space s tandards  in 
operation throughout the National Park. The standards set out in Figure 7.8 are taken from this 
report and represents the standar ds that the National Park Authority will adopt . These  are 
based on standards set out in adopted Local Plans or in local needs -based evidence . Residential 
development proposals will be required to provide open space on site  or within a set proximity  
in accordance with the appropriate  standard  in Figure 7.8 or any updated standards adopted in 
the course of the plan period.  
FIGURE 7.8 : STANDARDS FOR OPEN  SPACE, SPORTS AND RE CREATIONAL 
FACILITIES FOR THE N ATIONAL PARK BY LOCA L AUTHORITY AREA  
 
 
Local 
Authority  Amenity 
Greenspace  Parks and 
Gardens  Outdoor 
Sports  Children  / Teen 
Play 
ha per 
1000†85 Prox. 
within *86 ha 
per 
1000
† Prox. 
within*  ha 
per 
1000†  Prox. 
within * ha 
per 
1000†  Prox. 
within*  
Adur  0.72 400m  0.22 1200m  - - 0.04 1200m  
Worthing  0.78 400m  0.20 1200m  - - 0.05 1200m  
Arun 0.82 400m 0.02 1200m - - 0.06 1200m 
Brighton & 
Hove  0.582 480m  0.92 720m  0.47 960m  0.055 720m  
Chichester  0.50 480m  1.60 600m  1.60 600m  0.15 480m  /  
600m  
East Hants  1.0 700m  1.0 650m  0.5 650m  0.25 480m  /  
650m  
Lewes  - - - - 1.7 - 0.7 - 
Horsham  1.7 - - - - - 0.5 - 
                                                      
84 South Downs National Park Open Space, Sports and Recreation – Evidence Study  (South Downs National 
Park Authority, 2014)  
85 † hectares per 1,000 of population.  
86 * The  accessibility standards provide the maximum distance a person would  normally walk from their home 
and/or work to get to the respective type of open space . They help to show open space catchment areas 
and thus help in the assessment of locational deficienc ies. They also help in the assessment of open space 
priorities when considering development proposals.   
182                                                         Eastbourne  0.6 1200m  0.75 1000m  1.5 1200m  0.1 800m  
Mid Sussex  - - - - 1.6-1.8 - 0.6-0.8 400m – 
1000m  
Wealden  1.0 
 600m  1.4 600m  - - 0.0 3 / 
0.02 480m  / 
600m 
Winchester  0.8 700m  0.75 650m  0.75 650m  0.5 480 / 
650m  
7.258  The requirement s set out in Figure 7.8 will apply to all qualifying developments that meet the 
threshold se t for respective district areas. The Authority will be alert to proposals that seek to 
artificially subdivide sites, in which cases the threshold will be applied to the combined sites’  
gross areas.  
7.259  Provision  should be calculated on a pro -rata basis proportionate to the gross site area , using a 
guideline  population density of 60 people per hectare.  All types  of public open space  should be 
provided on -site where reasonable and proportionate to do so. Open space may form part of 
the requirement to deliver sustainable drainage , if the space is useable and fit -for-purpose.  
Where insufficient space exists on site to  meet local needs th en off -site provision in the locality  
may be sought  in line with strategic policy SD 45: Green Infrastructure.  
7.260  Private open space that is not available for public use will not be accepted in lieu of requirements 
for public open space provisions or contribut ions. 
New buildings providing local sport and recreational facilities  
7.261  Pavilions and other buildings provide facilities for changing and taking refreshment at cricket and 
other sports grounds. These buildings should if possible be located within settlement boundaries 
as defined on the Policies Map. Development proposals to locate such buildings outwith 
settlement boundaries need to provide evidence of a sequential approach  to site selection.  The 
search should focus first on sites within a settlement boundar y. If buildings are to be located 
outwith a settlement boundary evidence is also required that the building is both  ancillary to 
and essential for the use of the land for outdoor sport and recreation.   New or improved playing 
surfaces should also be locate d within or close to settlements. It is important that the impact of 
the new surface on the landscape is fully considered in line with policy SD4: Landscape 
Character. A pplications also need to comply with policy SD43: New and Existing Community 
Facilities .    
Safeguarding  
7.262  Criterion 3 of Policy SD 46 safeguards against the loss of existing open space and associated 
sports and recreational facilities. This policy will apply not only to public facilities but also 
privately owned facilities such as school play ing fields and sports clubs. The latter are equally 
important to national park purposes in terms of shaping the form, character, and appearance of 
settlements and their place in the wider landscape.    
 
 
  
183                                                         Cemeteries and burial grounds  
7.263  Cemeteries and burial grounds are a much valued and sensitive type of green infrastructure 
asset. The development proposals should have due regard to the character of the surrounding 
area especially those relating to the special qualities and retain any existing landscape featu res 
such as hedges and trees. Any opportunities to improve and/  or create new biodiversity, habitats 
and green infrastructure should also be taken. It will be necessary to demonstrate that the 
proposed cemetery will not have an adverse impact on ground or surface water.   
184                                                         Development Management Policy SD47 : Local Green Spaces  
The following green areas, as defined on the Policies Map, are designated and protected as Local 
Green Spaces, in line with the National Planning Policy Framework:  
Brighton & Hove  
 Green  Ridge  
Buriton  
 The Links  
 Buriton Recreation Ground  
 Village Pond  / War Memorial  
 Sheep Dip and Pond Green  
 Sumner Road Green Spaces  
Cheriton  
 Open space at Top of Freemands 
Yard Lane  
Corhampton and Meonstoke  
 Church Green, Meonstoke  
Droxford  
 Droxford Parish Green  
East Chiltington  
 Hollycroft Field  
East Dean, East Sussex  
 The Horsefield  
 Went Way Allotments  
East Worldham  
 East Worldham Playground  
Fulking  
 North Town Field  
Hambledon  
 Speltham Down  (1) and (2)  
 The Glebe Land  
 Midhurst  
 South Pond and associated green space  
 Half Moon Covert  
 Carron Lane Recreation Area  
 Holmbush Recreation Area  
 St Margaret’s development community 
garden  
 Jubilee Path and associated green space  
Poynings  
 Poynings Playing Field  
 Poynings Allotments  
Seaford  
 The Village Green, Bishopstone  
 Tide Mills, Mill Drove  
Selborne  
 Burlands Field or Culverscroft  
 Dowlings Little Mead and Church 
Meadow  
 Selborne Recreation ground  
Slindon  
 Slindon Common Recreation Ground  
 Top Playing Field  
 Meadsway  
 The Forge Field  
 Jubilee Orchard  
 The Allotments  
 The Copse  
Stedham  
 Stedham Sports Ground  
 Stedham Recreation Ground (Village 
Green)    
185                                                         7.264  The purpose of Policy SD 47 is to designate Local Green Spaces, which have been promoted to 
the National Park Authority as demonstrably special to the local community.  The methodology 
and the results of the Local Green Space assessment is set out in an evidence based study Local 
Green Spaces in the South Downs National Park87. Many other Local Green Spaces have been 
design ated in N eighbourhood Development Plans.  
7.265  National policy sets out how Local Green Spaces are protected.  Development proposals should 
not conflict with the reasons  that the local green space has been demonstrated to be special to 
the local community, or prejudice its role as a Local Green Space.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
87 Local Green Spaces in the South Downs National Park, (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017 )  Land at Common View (Allotment 
Gardens)  
 Playing Field – land at Common View  
Wannock, Polegate  
 Wannock Coppice   
186                                                         7k. CLIMATE CHANGE  
Introduction  
7.266  This section of the Local Plan includes two strategic and two development management policies 
linked to the subject of climate change. These policies are SD4 8: Climate Change and the 
Sustainable Use of Resources, SD4 9: Flood Risk Management, SD 50: Sustaina ble Drainage and 
SD51: Renewable Energy.  
7.267  Mitigating against and adapting to climate change is an international and national priority. In 
response to anticipated long -term changes in our planet’s average temperatures, weather and 
seasonal patterns and sea l evel rises, the UK has committed to reducing carbon dioxide 
emissions by 80 per cent of 1990 levels by 205088. Currently, the built environment nationally 
is responsible for approximately 50 per cent of carbon dioxide emissions.  
7.268  The Vision and Circular  for English National Parks  states that national parks should lead the way in 
adapting to and mitigating climate change. Development should therefore minimise the National 
Park’s vulnerability to climate change through reducing and mitigating the factors w hich are 
causing it, and become more resilient by being able to adapt to its effects.  T he South Downs 
National Park Climate Change Adaptation Plan89 (CCAP) is the main evidence based study on 
climate change and states that the South Downs is particularly v ulnerable to the impacts of 
present and future climate change. It sets out a range of responses to the risks and opportunities 
from climate change, including flood and coastal erosion management, building ecological 
resilience to the impacts of climate cha nge and effective water management.  
7.269  Our use of resources is not sustainable , and the design and construction of new development 
with improved environmental performance is a critical part of delivering sustainable 
development. Even without climate change, there is still an imperative to promote development 
which meets the highest possible environmental design standards which minimises the use of 
finite resources.  
7.270  The likelihood of flooding is predicted to increase as a result of climate change causing more  
extreme weather events, such as prolonged periods of intense rainfall. Reducing the National 
Park’s vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, and particularly flooding to residential 
properties, is therefore a key objective of the Local Plan. The Na tional Park’s extensive chalk 
geology makes groundwater flooding a key issue with a number of areas at risk. A Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment  (SFRA)90 has been undertaken for the National Park. Areas at risk of surface 
                                                      
88 The Climate Change Act 2008 commits the UK to set a long-term binding framework to cut our emissions 
by at least 80 per cent by 2050 and by at least 35 per cent by 2020 against 1990 levels. It also places a duty 
on authorities to report to Government on the current and future predicted impacts of climate ch ange on 
their organisation; proposals and policies for adapting to climate change; and an assessment of progress 
towards implementing the policies and proposals set out in previous reports. This is in the context of the 
national climate change risk assessm ent and adaptation programme that has been devised to address the 
Act’s requirements.  
89 South Downs National Park Climate Change Adaptation Plan (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)  
90 South Downs National Park Authority Water Cycle Study and SFRA Le vel 1 Scoping and Outline Report 
(Amec, 2015)   
187                                                         water flooding typically follow the main water courses and dry valleys in chalk downland areas.  
The SFRA also identifies that groundwater influence on fluvial flooding is a problem along the 
Findon Valley and Rivers Itchen, Meon, Lavant, as well as some of  the smaller tributaries .  A 
Level 1 Update and a Level 2  SFRA has also been produced which assesses all allocated sites 
that are at risk from fluvial and tidal flooding; surface water flooding and groundwater flooding  
in both the Local Plan and the Lewes NDP91. This study has helped to facilitate the application of 
the Sequential and Exception Test, where necessary, the formulation of site specific flood risk 
management policies and recommendations on the suitability and design of SuDS for allocated 
sites.  
7.271  Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS ) can help to mitigate the risk of flooding. Development can 
lead to increased surface water run -off and as such all proposals should ensure that as a 
minimum there is no net increase in surface water run -off taking account of climate change. 
SuDS are desi gned to replicate, as closely as possible, the natural drainage from a site before 
development and treat run off to remove pollutants, reducing the impact on groundwater and 
receiving water courses.  Therefore, development should incorporate mitigation tech niques in 
its design such as permeable surfaces and SuDS.  However, there are locations in which elements 
of SuDS are either unfeasible or inappropriate; for example, infiltration mechanisms may not be 
appropriate on floodplains, areas of high groundwater o r in areas with known soil 
contamination. Similarly they will not be a feasible option in areas with impermeable soils.  
7.272  The use of renewable energy rather than fossil fuels will help to reduce carbon emissions and 
thus reduce climate change. Renewable ener gy offers a more sustainable use of natural capital 
and therefore is an important ecosystem service. However, the landscape character of the 
National Park is a finite and precious resource that the National Park Authority  is charged with 
conserving and enh ancing. Development of renewable energy, therefore needs to be suitably 
constrained so as not to compromise the special qualities.  
7.273   It should be noted that there are restrictions on designated landscapes including National Parks , 
which mean that  permitted development rights do not apply to solar photo voltaics and solar 
thermal technologies in the same way as non -designated areas92. Similarly there are more 
specific restrictions that apply to the installation of renewable technologies in listed buildings or 
conservation areas. Potential applicants should seek guidance from the Authority on the nature 
of these restrictions.  
 
 
 
                                                      
91 South Downs National Park Authority Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA  Report (Amec, 2017)  
92 Part 40 of The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (Amendment) (England) order 
2008    
188                                                         Strategic Policy SD4 8: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
1. The Authority will encourage all new development to incorporate  sustainable design features , 
as appropriate to the scale and type of development.  
2. All development proposals will be required to achieve the minimum standards as set out 
below unless it can be demonstrated that doing so is not technically feasible  or would  make 
the scheme unviable:  
Residential : 
i. Energy: 19% carbon reduction improvement against Part L (2013)93 and; 
ii. Water: C onsumption of no more than 110 litres per person per day94. 
Non-Residential : 
i. Major: BREEAM Very Good95 
3. All development proposals, including retrofitting, will be required to demonstrate, 
proportionately, how the development addresses climate change mitigation and adaptation 
through  the on-site use of zero and/or low carbon technologies, sustainable design and 
construction, and low carbon mater ials. 
4. Major development proposals should also include a n energy assessment to demonstrate how 
carbon dioxide emissions are to be minimised on -site. 
7.274  The purpose of this policy is to encourage high standards of sustainable building design and 
construction in new and existing buildings , as an essential part of the National Park’s response 
to the challenges of climate change.  
7.275  The way in which buildings are designed, constructed, operated and decommissioned have 
significant impacts on the built and natural environment and require major resource inputs such 
as energy, water and materials. Designing and constructing buildings that  help to reduce or avoid 
adverse impacts can reduce resource  inputs and the National Park’s carbon footprint , and also 
costs for developers and occupants. These aspects should be integral to development from the 
start, rather than improvements ‘bolted on’ at the end of this process , and should work 
alongside  relevant elements of the Local Plan design policies.  This applies equally to development 
which is allowed under Permitted Development Rights. Developers, other businesses and 
homeowners are encouraged t o consider these aspects to achieve the highest possible 
environmental standards in their proposals.  
 
 
                                                      
93 This standard is equivalent to former Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4 in energy use  
94 The optional enhanced national standard is defined within the 2015 Approved Document G, Building 
Regulations ‘Sanitation, hot water safety and water efficiency’, Mar ch 2015, pp.15 G2(3)  
95 Major non -residential development is defined as Development over 1,000 sq/m; or development on a site of 
0.5ha or more.   
189                                                         Sustainable construction and technologies  
7.276  Applicants are strongly encouraged to consider what measures could be incorporated into their 
proposals. For example, it can be the case that the most sustainable building materials to use 
are those sourced locally.  
7.277  The Authority will consider site constr aints, technical restrictions, financial viability and the 
delivery of additional benefits to the National Park where requirements of the policy cannot be 
met. However, all development proposals should minimise the impact on landscape character, 
features o f natural beauty, wildlife, cultural heritage and the general amenity of communities.  
On-site Energy  
7.278  A Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study  (RLCES) was prepared as part of the evidence for the 
Local Plan96. This has fed into the requirements set out in Policy SD48.  
7.279  The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method  (BREEAM) is a widely 
recognised, accredited, independent method for assessing environmental performanc e of non -
residential buildings. Until superseded by nationally prescribed  standards, the BREEAM 
standards for non -residential buildings by nationally recognised certification bodies may also be 
accepted.  
Retrofitting  
7.280  The existing building stock also makes a large contribution to carbon emissions. Measures 
should be implemented  which lower the environmental impact from the existing stock through 
reuse and refurbishment of buildings, reducing carbon dioxide emissions and fossil energy use, 
increasing thermal efficiency, reducing waste and noise impacts, and conserving water, mate rials 
and other resources.  
Major Development97  
7.281  A detailed assessment of the energy demand and carbon dioxide emissions will be expected 
from all proposed major developments in order to ensure that climate change is fully addressed.  
On-site Water Use  
7.282  The E nvironment Agency (EA) has identified that all of South East England, including the National 
Park, as an area of serious water stress. It is therefore imperative that water resources are 
managed efficiently. Accordingly, all new homes in the National Park will be required to achieve 
water consumption of no more than 110 litres per person per day. This target is equivalent to 
that proposed as an optional requirement of the Housing Standards Review  which corresponds 
with Code Level 4  in relation to water effi ciency. The Whole Plan and Affordable Housing Viability 
Assessment98 sets out that viability analysis factored in Code 4  as a minimum and as such this 
requirement will not impact residential development viability in the National Park.  
                                                      
96 South Downs National Park Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study – Main Report (AECOM, 2013)  
97 As defined by the  Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015  
98 South Downs Local Plan and Affordable Housing Viability Assessment (BNP Paribas, 2017)   
190                                                         Strategic Policy SD 49: Flood Risk Management  
1. Development proposals will be permitted that seek to reduce the impact and extent of all 
types of flooding through:  
a) Steering development away from areas of flood risk as identified by the Environment 
Agency and the Strategic Flood R isk Assessment. Development in areas of flood risk 
will, where relevant, be required to meet the national Sequential and Exception tests;  
b) Not increasing the risk of flooding elsewhere and, wherever possible, reducing  overall 
flood risk;  
c) Flood protection, mitigation and adaptation measures necessary and appropriate to the 
specific requirements of the proposal, the development site and other areas potentially 
impacted; and  
d) Ensuring that t he integrity of coastal and river flood defences are not undermined.  
2. Development proposals should, where required by national policy and guidance, be 
accompanied by a s ite specific Flood Risk Assessment  (FRA).  
3. Proposed flood protection, mitigation and adaptation measures should be supported with a 
management schedule, the ide ntification of the body responsible for maintenance , and 
evidence of  funding and maintenance in perpetuity.  
7.283  The purpose of Policy SD49 is to reduce the National Park’s vulnerability to flood risk and the 
impacts of flooding associated with climate change. The Authority  will seek to manage flood risk 
through avoidance of risk wherever possible. The National Park Authority will work with ot hers 
to implement relevant flood and coastal protection strategies and plans.  
Sequential and Exception Tests  
7.284  Proposed development within a flood zone will be assessed using the sequential and exception 
tests in national policy. The sequential test aims to steer different types of new development 
away from areas with the highest risks of flooding, which includes considering reasonably 
available alternative sites where it is proposed in areas at highest risk of flooding.  
7.285  The exception test is used to demonst rate whether flood risk to people and property will be 
managed satisfactorily, while allowing necessary development to be permitted in circumstances 
where suitable sites in areas with a lower risk of flooding are not available. It must be 
demonstrated that  there are wider sustainability benefits which outweigh the flood risk, it will 
be safe for its lifetime, does not increase flood risk elsewhere and that any residual risk can be 
safely managed.  
Risk of Flooding  
7.286  Development proposals should not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere. Site specific Flood 
Risk Assessments (FRA) should be provided in conjunction with planning applications in line 
with national planning guidance. An FRA will be needed for development (except minor 
development) with in Flood Zones 2 or 3. For sites within Flood Zone 1 and larger than 1 
hectare, an FRA is likely to be required where there are known flood risks and critical drainage 
problems. The Environment Agency (EA) further advises that FRAs should be undertaken if the 
site is in an area known to have flooding problems from any particular source, or is within 20m  
191                                                         of a watercourse irrespective of the land’s Flood Zone classification. If there is any potential for 
flood risk issues , advice from the EA should be sought before submitting an application.  
Flood Protection, Mitigation and Adaptation  
7.287  Flood risk management opportunities should be sought to reduce the overall level of flood risk 
in the application site and beyond. This can be achieved through suitable design, a ppropriate 
green infrastructure, the application of sustainable drainage systems  (SuDs) , off-site works and 
through safeguarding land for flood risk management.  
7.288  The Authority , as appropriate, will secure ongoing maintenance and operation of approved flood  
mitigation and adaptation systems through planning obligations or suitable conditions.  
7.289  Where surface water flooding is identified as a relevant issue for a development, a detailed 
assessment will need to be made on a site -by-site basis. The assessment sho uld identify the 
suitable management and mitigation necessary to ensure that there is no increase in surface 
water run -off from the proposal on both the development site and elsewhere. Proposals 
incorporating SuDS should address Local Plan policy SD 50: (Sustainable Drainage).  
7.290  Where development is proposed in areas of groundwater flooding risk, proposals must take 
account of any relevant existing plans or strategies, including those produced by the Lead Local 
Flood Authorities (LLFAs )99. For example, Hampshire County Council has prepared a 
Groundwater Management Plan, which includes specific flood risk management plans for the 
Finchdean, Hambledon, West Meon and Rowlands Castle areas.  
7.291  Where coastal and/or tidal flood protection, mitigati on and adaptation is proposed, proposals 
must take account of any relevant existing plans or strategies, including the SFRA, and engage 
constructively with relevant authorities at the pre -application stage.  
Working with Others  
7.292  There are a number of organis ations involved in flooding matters, including the Environment 
Agency (EA) and the LLAFs, which the National Park will work with closely to reduce the risk 
of flooding through relevant strategies and plans. This includes Shoreline Management Plans100, 
Flood Risk Management Plans101, River Basin Management Plans102, Surface Water Management 
Plans and Local Flood Risk Management Strategies.  
                                                      
99 In the National Park there are four (4) Lead Local Flood Authorities (LLFA) – Hamp shire County Council, 
West Sussex County Council, Brighton and Hove City Council and East Sussex County Council  
100 Shoreline Management Plans (SMP) are developed by Coastal Groups with members mainly from local 
councils and the EA. They identify the most s ustainable approach to managing the flood and coastal erosion 
risks to the coastline in the short (o -20 years), medium (20 to 50) and long (50 -100 years) terms.  
101 Flood Risk Management Plans (FRMPs) have been published by the Environment Agency for all Riv er Basin 
Districts in England to provide an overview of the risk of flooding from rivers, the sea, surface water 
groundwater and reservoirs, as well as measures and objectives for managing flood risk for the period 2015 -
2021. There are five catchments acro ss the SDNP study area (Test and Itchen, East Hampshire, Arun and 
Western streams, Adur and Ouse and the Cuckmere and Pevensey Levels).  
102 The River Basin Management Plans (RBMP) describe the river basin district, and the pressures that the water 
environmen t faces. It shows what this means for the current state of the water environment in the river  
192                                                         7.293  The purpose of Policy SD 50 is to reduce the National Park’s vulnerability to surface water 
flooding through appropriate management and ensuring there is no net increase in surface water 
run-off from new development.  
7.294  In considering a development that includes SuDS , the Authority  will need to be satisfied that 
the proposed standards of operation are appropriate , taking into account the specific site and 
local area characteristics , and relevant national guidance such as the Technical Standards and 
supporting Practice Guidance103. Where i nfiltration is proposed, this should be supported by 
suitable evidence which demonstrates that annual high groundwater levels are below the base 
of infiltration. Further guidance on the appropriate design of  SuDS can also be found in the 
SDNPA’s Level 1 U pdate and Level 2 SFRA104.  
7.295  When considering major development, as defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development 
Procedure) (England) Order 2015 , the LPA will consult the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA). 
For other developments the LPA will seek adv ice from the LLFA on a site -by-site basis taking 
into account the site characteristics and type of development proposal. The LPA will also consult 
other relevant bodies, such as the Environment Agency, as appropriate.  
Provision of open space  
7.296  Where appropriate, SuDS should be used as part of the linked green infrastructure network to 
provide multiple functions and benefits to landscape quality, recreation and biodiversity. This 
can be achieved through habitat creation, new open spaces and good design. SuDS should be 
                                                      
basin district, and what actions will be taken to address the pressures in line with the requirements of the 
Water Framework Directive.  
103 Sustainable Drainage Systems: non -statutory technical standards (DEFRA, 2015)  
104 South Downs National Park Authority Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA  Report (Amec, 2017)  Development Management Policy SD 50: Sustainable Drainage Systems  
1. Development proposals will be permitted where they  ensure that there is no net increase in 
surface water run -off, taking account of climate change.  
2. Proposals for major development * will be permitted where they  provide suitable sustainable 
drainage systems , unless it is demonstrated to be inappropriate. All other development 
proposals  must provide  suitable sustainable drainage systems where required by the Lead 
Local Flood Authority (LLFA) .  
3. Sustainable drainage systems, where feasible , must support the provision of open space, public 
amenity areas and enh ancing biodiversity  and other public benefits as appropriate .  
4. Where sustainable drainage systems are provided, arrangements must be put in place for their 
whole life management and maintenance.  
* major development as defined in the Town and Country Planni ng (Development Procedure) (England) 
Order 2015 .  
193                                                         designed to help cope with intense rainfall events and to overcome any deterioration in water 
quality status. In determining the suitability of SuDS for individual development sites, developers 
should seek advice from the Environment  Agency and the relevant LLFA.  
Whole Life Management and Maintenance  
7.297  Site promoters need to ensure that their design takes account of the construction, operation 
and maintenance requirements of both surface and sub -surface components. Suitable whole life 
management and maintenance will be secured through planning obligations and/or conditions  
Development Management Policy SD 51: Renewable Energy  
1. Development proposals for renewable energy schemes, except those specifically addressed in 
criterion 2, that contribute  towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions and moving towards a 
carbon neutral National Park will be permitted where it is demonstrated through suitable site 
specific analysis that the proposal:  
a) Makes provision for the removal of the facilities and reinstatement of the site, should it 
cease to be operational;  
b) Ensures existing public access is not impeded; and  
c) Does not result in the loss in use of Grades 1, 2 or 3a agricultural land . 
2. Development proposals for small -scale individual wind turbines and freestanding solar arrays 
serving individual properties or small groups of properties will be permitted where:  
a) They are suitably sited and screened and clearly associated with the buildings or 
properti es that they are intended to serve;  
b) They are appropriate in scale to the property being served;  and 
c) There is no unacceptable adverse impact on local amenity or conflict with public safety . 
7.298  The purpose of Policy SD 51 is to support the development of appropriate new renewable 
energy that will improve the quality of life for those living  in, working in or visiting the National 
Park, while seeking to conserve and enhance the special qualities . 
7.299  All renewable energy develo pment proposals should address the criteria  of Policy SD42 : 
Infrastructure. Applicants should also note that major development is subject to Policy SD3 : 
Major Development .  Impacts on landscape, cultural heritage, wildlife habitats, tranquillity, access 
and recreation, air and water quality and highways should be considered against the relevant 
policies in this Local Plan.  
7.300  In addition, when considering the appropriateness of local schemes potential applicants are 
referred to the Integrated Landscape Chara cter Assessment105 (SDILCA ) and to the Viewshed 
Characterisation Study106. In view of the sensitivity of the landscape to renewable energy schemes, 
potential applicants are advised to consult the Authority at the earliest opportunity when 
considering schemes.  
                                                      
105 South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (SDILCA) (LUC, 2005, updated 20 11) 
106 South Downs National Park: View Characterisation and Analysis (LUC, 2015)   
194                                                         7.301  A Renewable Energy & Low Carbon Study107 was prepared as part of the evidence for the Local 
Plan. The Study sets out some of the key issues in assessing the appropriateness of the following 
different technologies within the National Park , which are reflected  in Policy SD5 1. 
Wind Energy  
7.302  The majority of the South Downs National Park has sufficient average annual wind speed for 
commercial scale wind energy generation. Large scale wind presents by far the greatest 
opportunity for renewable energy generation in the Local Plan area.  However, such schemes 
are unlikely to be granted planning permission in this nationally protected landscape as this 
would be contrary to the first purpose of the National Park and numerous Local Plan policies.  
There are likely to be ad ditional ecological and historic constraints, such as bat  fly‑lines and the 
setting of conservation areas,  which may also exclude deployment of wind energy technologies.  
7.303  Small scale wind turbines are defined as having capacity of less than 100 kW and typically 
comprise single turbines.  It may be appropriate in some areas of the National Park  for individual 
small scale wind turbines  to come forward.  These should be  similar in scale to existing buildings 
and trees, set against a backdrop or suitably scre ened, in an appropriate colour, and be 
assimilated into the landscape.  
7.304  The potential for exploiting the wind resource in the National Park from small scale wind 
turbines is limited by the need to ensure that small -scale wind turbines do not detract from th e 
statutory purposes to conserve the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the National 
Park. Some landscapes, such as heath and downland, including in coastal locations, are 
particularly  sensitive to intrusive development from vertical structu res due to their open vistas 
and wild character.  
7.305  In order to judge whether the potential impacts of a small scale wind turbine  proposal are likely 
to be acceptable, applicants should consider the impacts of the wind turbine along with any 
required infrastructure, such as road access, on site -tracks, turbine foundations, hard standings, 
anemometer masts, a construction compound, e lectrical cabling and an electrical sub -station 
and control building. Applications should include any necessary supporting information regarding 
the assessment of impacts on landscape, wildlife, cultural heritage and  other resources.  
Solar Energy  
7.306  Proposa ls for multiple ground -mounted solar arrays – or ‘solar farms’  that are sited in isolation 
away from existing built forms are likely to have significant impacts on landscape character and 
visual amenity , and are unlikely  to be appropriate within the Nation al Park.  
7.307  Small -scale freestanding solar arrays that are well screened in enclosed gardens or closely linked 
to existing buildings with no or minimal visual impact may be acceptable . There may also be 
some circumstances where ground mounted solar arrays to serve groups of properties, 
community buildings, such as village halls, agricultural properties or other businesses are 
acceptable, where these are well screened within existing building complexes or by other 
landscape features such as hedgerows, walls or trees, and do not detract from any architectural 
or historic interest. However, freestanding arrays should be sensitively sited to avoid impacts 
on wildlife and land of high ecological interest.  
                                                      
107 South Downs National Park Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Study (AECOM, 2013)   
195                                                         Hydropower  
7.308  The Renewable Energy & Low Carbon Study confirms that significant hydropower development is 
not envisaged for the National Park.  Notwithstanding this, advice on environmental protection 
for new hydropower schemes has been published by the Environment Agency108. 
Biomass  
7.309  The Study  highlights the opportunities from biomass due to the availability of woodfuel and other 
crops within the National Park. The Study recommends that the development of the biomass  / 
woodfuel  market should be supported in principle. Forestry is one of the key sectors of the 
National Park’s economy.  
Heat Networks & Combined Heat and Power  
7.310  The Study  identifies that only larger settlements such as Lewes and Petersfield are suitable 
propositions  for combined heat and power schemes.  
Geothermal  
7.311  Outside the Study , the former Department for Energy and Climate Change ( DECC ) assessed 
the potential for deep geothermal power generation in the UK. The South Downs National 
Park was not identified in the DECC assessment  as having potential for geothermal energy use.  
 
  
                                                      
108 https://w ww.gov.uk/guidance/new -hydropower -scheme -apply -to-build-one   
196                                                         7l. ADVERTISEMENTS & SIGNAGE  
Introduction  
7.312  This section includes two policies. The first relates to shop fronts both within and outside 
identified town and village centres. The second policy relates to adverts . 
7.313  Shop fronts can make a significant contribution to the character of town and village centres 
particularly where they incorporate traditional features.  
7.314  Adverts like shop fronts have an im portant role to play in making people aware of a business. 
By their very nature, permanent and temporary adverts are conspicuous and prominently 
displayed. Individually and cumulatively, they can affect the character and appearance of buildings, 
settlement s, the landscape and views. Illuminated advertisements can also affect  the tranquillity 
of an area at night.  Because of the volume of traffic, the most prevalent areas for adverts are 
on the A roads, such as the A27 and A272, and the main roads which link  them. Temporary 
adverts for events are also a regular occurrence throughout the National Park.   
7.315  The purpose  of this policy is to ensure that shop fronts contribute to the generally traditional 
character of the town and village centres,  are considered as part of the whole building,  and are 
sympathetic with neighbouring buildings. Particular attention should be paid to materials, style, 
proportion and size of windows and fascias.  Traditional shop fronts incorporate a number of 
components including vertical glazing bars, recessed entrance doors, stall risers, fascias and 
pilasters topped with sometimes decorative corbels. Colours, too, are important both for the Development Management Policy SD52: Shop Fronts  
1. Development proposals for new, or changes to , existing shop fronts will be permitted where 
they: 
a) Relate well to the building in which they are situated, giving regard to upper floors, in 
terms of scale, proportion, vertical alignment, architectural style and materials;  
b) Retain and restore where possible significant historic features of any original shop front;  
c) Are based upon a traditional approach to shop front design;  
d) Take account of good architectural features of neighbouring shop front s so that the 
development will fit in well with the street scene particularly if located within a  
conservation area or on a listed building ; and 
e) Use materials which respect the street scene.  
2. If a single shop front is to be created by joining two or more units, it should reflect and show 
the original divisio ns that existed, particularly in the case of historic properties.  
3. There will be a presumption against internally illuminated signage  / logos as well as  solid 
shutters or any other feature which obscures window displays, unless this is a traditional 
feature of a historic premises.  
4. External lighting is only normally appropriate for businesses operating in the evening.  If 
required,  it should be kept to a minimum, be discreetly positioned and incorporated into the 
design.  
  
197                                                         shop front itself and for any lettering. In many situations, a corporate company style may have 
to be modified, especially if a brightly coloured and  / or internally illuminated signage  / logos are 
proposed.    
7.316  Traditional  blinds  / canopies will normally be canvas  or other natural material , of retractable 
roller or fan type.  The use of solid shutters , which can create unattractive street frontages , will 
not be supported unless it is a traditional feature of the property or in exceptional circumstances 
where evidence supported by the police has shown that security poses a particular problem.  
7.317  The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that adverts do not adversely detract from the location 
in which they are placed. This policy relates to outdoor adverts and excludes road traffic signage, 
which is covered by separate legislation. Depending on a number of factors including location, 
overall size, height, content and lettering, some advertisements do not require the subm ission 
of an application.  This is subject to criteria within the Advertisement Regulations  and is referred 
to as a deemed consent.  
7.318  Some areas within the National Park are identified as areas of special advertisement  control, 
where stricter limitations ar e applicable. It is therefore recommended that advice is sought from 
the Authority before erecting an advertisement.  
7.319  ‘A’ boards may require advertisement consent. When business are not open to the public, ‘A’ 
boards should be stored away to prevent clutte r. 
7.320  Relevant conditions will be applied to consents, to ensure that the advertisement does not 
endanger the public or harm the character or appearance of the area.   
 
 
 
 Development Management Policy SD53: Adverts  
1. Advertisement consent will be granted where:  
a) The location, size, scale, proportions , design and materials of the advert respects the 
character and appearance of the host building (including any historic significance), site 
and area;   
b)  The number of adverts is kept to a minimum to ensure that there is no harmful 
cumulative impact on th e host building and/or the amenity of the area; and  
c)  There is no harmful impact to public safety.   
2. There will be a presumption against internally illuminated advertisements.  
3. Externally lit adverts are normally only appropriate for businesses operating in the evening.  If 
required, they should be kept to a minimum, be discreetly positioned and incorporated into 
the design  of the building.  
  
198                                                         7m. POLLUTION AND CONTAMINATION  
Introduction  
7.321  This section of the Local Plan includes two development management policies. The first policy 
on pollution and air quality deals with a wide range of pollutants. The second policy focuses on 
contaminated land . 
7.322  The natural environment of the National Park provides many regulating ecosystem servic es, for 
example , vegetation cover helps to remove vehicle omissions from the air . In general, air quality 
in the National Park is good. However, there are concerns about the levels of nitrogen dioxide 
emissions in certain areas. In 2005 an Air Quality Mana gement Area (AQMA) was declared in 
Lewes Town Centre for nitrogen dioxide109, mainly due to traffic emissions. Ground level 
concentrations of ozone have also frequently exceeded the UK air quality standards at 
Lodsworth where Chichester District Council meas ure this pollutant.  
7.323  Contaminated land exists in pockets throughout the National Park, the sources of which include 
old petrol filling stations, land used for industrial processes involving hazardous substances, 
landfill sites and sewage works.  
7.324  The purpose of the policy is to ensure that the National Park Authority , working with local 
authority partner s and other relevant agencies , manages the impact of pollutants and in 
particular improves air quality throughout the National Park. In line with other policies in the 
Local Plan development proposals should promote opportunities for walking, cycling, public 
transport and congestion ma nagement to reduce traffic levels in areas of reduced air quality.   
                                                      
109  Declaration of an AQMA is necessary under Part 4 of the Environment Act 1995, when certain statutory air 
quality thresholds are breached.  Development Management Policy SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
1. Development proposals will be permitted provided that levels of air, noise, vibration, light, 
water, odour or other pollutants do not have a significant negative affect on people and the 
natural environment now or in the foreseeable future, taking into account cumulative impacts 
and any mitigation.  
2. Development proposals that by virtue of their location, nature or scale could impact on an 
existing AQMA, as shown on the Pol icies Map, will be required to:  
a)  Have regard to any relevant Air Quality Action  Plan (AQAP) and to seek improvements 
in air quality through implementation of measures in the AQAP; and  
b) Provide mitigation measures where the development and/or associated traffic would 
adversely affect any declared AQMA.  
3. Development proposals will be required to provide mitigation measures where the 
development and/or its associated traffic could lead to a declaration of a new or extended 
AQMA . 
4. Development propos als will be permitted where they follow best practice methods to reduce 
levels of dust and other pollutants arising during a development from demolition through to 
completion.  
 
  
199                                                         7.325  The effects of air pollution can be felt far beyond the original source of the pollution and impact 
other areas. Therefore all proposals, not just those for development within or adjacent  to 
AQMAs , need to consider the potential impact on air quality. This includes not just those 
matters covered by statutory legislation but also more general amenity issues such as dust and 
odour.   For example, developments adjacent to existing wastewater treatment works or 
smaller wastewater facilities, such as pumping stations will only be permitted if the proposal 
demonstrates that there is adequate mitigation. Pollution takes many forms and the impact of 
litter resulting from a development such as a tak eaway will be considered and management will 
be required.  
7.326  Development proposals that may lead to a deterioration in air quality resulting in unacceptable 
effects on human health, the natural environment or local amenity, will require the submission 
of an air quality assessment. Where this effects internationally designated nature conservation 
sites an HRA will be required in line with Policy SD9:  Biodiversity and Geodiversity. Should an 
air quality assessment or HRA be required it should address but is not restricted to:  
 The existing background levels of air qual ity; 
 The cumulative impact of development levels of air quality; and  
 The feasibility of any measures of mitigation.  
7.327  An Air Quality Action Plan  (AQAP) has been produced for the Lewes Town Centre AQMA and 
includes a number of measures that aim to improve air  quality. It is expected that developments 
within the vicinity will aid in the delivery of the AQAP by either providing measures set out in 
the AQAP or by funding their delivery, thereby mitigating the development’s potential negative 
impacts.  
7.328  Applicants for development within or adjacent to an AQMA , be it inside or outside of the 
Nationa l Park , should discuss any requirements with the Authority at the earliest opportunity 
and certainly before a planning application is submitted . This will help to determine whether a 
proposed development could impact upon the AQMA and therefore require mit igation 
measures.  
7.329  The purpose  of the policy is to ensure that when considering the development of land known 
or suspected of being contaminated, the principle is one of ensuring the land is "suitable for 
use". This requires that the owner, occupier or developer of a site should undert ake those 
measures necessary to deal with any unacceptable risks to health or the environment, taking 
into account the intended use of the land. Consideration must be given to the potential impact 
on neighbouring developments, residents and the road networ k of any decontamination 
process.  
7.330  It is for the owner or developer to determine the existence and extent of any contamination. 
The Authority will follow national guidance in regard to the need for pre -application Developm ent Management Policy SD55: Contaminated Land  
1. Development proposals for sites with either known or suspected contamination or the 
potential to contaminate land either on site or in the vicinity, will require the submission of 
robust evidence regarding inve stigations and remedial measures sufficient to ensure that any 
unacceptable risk to health or environmental health is removed prior to development 
proceeding.  
  
200                                                         investigation into contamination issues but such an assessment may include some or all of the 
following;  
 A desk top study;  
 Site investigation;   
 Risk assessment,  
 Remediation ; and 
 Post remediation certification of the work completed.   
7.331  Where there is no ev idence to the contrary, the possibility of contamination will be assumed 
when concerning applications in relation to land on or adjacent to previous industrial use or 
where proposed uses are considered that are particularly sensitive to contamination for 
example housing, schools, allotments, children’s playing areas.  
7.332  If there is only a suspicion of contamination or the contamination is slight, planning permission 
may be granted subject to conditions requiring site investigation and any necessary remedial 
measures.  
 
 
 
                                                                        201                                                    
  8. STRATEGIC SITES  
Introduction  
8.1 This chapter sets out the policies for the strategic sites within the National Park. These sites 
represent one -off opportunities for developments of exceptional quality. They have the 
potential to make a substantial contribution towards sustainable growth  and deliver multiple 
ecosystems services, which in turn promotes the N ational Park’s purposes and  helps to achieve 
the vision set out in this Plan. The strategic sites are:  
 Shoreham Cement Works, Upper Beading ; and 
 North Street Quarter and adjacent East gate  area, Lewes.  
8.2 Whilst the former ‘Syngenta’ site in Fernhurst is also a strategic site, it has already been allocated 
for a sustainable mixed -use d evelopment incorporating residential (approximately 200 homes), 
commercial development and other suitable uses  in the Fernhurst Neighbourhood  Development  
Plan (NDP) , which was made in  2016.   
8.3 This chapter identifies how the  strategic sites can collectively  and individually contribute to 
meeting the National Park’s purposes, and how their development c ould be justified by 
exceptional circumstances and be in the public interest , in accordance with Policy SD3: Major 
Development in the South Downs National Park . 
8.4 There are also three strategic housing allocations, these are set out with all the other allocations 
in Chapter 10. Land at Old Malling  Farm in Lewes  (Allocation Policy SD77) is a greenfield site 
that will make a significant contribution to meeting the u nmet housing need of Lewes and was 
originally allocated in the Lewes Joint Core Strategy . The Depot / Brickworks site and former 
Holmbush Caravan Park, both located in Midhurst and both brownfield sites , will contribute 
significantly to the unmet housing need of Midhurst.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                        202                                                    
  Local Plan Objectives  
The following Local Plan objectives are considered most relevant for this section:  
Objective 1 : To conserve and enhance the landscapes of the National Park. 
Objective 2:  To conserve and enhance the cultural heritage of the National Park.  
Objective 4 : To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services thus enhancing natural capital across 
the landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human health and wellbeing.  
Objective 5:  To protect and provide opportunities for everyone to discover, enjoy, understand and 
value the National Park and its special qualities.  
Objective 7 : To conserve and enhance the villages and market towns of the National Park as thriving 
centres for residents, visitors and businesses.  
Objective 8 : To protect and provide for the social and economic wellbeing of National Park 
communities supporting local jobs, affordable homes and local facilities.  
Objective 9 : To protect and provide for local businesses including farming, forestry and tourism 
that are broadly compatible with and relate to the landscapes and special qualities of the National 
Park. 
Need for the Development  
8.5 There are two types of need for development  on these sites. Firstly , there is a need to restore 
and regenerate underused sites that are having an adverse impact on the landscape and scenic 
beauty of the National Park . This need is self -evident from the sit e descriptions.  
8.6 Secondly , there is a need for development to take place to meet growth needs, as far as it is 
compatible with the National P ark purposes and the overarching ecosystem servi ces led 
approach .  The following paragraphs  identify the need for different types of developm ent for 
which the strategic sites may be appropriate in principle.  
Housing Need  
8.7 The DEFRA Vision and Circular for English National Parks110 states  that the national park authorities 
have an important role to play in the delivery of affordable housing and the Local Plan should 
include policies that pro -actively respond to local housing needs. In line with the NPPF, t he 
expectation is that new housing will be focused on meeting affordable h ousing requirements, 
supporting local employment opportunities and key services.  Therefore, the National  Park 
Authority should  maintain a focus on affordable housing to ensure the needs of local 
communities are met and affordable housing remains so in the longer term.  
8.8 The issue of housing need , both market and affordable , is addressed earlier in this Plan  and in 
particular Policies SD26: Supply of Homes, SD27: Mix of Homes and SD28: Affordable Housing.  
The policies reflect  that there is a substantial need for affordable housing  within the National 
Park and a need for local housing .   
                                                
110 Vision and Circular on English National Parks and the Broads  (DEFRA, 2010)                                                                         203                                                    
  Employment Need  
8.9 The Employment Land Review111 (ELR) identified a limited need for further development, namely 
2 to 3 hectares gross of offices (B1  a / b) and up to 5 hectares gr oss of industrial and warehousing 
(B1c / B2 / B8). It suggests some qualitative need for office floorspace in Lewes.  It also identifies 
the potential for the Shoreham Cement Works site  to provide about 5 hectares of employment 
(B1, B2 and  B8) uses as ‘seco ndary supply’.  
Tourism Need  
8.10 As highlighted in Policy SD23: Sustainable Tourism, there is potential for tourist accommodation 
development across a ll parts of the National Park. Whilst the potential scale of some visitor 
accommodation can clearly present a challenge in a sensitive environment such as a National 
Park, given the benefits they can bring there is merit in a proactive approach to identifying 
suitable sites where larger -scale visitor acco mmodation development projects c ould be 
acceptable in planni ng terms.   
Impact on the Local Economy    
8.11 The development of the sites for employment uses would clearly have a beneficial impact on 
the economy of the National Park and of the wider sub -region, while development for visitors’ 
accommodation and visitor / tourism attractions would create employment opportunities 
directly as well as bringing additional expenditure in  to the local area. Housing development will 
generate construction jobs, while retaining expenditure by local people occupying the  dwellings 
and providing a local labour force for existing and new businesses.  
Meeting the Need outside the Designated Area or in Some Other Way  
8.12 With regard to the first type of need, that is to restore and regenerate currently underused  / 
vacant sites a nd improve their impact on the landscape, by definition , this can only take place 
on these sites. Suitable development must achieve an acceptable level of restoration which 
enhances the landscape, scenic beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the Nation al Park at these 
locations.  
8.13 In relation to visitor accommodation and employment development, it would not be sustainable 
to expect all provision to be made outside the National Park , increasing c ommuter flows and 
day trips. Some use should be made of unde rused hotel and guest house accommodation in the 
coastal towns, but it is also important to add to the amount of accommodation within the 
National Park in order to increase the currently low levels of average visitor expenditure. 
Moreover, it is the Nation al Park itself, which creates the need and demand for tourist 
accommodation. Developing outside the designated area would only partly meet these needs.  
8.14 With regard to housing, a large amount of development to meet the objectively assessed need 
in market ho using will need to take place outside the National Park , using the Duty to 
Cooperate.  Additionally, Lewes  has opportunities , albeit limited,  to make a contribution in this 
respect,  hence the pro -active approach of both Lewes District Council and the Nation al Park 
Authority  to allocate land at North Street Quarter for a mix of uses including housing .  
                                                
111 Employment Land Review (G .L. Hearn, 2015)                                                                         204                                                    
  Effect on Environment, Landscape, Recreation and Special Qualities  
8.15 Both strategic sites  allocated in this Local Plan  present a great opportunity to create an e xemplar 
sustainable development, which makes a positive impact on the landscape, intrinsic beauty and 
special qualities of the National Park through:  
 Enhancement of the landscape character of the areas through their restoration and 
regeneration and support ing and enhancing habitats;  
 Embedding ecosystems services within any development proposals in accordance with 
Policy SD2: Ecosystems Services;  
 Providing opportunities for the enjoyment and understanding of the National Park and 
support ing sustainable economic activities , for example , through recreational uses / 
development or employment uses supporting the rural economy as part of a mix of uses;  
 Supporting and enhancing local communities, for example , through delivering infrastructure 
needs such as hig h speed broadband or improving health and wellbeing through providing 
walking and cycling routes ; and 
 Sustainable travel links with the rest of the National Park.  
 
SHOREHAM CEMENT WORK S 
Introduction  
8.16 Shoreham Cement Works is a  44 hectare site that includes an inactive chalk quarry and semi -
derelict works.  It is the most prominent site within the National Park in a key location where it 
is at its narrowest.  Despite being a n important part of the social and industrial heritage of the 
area, the site has a significant negative visual impact on the National Park, particularly from 
public rights of way and wider viewpoints, including the South Downs Way and the Downs Link 
cycle route .      
8.17 The National Park Authority ’s main objective for the site is to restore it i n a way that is 
compatible with the special qualities and statutory purposes of the National Park. Major 
development may provide an opportunity for the site to be restored by enabling the demolition 
or renovation of unsightly buildings , suitable treatment of prominent quarry faces and other 
landscaping improvements .   
8.18 The site is located about 5km to the north of Shoreham and 2km south of Upper Beeding village, 
on each side of the A283. It is bounded to the west by the River Adur and farmland in the 
floodpl ain, to the north by chalk grassland, and to the south and east by farmland.  Immediately 
to the north on the A283 are 40 Edwardian terraced houses (Dacre Gardens) which were built 
to house workers at the cement works, together with an infill development of  10 flats.  
8.19 The site can be divided into 4 main sub -areas ( see Figure 8.1): 
 Area A – west of the A283, containing the former offices for the cement works and now 
occupied by a variety of temporary industrial and storage uses.  These uses are unsightly 
although largely screened by trees. The area has a frontage onto the River Adur  and is 
linked by a t unnel under the A283 to Area B                                                                         205                                                    
   Area B – immediately east of the A 283, containing the former cement works buildings. 
These are very large unsightly structures, highly prominent from close viewpoints, including 
the main road, the towpaths on both sides of the river, the South Downs Way, the Downs 
Link and the road to Coombes and Botolph s  
 Area C – the exhausted chalk qu arry area which is partly used for the import ation, storage 
and treatment of inert material to produce recycled  / secondary aggregates and this use is 
currently under review.   Much of the area is screened from views by the clif f faces of the 
original quarry  
 Area D – the rear, elevated portion of chal k available for extraction.   It has been described 
as ‘a substantial scar’ and a ‘large gash in the rolling landscape of the Downs’, visible over a 
wide area and from a large number of viewpoints, including much of the South Downs Way 
to the west. The area  has biodiversity and geodiversity interest and immediately adjoins a 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (S SSI) and a Scheduled Monument  
8.20 Large -scale cement production began on the site at the end of the 19th Century.  The buildings 
were completed in 1948 -50, permission having first been granted for chalk extraction in 1946,  
and extended in 1950 and 1969. Chalk extraction and cement production ceased in 1991, but 
the permission s have been kept alive by an application for registration of the old mining 
perm ission in 1992.  These extant permission s for the extraction of chalk run to 2042, when a 
basic restoration schem e would have to be implemented.   
8.21 Existing use rights exist for B2 industry within existing buildings and for associated uses (such 
as storage) taking place in the open air . 
8.22 Areas A and B can be classed as brownfield land, but not Areas C and D, since the NPPF 
excludes minerals sites from the definition of previously developed land .                                                                        206                                                    
    FIGURE 8.1: SHOREHAM  CEMENT WORKS  
Constraints  
8.23 Constraints affecting the site include:  
 Cost of extensive restoration needed to deal with both the short - and long -distance views  
 Cost of demolition or renovatio n of the cement works buildings  
 Uncertainty with regard to the significance of the heritage asset represented by the 
buildings and plant and the measures required t o either retain or record this  
 Protected bir d species nesting within Area D  
 Regionally Impo rtant Geological Site at Area D  
 Ecological designations near the site  – surrounding area is rich in unimproved chalk 
grassland, a unique habitat for a number of notable flora and fauna species  
 Scheduled Monument (prehistoric cross -ridge dyke) outside the site but n ear the northern 
edge of  Area D  
 A principal aquifer below the site . There is also potential fluvial / flooding and surface water 
flooding at the lowermost part of the site and access tracks.  
 Parts of the site are likely to be contaminated – ground remediation works required  and 
need to ensure protection of water quality  (particularly given close proximity of the River 
Adur)  
                                                                       207                                                    
   Proximity to Shoreham Airport , including the potential of any new development involving 
tall structures or telecommunications interference  
 Improvements needed  to the two site accesses but without an increase in the visual impact 
of highway infrastructure, including hard -surfacing, s ignage and traffic signals  
 Unsustainable location with poor access to shops, schools and other services and facilities  
Opportunitie s  
8.24 The site of fers the following opportunities : 
 Enhance the landscape and scenic beauty, restoring the site to an appearance which is 
acceptable within a national park. This involves:  
 Removal of the unsightly uses and buildings on Area A which impinge on t he largely 
undeveloped river corridor and replacement by development which takes a dvantage 
of the river frontage  
 Demolition or renovation of the existing c ement works buildings on Area B  
 Creation of a landscaped bund or alternative enhancement of the road frontag e as a 
gateway to Areas B and C  
 Re-modelling of the most prominent quarry faces  and planting of Area D  
 Accepting enabling development to secure the satis factory restoration of the site  
 Create an exemplar of sustainable development  with the following development principles:  
 Enhance the site’s con tribution to ecosystem services  
 Contribute towards th e green infrastructure network  
 Develop previously developed land in Areas A and B  
 Maximise and enhance levels of biodiversity on the site  in order to support  the 
adjacent Anchor Bottom SSSI, while pr eserving the Scheduled Monument  
 Explore the potentia l for biodiversity off -setting  
 Enable geo -conservation, given the scientific and educational  value of the strata  
 Develop renewable energy gene ration, such as solar panels and small scale combined 
heat and power plant  and explore hydro -electricity generation  
 Reduce waste including re -using and recycling waste on site  
 Explore a wider environmental enhancement programme to address issues such as 
the removal  of overhead power lines nearby  
 Deliver sustainable drainage systems (SuDs) and minimising the  amount of 
impermeable surfaces  
 Explore an integrated sustainable transport solution, including innovative and 
alternative modes of transport to the priv ate car, promoting demand management 
measures , and increasing road safety for the b enefit of all users                                                                         208                                                    
   Improve cycle and walking routes in the vicinity, enhancing the Downs Link 
recreational route between Upper Beeding and Shoreham, including a southern lo op 
from the South Downs Way  
 Develop sustainable visitor and tourism opportunities appropriate to a National Park, 
including promoting the understanding and enjoyment of its special qualities  
8.25 The site has many challenges but it also represents a great oppor tunity to deliver an innovative, 
exciting and imaginative solution which treats the site as an asset  to the National Park  rather 
than a problem . To enable a comprehensive, appropriate and viable scheme to be delivered, the 
National  Park Authority  will prep are an Area Action Plan  (AAP).   
8.26 The AAP will facilitate the formulation of a bespoke approach for the environmentally -led 
restoration of the site, with significant landscape improvements , that can deliver a viable scheme 
with multiple benefits for the N ational Park and may attract external funding.                                                                         209                                                    
   Strategic Site Policy SD56 : Shoreham Cement Works  
1. Shoreham Cement Works, as identified on the Policies Map, is an area of significant 
opportunity for an exemplar sustainable mixed use development, which delivers a substantially 
enhanced landscape and uses that are compatible with the purposes of the Natio nal Park.  To 
help achieve this the  National Park Authority will prepare an Area Action Plan (AAP) with the 
overall aims of:  
a) Enhancing the visual impact of the site from both the nearby and distant public 
viewpoints;  
b) Conserving, enhancing and providing opportunities for understanding the biodiversity, 
geodiversity, historic significance and cultural heritage of the site;  
c) Ensuring the delivery of Ecosystems Services ; and 
d) Ensuring that the design of any development is of the highest quality and appropriate  to 
its setting within a National Park.  
2. The National Park Authority would support development proposals for  
a) Sustainable tourism / visitor based recreation activities and leisure development directly 
related to the understanding and enjoyment of the Nationa l Park;  
b) B2 and B8 business uses to support the local economy, with a focus on environmentally 
sustainable activities, supporting local communities and providing opportunities for 
entrepreneurship ; and 
c) Further types of development that would enable the env ironmentally -led restoration of 
the site,  
provided that the proposals can clearly demonstrate how they would deliver the key 
considerations set out in Part 1 of this policy,  and  
d) Improves accessibility and helps to create sustainable patterns of travel;  
e) Provides renewable energy generation to serve any development on the site;  
f) Provides realistic proposals for the relocation of existing employment and storage uses 
that are not appropr iate to a National Park setting;  and  
g) Ensures that any adverse impacts (ei ther alone or in combination) are avoided, or, if 
unavoidable, minimised through mitigation with any residual impacts being compensated 
for. 
3. The National  Park Authority will resist more development than is necessary to secure and 
deliver the environmentall y-led restoration of the site.  
4. The National  Park Authority wants to see  a comprehensive redevelopment of the whole site 
consistent with the AAP.  However, if any planning applications come forward separately and 
prior to the adoption of the AAP, then they would have to clearly demonstrate how the 
proposals would accord with the key considerations set out above.                                                                         210                                                    
  Area Action Plan   
8.27 The AAP  will address in more detail the constraints and opportunities including land restoration, 
environmental impacts, transport, flood risk, cultural and heritage, design considerations, 
viability (including identifying possible p artnership funding to enable delivery of a scheme) and 
phasing of delivery over a number of years.   
Developing proposals in partnership   
8.28 Over r ecent years a number of proposals to redevelop the site have emerged from different 
interested parties, including a scheme dismissed at appeal in 2003 and a visitor accommodation 
/ recreational uses based scheme  put forward by the Upper Beeding Neighbourho od Plan 
Group .  
8.29 Through the AAP process, the National  Park Authority  will work in partnership with 
landowners, developers, relevant public bodies and the local community to demonstrate the 
delivery of a viable scheme which is truly exceptional in terms of conce pt, quality and 
sustainability.  
8.30 The site has the potential to provide sustainable tourism / visitor based recreational and business 
uses to support the local economy provided that they are compatible with its sensitive location 
and the proposed  uses m eet the purposes of the National Park.  
Enhancing landscape   
8.31 The National  Park Authority’s  main objective for this site is to secure a significantly enhanced 
landscape.  It accepts that major development provides the opportunity to achieve this and that 
any scheme has to be viable to ensure delivery. However, the scale of any major development 
has to be consistent with the National  Park Authority’s  main objective  for the sit e and meets 
the National Park’s purposes.  Therefore, the AAP and subsequent planning application will have 
to have a particular focus on viability and a clear delivery process.   
Planning applications prior to AAP adoption  
8.32 The National  Park Authority  wishe s to see a comprehensive and clear planning approach to th is 
important site and believes the AAP is the right way to achieve this.  However, it accepts that 
planning applications may come forward prior to the adoption of the AAP. If this were to be 
the cas e, then consideration will be given to whether the development proposals adequately 
address  the key considerations  set out in Policy SD 56, and other relevant policies in this Local 
Plan, and the emerging AAP.  
 
 
 
                                                                        211                                                    
  NORTH STREET QUARTER  AND ADJACENT EASTGAT E AREA, 
LEWES  
Introduction  
8.33 North Street Quarter and adjacent Eastgate Area is located immediately to the north -west of 
Lewes town centre and has an extensive river frontage stretching from just south of Phoenix 
Causeway up to Willey’s Bridge.   
8.34 The area is in two distinct parts, but its redevelopment needs to be considered as one in order 
for a comprehensive approach to be taken to this part of the town. The two parts are the North 
Street Quarter, which lies to the north of Phoenix Causeway (this area is who lly outside, but 
adjoins the Lewes Conservation Area), and the northern part of the Eastgate area, which is 
within the Conservation Area  (Figure 8.2).   
Constraints  
8.35 Constraints affecting the site include:  
 Limited opportunity for outward expansion of Lewes town due to extensive floodplain of 
the River Ouse and surrounding sensi tive and high -quality landscape  
 Impact of the October 2000 flood event and lack of flood defences, which in turn has 
restricted investment in the area and led to m any of the units beco ming run down and less 
able to meet the needs of modern businesses  
 Range of industrial and warehouse buildings dating from the 1950s and 1960s  
 Bus Station – although the bus station performs a vital transport role and is well located in 
relation to many im portant parts of the town centre, it is not a vital asset. The bus station 
and garage are unattractive utilitarian features at an important entrance to the historic core 
of the town. It is the interchange function which it is essential to retain in the are a rather 
than the longer term bus storage  
 Limited quantitative need for additional convenience floorspace during the plan period  – 
redevelopment should not result in a significant increase in floorspace when compared to 
the existing food store  
 Need to retain car -parking  – the site contains some areas of surface level parking  and the 
town has an unde r provision of parking spaces                                                                         212                                                    
  FIGURE 8.2: NORTH ST REET QUARTER AND ADJ ACENT EASTGATE AREA  
                                                                        213                                                    
  Opportunities  
8.36 This site offers the only opportunity for  strategic level growth and the redevelopment within 
Lewes town and can  help to deliver:   
 Enough housing to help significantly to meet the affordable and market housing needs in 
the town, including accommodation for the elde rly 
 Business floorspace in order to meet a qualitative need to provide greater choice for 
existing and prospective businesses, particularly modern offices  
 Retention of the creative businesses / community that has developed in the North Street 
Quarter, incl uding small flexible, low -cost work units (‘box spaces’), a large flexible work 
space (‘creative industry hub’) and assembly and leisure space (‘performance hub’)  
 Community facilities, including a health centre and leisure uses  to build upon the sense of 
place and support the local community  
 Some more modern retail floorspace meeting a qualitative need that cannot be satisfied 
within the historic centre and helping to reduce leakage of retail spending to other centres  
 Restaurants cafes and bars, small -scale retail and other uses which will introduce vibrancy 
and support the new neighbourhood to be created, without undermining the vitality and 
viability of the main town centre  
 Relocation of existing businesses to the Malling Brooks East employment allocation , which 
has been acquired by the majority landowner for the North Street Quarter  
 Tourism accommodation  
 An exemplar sustainable development with the  following development principles and 
infrastructure:  
 a flood defence system to meet Environment Agency condi tions 
 a new gateway access point from Phoenix Causeway  
 associated new highway, cycle and footpath routes  with an emphasis on crea ting a 
‘walkable neighbourhood’  
 a new footbridge connecting the south and north banks of the river  
 a new riverside footpath along the full length of the site, of a width that will add to 
the enjoyment, amenity and experience of users  
 new bus interchange  
 on-site parking at ground level for residents and town visitors  and including other 
measures such as a  car club and e lectric vehicle charging points  
 a new public square beside the River Ouse  
 formal and informal public open spaces  including play areas  
 landscaping and widespread planting including new wildlife corridors, green roofs and 
sustainable surface w ater management  systems  
 on-site renewable energy  
 eliminating waste t hrough re -use and recycling                                                                         214                                                    
   installation of water efficient fittings and appliances and avoiding flooding  and pollution 
of water courses  
8.37 The redevelopment of this area represents a significant opportunity to deliver a scheme which 
meets the objectives of Local Plan  and provides wider benefits, including the re -use of urban 
land which is highly accessible (immediately alongside an existing t own centre and its services), 
the provision of affordable housing, important infrastructure in the form of new flood defences 
and improved accessibility / linkages to the wider National Park to help promote public 
enjoyment of its special qualities.  
8.38 A hybrid planning permission112 for the North Street Quarter , which makes up the majority of 
the site , for mixed use development was granted in May 2016  (referred to as the ‘consented 
scheme’) . However P olicy SD57  has been designed to be sufficiently flexible to a llow other 
proposals to come forward to achieve National Park  objectives, should the consented scheme  
(or phases of the consented scheme) not proceed an d / or other proposals come forward.   
                                                
112 SDNP/15/01146/FUL – Hybrid planning permission (being a full permission for Phase 1 and an outline 
permission for the remainder being Phases 2 & 3) for the demolition of existing buildings and th e 
redevelopment of the North Street Industrial Estate, North Street, Lewes for a mixed use development  
granted 25th May 2016 .                                                                        215                                                    
  Strategic Site Policy SD57: North Street Quarter and adjacent Eastgate area, 
Lewes  
1. Proposals for the sustainable mixed -use development of approximately 9 hectares of land at 
North Street and the neighbouring part of Eastgate, as shown on the Policies Map, will be 
permitted provided they comply wi th the criteria below.  
2. The development will create a new neighbourhood for the town of Lewes. Therefore, any 
proposals should be based on the following uses and broad quantum of development:  
a) Approximately 415 residential units, predominantly focused towar ds the northern part 
of the site;  
b) At least 5,000 square metres of B1a office and / or B1c light industrial floorspace, subject 
to market needs and general viability;  
c) The redevelopment or relocation of the existing A1 food supermarket;  
d) Other uses that are  deemed to aid in the successful delivery of a new neighbourhood, 
whilst not undermining the wider function of Lewes town centre (this could include A1 
Shops,  A2 Financial and Professional Services, A3 Restaurants and Cafes, A4 Drinking 
Establishments, A5  Hot Food Takeaways, C1 hotel, D2 Assembly and Leisure uses and 
community floorspace);  
e) C2 nursing / care home (self -contained units will be counted as residential within the 
above figure);  
f) D1 non -residential institutions such as medical and health services, crèches , exhibition 
and training space;  and  
g) New floorspace for other cultural, artistic and artisan uses not covered by the uses stated 
above.  
3. In addition, any proposal will need to demonstrate:   
a) It includes the early provision of flood defence s to an appropriate standard and to the 
approval of the Environment Agency;  
b) It facilitates improved linkages across Phoenix Causeway and Eastgate Street and a better 
balance between the use of the private car and other modes of transport, in order to 
enabl e the safe flow of pedestrians and the improved integration of the area to the north 
of Phoenix Causeway with the wider town centre;  
c) It delivers enhancements to vehicular access and off -site highway improvements, arising 
from and related to the development  and its phasing;  
d) It respects and enhances the character of the town and achieves a high standard of design, 
recognising the high quality built environment, on and within the vicinity of the site, and 
the site’s setting within the National Park and adjacen t to a Conservation Area;  
e) It is subject to an analysis and appropriate recognition of the site’s (or phase of the site) 
cultural heritage and a programme of archaeological work, including, where applicable, 
desk-based assessment, geophysical survey, geo -archaeological survey and trial trenching 
to inform design and appropriate mitigation;                                                                         216                                                    
  f) It conserves and enhances biodiversity and the green infrastructure network in and 
around the area;  
g) It incorporates a riverside shared foot / cycle route along the western  bank of the River 
Ouse to extend the town’s riverside focus and contribute to its character and quality, 
and provides additional pedestrian and cycling routes to link the site (or phase of the 
site) to the rest of the town, improves permeability within th e site (or phase of the site) 
and provides views out of the site (or phase of the site);  
h) It provides an appropriate level of public car parking provision;  
i) Any retail uses are incorporated into the designated town centre boundary as far as 
possible and the amount of retail provision is informed by a Retail Impact Assessment, if 
necessary;  
j) Alternative uses on the bus station site are subject to the facility being replaced by an 
operationally satisfactory and accessible site elsewhere;  
k) It makes contributions t owards off -site infrastructure improvements arising from, and 
related to, the development;  
l) It provides a connection to the sewerage and water supply systems at the nearest point 
of adequate capacity, as advised by Southern Water, and ensures future access  to the 
existing sewerage and water supply infrastructure for maintenance and upsizing purposes;  
m) It incorporates sustainable surface water management systems, and  
n) It ensures that any adverse impacts (either alone or in combination) are avoided, or, if 
unavoidable, minimised through mitigation with any residual impacts being compensated 
for. 
4. Whilst the National Park Authority  wants to see a comprehensive redevelopment of the whole 
site, it recognises that planning applications may come forward separately  or in phases.  
Therefore, those applications would have to clearly demonstrate how the proposals would 
accord with the key considerations set out above and are consistent with other planning 
permissions granted or emerging proposals.  
Potential uses  
8.39 The Eastgate area consists of a Waitrose store and associated parking area, the adjacent former 
Wenban Smith buildings and a bus interchange.  Historically, the Eastgate area was allocated in 
previous versions of the Lewes District Local Plan . The site was iden tified as a potential area for 
redevelopment with the priority being for the retention of a major food store and  the 
introduction of a replacement bus interchange.  Although no such proposals have been 
subsequently put forward, there is still interest in re developing this site for a mixed use 
development that would incorporate an enhanced food store.    
8.40 At the same time, there are still concerns over the long -term viability of operating the bus 
station in its current location.  Therefore, the principle of rede velopment is acceptable, providing 
that attractive, operationally satisfactory interchange facilities for passe ngers are provided on a 
site elsewhere of equal convenience in this sector of the town.                                                                         217                                                    
  Planning applications  
8.41 Given the shared constraints and opportunities between the two sites, the National Park 
Authority  believes it appropriate that the policy seeks a comprehensive approach to the 
redevelopment of the whole area.  However it  is recognise d that planning applica tions will come 
forward separately , and the policy provides  flexibility for this, while ensuring that when detailed 
proposals come forward they are consistent with other phases / schemes.   
 218                                            
 9. SITES &  SETTLEMENTS  
Introduction  
9.1 This chapter  allocates  sites for development  in line with the spatial  strategy  of the Local 
Plan for a medium level of development dispersed across the towns and villages of the 
National  Park. The Local  Plan allocations  make  a substantial  contribution  to meeting  the 
requirements for Housing, Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople and 
Employment set out in policies SD26: Supply of Homes, SD33: Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople and SD35: Employment Land respectively. Further allocations 
are made in Neighbourhood Development Plans (NDP).  
9.2 The allocations are supported by an extensive and robust evidence base.  The principle  
topic based  studies  supporting  the allocations  are the Settlement Facilities Study113, 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment114 (SHLAA), Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople Background Paper115, the Employment Land Revie w116 and the Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment Levels 1117 and 2118. A number of other studies relating to the first 
purpose of the National Park also support the allocations particularly the South Downs 
Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (SDILCA) . Finally, a detailed background 
paper119 looks at all the potential housing sites that were con sidered for allocation in 
this P lan. There has also been extensive consultation with local communities on the 
allocations particularly  with the town and parish  councils.  
9.3 There  are also many  sites allocated  for development  in NDPs.  All the allocated  sites are 
identified on the park wide P olicies Map with further details shown on Inset Maps. It 
should be noted that there are also a small number of Local Plan allocations in 
designated neighbourhood  planning  areas.  
9.4 Three of the allocations in this chapter are identified as strategic housing allocations. 
They are not critical  to achieving  the 2050 Vision  for the National  Park in the same way as 
the strategic sites, but are nevertheless important locally in terms of regeneration and 
meeting local housing  need.  
9.5 The allocations are set out in this chapter by settlement. There is a short introduction 
to each settlement,  which  is followed  by a brief description  of individual  sites highlighting 
key opportunities and constraints, although this is not intended to be exhaustive. 
Individual  policies  are set out for each allocation  site with development  parameters  and 
113 Settlement Facilities Assessment (South Downs National Park Authority, 2015)  
114 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (South Downs National Park Authority, 2016)  
115 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople Background Paper (South Downs National Park 
Authority, 2016)  
116  Employment Land Review (G.L. Hearn, 2015 and Sout h Downs National Park Authority, 2017)  
117  Water Cycle and Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 (Amec, 2015)  
118  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 Update and Level 2 (Amec foster wheeler, 2017)  
119  Background Paper on Housing Allocations for th e South Downs Local Plan (South Downs National  219                                            
 site specific development requirements with which a planning application would need to 
comply in order to receive planning permission.  Finally, the policy lists specific 
documents that will be required to su pport applications for the site.  
9.6 It should  be noted  that relevant  policies  are not listed  for each  site, and that 
it is important for the plan to be read as a whole. All development plan 
policies will be taken into account in determining planning applications for 
site allocations, along with other material considerations.  
Major Development Test  
9.7 Core Policy SD3 sets out the two stages of decision making in relation to major 
development. If the proposal is considered to be major development then the second 
part of the policy will apply, alongside other policies within this Local Plan. An 
assessment has been made of all the allocations in regard to major development and is 
set out in the technical report Site Allocations against Major Development 
Considerations.  It should be noted that some development proposals may be subject to 
Environmental Impact  Assessments.  
Ecosystem Services  
9.8 Site allocations are recognised as important for achieving conservation and 
enhancement of the ecosystem services in the National Park. In order to understand 
how site allocations  may affect  ecosystem  services,  it was necessary  to map the demands 
on and opportunities for ecosystem services across the National  Park. 
9.9 The GIS based  tool, EcoServ  GIS, a newly  developed  piece  of software,  was used which 
is able to map some ecosystem services. The ecosystem services mapped across the 
National Park are set out in Figure  9.1. 
9.10 EcoServ  GIS was first used to identify  which  allocations  are located  in areas  that provide 
multiple ecosystem services and are therefore particularly important. Site allocations 
within these key areas were then analysed further to develop criteria within the policy 
on matters to conserve and enhance these ecosystem services. Symbols are found at 
the start of the relevant site allocation policies to show which ecosystem services are 
identified. The matters to be addressed on ecosystem services will be secured through 
planning obligation and / or condition. It should also be noted that  man y of the site -
specific development requirements relating, for example, to flooding and biodiversity 
also provide multiple ecosystem services.  Local Plan Objectives  
The following Local Plan objectives are considered most relevant for this section:  
Objective 4 : To achieve a sustainable use of ecosystem services thus enhancing natural 
capital across the landscapes of the National Park and contributing to wealth and human 
health and w ellbeing.  
Objective 7 : To conserve and enhance the villages and market towns of the National Park 
as thriving centres for residents, visitors and businesses.  
Objective 8 : To protect and provide for the social and economic wellbeing of National Park 
communi ties supporting local jobs, affordable homes and local facilities.  220                                            
 
FIGURE 9.1 : KEY TO ECOSYSTEM SERVICES SYMBOLS  
   
 
Water quality  / water 
purification  Pollination  Climate change regulation  
 
 
   
Carbon storage  Air quality  / air 
purification  Accessible Natural  
Green Space 
 
   
Green Travel  Education  Noise Regulation  
 
ALFRISTON  
9.11 Alfriston is a historic village located in the valley of the River Cuckmere south of the 
A27 trunk road in the east of the National Park. The Cuckmere valley is narrow and 
flat bottomed with Alfriston sited above the river on the western bank. Ro utes within 
Alfriston are generally on a north -south orientation. Modern development has spread 
north and west of the historic core. Alfriston has a population of approximately 830 
people.  
  FORMER ALLOTMENTS, ALFRISTON  
Site Area:  
ALFRISTON Site Area:  0.4ha  
Current Use:  Agricultural buildings and woodland  
Flood Risk:  Eastern portion of site within Fluvial Flood Zones 2 and 3  
Historic Environment:  Alfriston Conservation Area; within setting of Listed Buildings  
9.12 The site is located within the historic core of the village. The site is currently under - 
utilised comprising several poor quality agricultural outbuildings and modest quality 
woodland.  
9.13 The site is within a sensitive area within the Alfriston Conservation Area. Building 
materials,  heights  and scale should  suitably  reflect  the design  guidance  set out in the 
Alfriston Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan120. The existing 
agricultural  buildings  are not considered  worthy  of conversion  to residential  use. There 
is a high potential for  archaeological interest. The eastern boundary of the site should 
be appropriately landscaped to provide a suitable transition to the river  valley . 
120 Alfriston Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan (South Downs National Park    
Author ity, 2014)  221                                            
 9.14 Residential development should be sited in the western and central portion of the site 
outside flood zones 2 and 3. It is considered that the area within the allocation site 
within Flood Zones 2 / 3 should not be developed. Development proposals  will be 
expected to incorporate Sustainable Drainage  Systems (SuDS). Due to potential for 
ground water flooding, attenuation SuDS are probably the most suitable option for this 
site. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific 
flood risk assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.15 Development must include suitable vehicular access and on -site parking. Proposals 
should demonstrate that safe vehicular and pedestrian access and egress can be made 
from the site taki ng into account flood risk. Where vehicular access is dependent on 
off-site improvement works these should be sought through a planning obligation. 
Suitable publicly accessible pedestrian access should be provided through the site to 
both North Street and the Public Right of Way to the east of the  site. 
9.16 Therefore, a Transport Assessment (TA) will be needed to understand the effect the 
additional trips will have on the surrounding road network. The TA should take full 
account of local flood risk and identify  suitable vehicular access and egress to the site 
taking full account of the historic roads in the  village.  
9.17 The allocation  site is closely  related  (50 metres)  to a priority  habitat  (Floodplain  Grazing 
Marsh) associated with the Cuckmere River and other watercourses, and as such may 
be home to protected species outside the site. An ecological survey of the site will be 
required to ensure that protected species in the local area will not be harmed and 
opportunities to enhance biodiversity in line with loca l strategies are  identified.  
9.18 The woodland within the site appears to be of modest quality. Development  proposals 
should  identify  all trees worthy  of retention  and then be retained  within  the site. Given 
the current agricultural use the extent of land conta mination should be assessed and 
mitigated, where necessary, prior to  occupation.  
9.19 Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species  Survey;
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Land Contamination Survey;  and
 Transport  Assessment. 222                                            
  Allocation Policy SD58: Former Allotments, Alfriston  
 
1. Land at the Former Allotments, Alfriston is allocated for the development of 5 to 10 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following si te specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) To conserve and enhance the form and fabric of the Alfriston Conservation 
Area and preserve the setting of local heritage  assets;  
b) Provide a suitably landscaped transition to the river  valley;  
c) All hous ing to be located in Flood Zone 1;  
d) Safe vehicular and pedestrian access and egress should be provided during 
flooding;  
e) Floor levels of habitable areas, where appropriate and proven necessary, to be 
designed to take into account flood risk and climate change;  
f) A suitable  internal  road layout  which  provides  for larger  vehicles  including  
refuse vehicles;  
g) A publicly accessible route should be provided through the site from North 
Street to the Public Right of Way to the east of the  site; 
h) To enhance biodiversity and provide for protected  species;  
i) Protect and enhance trees within the site worthy of  retention;  
j) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on 
street parking in local roads;  and 
k) Proposals which include security gat es or other barriers which preclude the 
residential areas of the development from becoming fully accessible, inclusive 
and integrated to the local community will not be  permitted.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the abili ty of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Where trees are lost, provide higher quality new tree planting on  site; 
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  
surface water  run-off. 
 
223                                            
 
 
     Site Ref: SD58       
     Former Allotments  
     Alfriston        
South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission  
                Housing Allocation  
 
         
 
 
 
                                                
                                              SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD58  
Former 
Allotments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083 Survey  100050083  
224                                            
 KINGS RIDE, ALFRISTON  
Site Area:  0.38ha 
Current Use:  Agricultural buildings  
9.20 The site is located in the south -west of Alfriston adjacent to the South Downs Way. 
The site comprises three dilapidated agricultural buildings and areas of hardstanding. 
The existing agricultural buildings are not considered worthy of conversion to 
residential  use. 
9.21 Residential  development  should  provide  a suitable  transition  in form and fabric  from the 
suburban character of Kings Ride and The Broadway to the open countryside beyond. 
New buildings would ideally be sited on the footprint of the existing agricultural 
buildings. New private amenity spaces and vehicular pa rking should not result in 
localised visual intrusion. There is an existing vehicular access onto the site from Kings 
Ride. 
9.22 Given the age of the buildings proposed to be demolished, development proposals 
should address protected species. Development proposals should identify all trees 
worthy of retention and then be retained within the  site. 
9.23 Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associ ated Tree Protection Plan;  and
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species  Survey.

 
225                                            
 Allocation Policy SD59: Kings Ride, Alfriston  
 
1. Land at Kings Ride, Alfriston is allocated for the development of 6 to 8 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any other uses. 
Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site specific  development  requirements  
will be permitted:  
a) A suitable transition in built form and fabric from the low density residential 
development to the east and north and the open countryside to the south 
and west;  
b) Private amenity space and vehicular parking to be suitably sited and  landsc aped;  
c) Boundary treatments appropriate for a site adjacent to open  countryside;  
d) The existing vehicular access should be  retained;  
e) The site layout must not include opportunities to provide future vehicular 
access into adjacent  fields;  
f) Sufficient easement to the adjacent gas pipeline;  and 
g) No significant harm to the amenity of the South Downs  Way.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on  site; 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting that should be suitable for  pollinating  species . 
 
226                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD59 
Kings Ride 
Alfriston   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD59  
Kings 
Ride 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
227                                            
 BINSTED  
9.24 Binsted  is a village  in the Western  Weald  broad  area approximately  3.5 miles east of 
Alton. The village has developed in an L -shape along the old road from Alton eastwards 
towards Alice Holt. Binsted has a conservation area centred on the Grade I listed 
church. The larger part of the village, including the allocation site, is outside th e 
conservation area. Traditional building materials used in Binsted reflect the location on 
the edge of the Weald with brick, hung tiles, some malmstone and numerous half - 
timbered  buildings.  
LAND AT CLEMENTS CLOSE, BINSTED  
 
9.25 The site is located to the south of Binsted and is acc essed from an existing cul -de-sac 
with modern houses. The site comprises a modestly sized paddock with mature trees 
and hedgerows on the southern and eastern boundaries. There is an existing vehicular 
access onto the site from Clements Close. There are exi sting cables across the site 
which will have to be grounded or re -routed to accommodate  development.  
9.26 Given the site is not widely visible in the wider landscape and away from the Binsted 
Conservation Area, there are no particular design requirements but th e appropriate 
use of traditional materials would be  supported.  
9.27 The site is within 5 kilometres of the Wealden Heath Special Protection Area and as 
such suitable mitigation of the impact of the development should be  provided.  
9.28 Development  proposals  should  contribute  towards  the aims of the Hampshire  Hangers 
Biodiversity Opportunity Area and be informed by the following evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological Survey;  and
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species  Survey.Site area: 0.5ha  
Current Use:  Paddock  
Environmental  Designations:  Within  the East Hampshire  Hangers  Biodiversity  
Opportunity Area  
Within Groundwater Vulnerability area  
Within 5km of Wealden Heaths Special Protection Area  228                                            
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD60: Land at Clements Close, Binsted  
1. Land at Clements Close, Binsted is  allocated for the development of 10 to 12 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Appropriate mi tigation of the impact of the development on the Wealden 
Heath Special Protection Area which should be informed by a Project Level 
Habitats Regulation  Assessment;  
b) The existing  vehicular  access  should  be retained  and the existing  on-site cables 
grounded or appropriately  re-routed;  
c) Existing mature trees and hedgerows to be  retained;  
d) Improvements to biodiversity in line with local strategies;  and 
e) To provide  all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking in local  roads.  
2. In order f or the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect  and enhance  trees within  the site where  possible,  and where  trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on  site; 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 229                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD60  
Land at Clements  Close 
Binsted   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD60  
Land at Clements 
Close 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,400  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
230                                            
 NEW BARN STABLES, THE STREET, BINSTED  
 
9.29 The site lies just off The Street to the rear of a number of homes of mixed age and 
style. This is an existing private Gypsy and Traveller site with permanent planning 
permission for 1 pitch. It is bordered by trees and hedging to the north and east and 
adjoins a sand school and pad docks to the immediate south and west. Beyond the 
immediate  site lies farmland  of mixed  field size bordered  by hedgerows  and field trees.  
9.30 The site is accessed from The Street using the existing entrance to the property. On 
the opposite side of the road are  arable fields. The site has a limited, localised effect on 
landscape character with views of any development from the south being seen within 
the context of the existing buildings on this and adjoining  sites. 
9.31 Permission already exists for equestrian relat ed commercial activity on the land and 
this is not altered by this allocation for a further  pitch.  
9.32 Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Sewerage and utilities  assessment 
 Site area:  
Current use:  0.17 ha  
Permanent site for Gypsies and Travellers  
Allocation Policy SD61: New Barn Stables, The Street, Binsted  
1. Land at New Barn Stables, Binsted is allocated for the development of 1 additional 
permanent  Gypsy  and Traveller  pitch.  Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any 
uses other than the Gypsy and Traveller pitches and those appropriate to the needs 
of equestrian uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) It must be laid out to ensure sufficient room is available to allow vehicles to 
turn around within the  site; 
b) Surface water drainage must b e controlled on site and foul drainage must be 
effectively treated before  discharge;  
c) Existing mature trees and hedgerows bordering the site must be retained and 
reinforced;  
d) The development should be occupied only by those who fulfil the definition of 
a Gyp sy or Traveller;  
e) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
f) New planting that should be suitable for pollinating  species . 231                                            
 
 
South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission 
Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocation  
 
Site: SD61  
New Barn Stables,The Street 
Binsted  
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Gypsy and Traveller site allocation 
SDNP Boundary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
SD61  
New 
Barn 
Stables  
¯ 
Scale at A4  1:800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
232                                            
 BURITON  
9.33 Buriton  is a nucleated  spring  line village located  on the Greensand  Terrace  right at the 
foot of the chalk ridge. The spring line contributes a lot to its character. The historic 
centre of the village is dominated by a large pond, from which a stream flows 
northwards, carving a deep and dramatic grassy valley through the terrace. The core of 
the village is at the point where the lane that forms the main village street bends 
sharply around the head of that valley. At the village core around the pond are the 
church and manor house, backing directly onto the foot of the chalk  scarp.  
9.34 The great majority  of the village  has been developed  in a north -westerly  direction  along 
the High Street and Petersfield Road. Further out is a sizeable area of late twentieth - 
century  housing.  North  east of the core and separated  from the main part of the village 
by the steep valley, there is a further cluster of houses of various ages located a short 
distance up North Lane. Building materials are diverse, reflecting the position under the 
chalk scarp, with much u se of malmstone.  
LAND AT GREENWAY LANE, BURITON  
 
9.35 The site is located  to the west of Buriton  and could  be accessed  from Greenway  Lane. 
The site comprises  a modestly  sized paddock  with mature  hedgerows  and some  trees. 
To the east of the site is an existing residential area comprising modern houses. The 
site has no notably environmental designations or  constraints.  
9.36 Development proposals should be informed by the following evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  PlanSite area: Approximately 0.5ha 
Current Use:  Paddock  233                                            
 Allocation Policy SD62: Land at Greenway Lane, Burit on 
1. Land at Greenway Lane, Buriton is allocated for the development of 8 to 10 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) A suitable transition in built form and fabric from the residential development 
to the east and the open countryside to the west, taking account the guidance 
set out in the emerging Village Design  Statement;  
b) Existing mature trees and hedgerows to be retained an  enhanced;  
c) Boundary treatments appropriate for a site adjacent to open  countryside;  
d) To provide  all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking in local  roads;  
e) New vehicular access from Greenway Lane and new pedestrian access which 
links to the existing pedestrian route which links Greenway Lane to Glebe 
Road; and  
f) The site layout must not include opportunities to provide future vehicular 
access into adjacent fields.  
 234                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD62  
Land at Greenway  Lane 
Buriton   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre-submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD62  
Land at 
Greenway Lane  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,200  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
235                                            
 CHERITON  / HINTON MARSH  
9.37 Cheriton is a  historic village located in the Western Downs broad area near the source 
of the River Itchen and close to the site  of a civil war battle in 1644. Cheriton is 
essentially a linear village along the path of the River Itchen albeit with open areas 
between parts of the village. The historic core of Cheriton is the northernmost part of 
the village with a large area of twen tieth century housing to the south -east. The smaller  
settlements  of Hinton  Marsh  and new Cheriton  are located  south  of the A272.  
LAND SOUTH OF THE A272 AT HINTON MARSH, CHERITON  
 
9.38 Land South of the A272 is located in the Hinton Marsh area of Cheriton. The site 
comprises  two existing  residential  dwellings  and curtilage  with frontage  onto the A272, 
and to the rear an area of  paddocks.  
9.39 The site is located in environmentally sensitive area close to the River Itchen. Suitable 
evidence  should  be provided  to ensure  that development  would  not be harmful  to the 
River Itchen Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Special Area of Conservation 
(SAC). Given the proximity of the River Itchen development proposals should be 
supported by suitable protected spec ies surveys and include appropriate biodiversity 
improvements into the  scheme.  
9.40 Development should take account of the close proximity of Hinton Ampner House and 
Gardens with sensitively designed housing and landscape boundaries on each side of 
the site. Whilst not historically significant, the existing thatched cottage on the site is 
considered worthy of retention and offers a sensitive frontage on to the  A272.  
9.41 Vehicular access should be provided from the A272. In the absence of a suitable 
pedestrian rout e on the southern side of the A272 in this area, off -site improvement 
works to enable safe pedestrian access and egress to the northern side of the A272 
may be  necessary.  
9.42 The Cheriton area is not (as of 2017) on mains drainage. Development proposals will 
need to demonstrate no significant impact on the local  environment.  
9.43 The allocation site will come forward in conjunction with suitable public access and 
landscape improvements to the off -site meadow area through which the River Itchen 
flows approximately 15 0 metres to the west. This will be secured through a planning 
obligation.  
9.44 The site is also at risk from groundwater flooding due to winterbournes located within 
the vicinity of the site. In addition historical borehole records indicate a spring was 
present  on site around 1900. This may reactivate during wet periods. The Level 1 
Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk 
assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.   Site area: 0.86ha  
Current Use:  Residential and  Paddock  
Environmental  Designations:  The   River   Itchen   SSSI   and   SAC   Priority   habitat  
(Floodplain Grazing Marsh) is approximately 150metres 
to the west  
 
 
 236                                            
 9.45 Development proposals should therefore be informe d by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Drainage  Strategy;
 Ecological Impact Assessment including Protected Species  Survey;
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment;  
 Project Level Habitats Regulations  Assessment; and 
 Flood Risk Assessment. 237                                            
 Allocation Policy SD63: Land Sou th of the A272 at Hinton Marsh, 
Cheriton  
 
1. Land South of the A272 at Hinton Marsh, Cheriton is allocated for the development 
of 12 to 15 residential  dwellings  (lass C3 use). Planning  permission  will not be granted 
for any other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) To demonstrate that there would be no likely significant effect on the River 
Itchen SSSI & SAC through development of the site for residential  use; 
b) Development should provide a suitable transition in built form and fabric  from 
the existing residential areas to the north and west and the open countryside 
to the south and  east; 
c) Development should include a suitable area of public open space within the 
site; 
d) A suitable vehicular and pedestrian  access;  
e) To provide  all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking;  
f) Off-site pedestrian access  improvements;  
g) Existing mature trees and hedgerows to be  retained;  
h) To provide suitable on -site foul water and surface water drainage;  
i) The location of new housing and access roads  to have regard to low lying areas 
prone to groundwater emergence; and  
j) To provide off -site suitable public access to the River Itchen in the area south 
of the A272 approximately 150 metres to the west of the allocation  site. 
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on  the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect  and enhance  trees within  the site where  possible,  and where  trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree p lanting on site. Trees on the 
site boundary  should  be retained  and new tree planting  should  be undertaken;  
b) Retain suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping where possible to maximise infiltration of water and reduce 
surface water  run-off. 
 
238                                            
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD63  
Land South of the A272 at Hinton Marsh 
Cheriton  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD63  
Land South of the 
A272 at Hinton Marsh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,500  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
239                                            
 COLDWALTHAM  
9.46 Coldwaltham  is a historic  village  in West  Sussex  located  2.5 miles south  of Pulborough 
in the Arun Valley. The London Road (A29) runs through the village. To the east of the 
village is the Waltham Brooks Nature  Reserve.  
LAND SOUTH OF LONDON ROAD, COLDWALTHAM  
 
9.47 The site is located south of London Road (A29) at the south -western end of 
Coldwaltham adjacent to the existing housing at Brookview and Brookland Way. The 
site is currently  in agricultural  use and devoid  of any permanent  buildings.  To the south 
of the site is a sewage works, part of the Waltham Brooks Site of Special Scientific 
Interest  (SSSI)  and a railway  line. Beyond  that is the wider  River  Arun valley which  has 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar 
designations.  
9.48 The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. Development proposals should provide 
suitable mitigation of the impact of the development on the closely sited designated 
sites. These sites are sensitive to change in local hydrology and as such development 
proposals should incorporate suitable surface water and foul water  drainage.  The site 
should provide  between 25 and 30 dwellings and associated open space. The open 
space will be secured in perpetuity through a planning obligation. It should be noted 
that the proposed area of open space is located outside the settlement boun dary for 
Coldwaltham as defined on the Policies Map.  
9.49 The allocation site is also located in a wider area identified as a groundwater source 
protection zone. Development proposals will need to demonstrate no significant 
impact on groundwater  resources.  
 Site area: 8.1ha  
Developable Area (within  
updated settlement  
boundary):                        2.00ha  
Open Space Area (outside  
updated settlement  
boundary):  Approx. 6.00ha  
Current Use:  Agricultural  
Environmental  Designation:  Waltham Brooks SSSI, Arun Valley SAC, SPA &  Ramsar  
to the east and south of the site  
Site within the Houghton to Coldwaltham Biodiversit y 
Opportunity Area (BOA)  
Minerals:  Mineral Consultation  (sand)  240                                            
 9.50 The National Park Authority will be producing a Development Brief for the allocation 
site and will expect proposals to accord with the Brief. The site has medium  / high to 
high landscape sensitivity and as such will need to come forward within a robust and 
appropriate landscape and townscape led development strategy. The northern, western 
and southern boundaries of the site each have specific landscape sensitivities , which 
development must respond to and reinforce where  appropriate.  A Concept Plan 
(overleaf),  which will form the design principles to be provided in the Development 
Brief, sets out the extent of the proposed built development and key topographical 
features.  
9.51 The site has a settlement separation function between Coldwaltham and the nearest 
settlem ent to the west,  Watersfield.  Development  must retain  and improve  that sense 
of separation between the two  settlements.  
9.52 Residential  development  should  reinforce  local distinctiveness  and respond  to the local 
character and vernacular in West Sussex through the predominant use of traditional 
materials. To optimise the potential of the residential area it should incorporate high 
quality, appropriately scaled, and inclusive public open  space.  
9.53 The westernmost and southern portions of the site should provide acce ssible and 
landscaped open space to be secured permanently through a suitable planning 
obligation.  The form of that open space  should  be informed by local community 
engagement.  The open space  should  provide  a suitable  transition  from the existing  and 
proposed residential areas to the Waltham Brooks SSSI. A small area of vehicular 
parking to serve users of the open space would be acceptable adjacent to the existing 
allotments on Brookland  Way.  
9.54 Vehicular access to the site should be from a new access fro m the A29. Development 
should provide suitable pedestrian and cycle routes to connect to existing residential 
areas and the adjacent open countryside. The proposal should incorporate a new 
pedestrian route from the A29 into the public open space which link s into the wider 
countryside . 
9.55 Development provides an opportunity to improve the quality of the public realm of the 
residential area to the east. Existing boundary treatments should be removed and 
replaced, where appropriate, with suitable alternatives. Im provements to the existing 
children’s play area in the adjacent housing area would be preferred to new provision 
within the proposed residential  area. 
9.56 The development, both the residential areas and open space, should provide suitable 
biodiversity improvements in line with local  strategies.  
9.57 Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Ecology Assessment incl uding Protected Species  Survey;
 Flood Risk Assessment including Surface Water Management  Plan;
 Hydrological  Survey;
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment;  and241                                            
  Project Level Habitats  Regulations Assessment. 242                                            
  
 Allocation Policy SD64: Land South of London Road, Coldwaltham  
1. Land South of London Road, Coldwaltham, is allocated for the development of 25  to 
30 residential dwellings (class C3 use). Development for a Class A1 (Shop) unit with 
a net sales floorspace up to a maximum of 280m² with suitable vehicular parking for 
customers will also be permitted. The remainder of the allocation site should be 
publicly accessible open space and a small area  of vehicular parking for users of the 
open space. Planning permission will not be granted for any other  uses. 
2. The National Park Authority will prepare a Development Brief to assist the delivery 
of the site. Detailed proposals that are in broad conformity with the Development 
Brief and that meet the following site specific development requirements will be 
permitted:  
a) To demonstrate  that there  would  be no likely significant  effect  on the Waltham 
Brooks  Site of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSI),  the Amberley  Wild Brooks  SSSI, 
The Mens  Special  Area of Conservation  (SAC)  and the Arun Valley  Special  Area 
of Conservation  (SAC),  Special  Protection  Area (SPA)  and Ramsar  site and that 
suitable mitigation, where deemed necessary, will be secured through  planning 
obligations and / or planning  conditions;  
b) Development must be informed by a comprehensive landscape and design 
strategy and through reinforcing local distinctiveness provide a suitable 
transition in form and fabric from the existing residential areas to the eas t and 
the open countryside to the north, west and  south;  
c) To provide  the residual  area of the allocation  as accessible,  landscaped open 
space with the primary purpose of providing an alternative to designated sites 
in the Arun Valley;  
d) To provide a new vehicular and pedestrian access from the A29 London Road 
and suitable pedestrian & cycle links to the rest of the settlement and  adjacent 
open countryside;  
e) To provide  all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking  in adjacent  residential  areas  and a small area of on-site parking  for users 
of the public open  space;  
f) To provide appropriate biodiversity improvements reflecting relevant national 
and local  strategies including a meadow management plan;;  
g) Existing mature trees and hedgerows to be retained and  enhanced;  
h) To provide suitable flood risk  mitigation;  
i) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources;  
j) Improvements to the public realm of the adjacent housing area including 
removing existing boundary treatments and replaced with suitable alternatives 
where appropriate;  and 
k) Demonstrate that the proposal would not have a significant harmful impact  on 
the supply of local  minerals.  
 243                                            
 
 244                                            
 
SD64: LAND SOUTH OF LONDON ROAD, COLDWAL THAM : 
CONCEPT PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 245                                            
  
CORHAMPTON  
9.58 Corhampton is a village located in the Dip Slope broad area on the western bank of 
the River  Meon.  It forms  a civil parish  with Meonstoke  which  adjoins  it on the eastern 
bank. The Parish had a population of approximately 760 in  2011.  
LAND EAST OF WARNFORD ROAD, CORHAMPTON  
9.59 The allocation site comprises three existing planning consents (SDNP/15/01181/FUL, 
SDNP/02757/FUL and SDNP/16/02767/FUL)  for residential development comprising  a 
total of 18  dwellings.  
 
 
 
 Site area:  
Current Use:  Approximately 0.73ha  
Commercial; Residential  
Allocation Policy SD65: Land East of Warnford Road, Corhampton  
1. Land  East of  Warnford Road,  Corhampton  is  allocated  for up to 18  residential 
dwellings (Class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any other  uses. 246                                            
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD65  
Land East of Warnford Road 
Corhampton and Meonstoke  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD65  
Land East of 
Warnford Road 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,400  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
247                                            
 DROXFORD  
9.60 Droxford  is an historic  village  located  in the Dip Slope  broad  area on the upper  reaches 
of the River  Meon.  For much  of its history  the manor  was a possession  of the Bishops 
of Winchester.  The village  is essentially  linear  in form,  originally  built on a raised  terrace 
slightly elevated from the river. Droxford is particularly noteworthy for its collection 
of well -preserved eighteenth and early nineteenth century domestic  architecture.  
Site Area:  1.04ha  
Current Use:  Agricultural buildings  
Flood Risk:  Surface water flood risk across centre of site and groundwater 
flood risk  
 Adjacent to Droxford Conservation area  
  LAND AT PARK LANE, DROXFORD  
9.61 The site is located to the west of the historic core of Droxford adjacent to the Junior 
School on Park Lane. Park lane is a narrow country lane lined with mature  hedgerows 
which restrict views into the allocation  site. 
9.62 The site is located in a sensitive area adjacent to the Droxford Conservation Area 
boundary. Given the proximity of the site to the conservation area it is considered 
appropriate for buil ding materials, heights and scale to suitably reflect the design 
guidance set out in the conservation area appraisal121. Given that Droxford is noted for 
its historic domestic architecture it is considered that the allocation site provides a 
good opportuni ty to reinterpret this using historic building materials and vernacular. 
There is also a high potential for archaeological  interest.  
9.63 The centre of the development site is identified as having surface water flood risk and 
as such proposals  should  include  suitable  mitigation.  The site is located  in a wider  area 
identified as having groundwater vulnerability and as such proposals should 
demonstrate no significant harm to water  resources.  The Level 1 Update and Level 2 
SFRA provides recommendations for a site  specific flood risk assessment and suitability 
and design of SuDS.  
9.64 A Transport  Assessment  will be required  to understand  what effect  the additional  trips 
generated by the development will have on the operation of Park Lane and more 
importantly the impact  on the Park Lane  / Police Station Lane junction and  surrounding 
road network.  
9.65 Development should include suitable vehicular access taking account of the narrow 
character of Park Lane. Where vehicular access is dependent on off -site improvement 
works these  should be sought through a planning obligation. Development should be 
served  by sufficient  suitable  off-street  vehicular  parking  to avoid  additional  pressure  on 
Park Lane.  
9.66 Park Lane forms  part of the Wayfarers  Way long distance  footpath.  Development  must 
not harm the amenity of this long distance  route.  
121 Droxford Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan (South Downs National    
Park Authority, 2015)  248                                            
 9.67 Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Highways  Assessment; 
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment;  and
 Transport  Assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 249                                            
  
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD66: Land at Park Lane, Droxford  
 
1. Land at Park Lane, Droxford is allocated for the development of 26 to 32 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use) providing that the design is of a high quality which 
sympathetically conserves and enhances the setting of local heritage assets. Planning 
permission will not be granted for any other uses with the exception of a small area 
of community parking in that part of the site adjacent to Park  Lane.  
2. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development requirements 
will be  permitted:  
a) The conservation and enhancement of the setting of local heritage assets 
including the Droxford Conservation  Area;  
b) A suitable transition in built form and fabric fr om the residential areas to the 
north and east and the open countryside to the south and  west;  
c) Safe pedestrian  and vehicular  access  and egress,  which  where  this is dependent 
on off -site highways improvements will be secured through suitable planning 
obliga tions;  
d) Provision  of all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking in local  roads;  
e)  The location of new housing and access roads  to have regard to areas prone to 
surface water flooding and  potential groundwater emergence;  
f) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources;  
g) No significant harm to the amenity of the adjacent Wayferer’s Way;  and 
h) No significant harm to the amenity of users of the adjacent  school.  
3. In order for the development to have an overal l positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance hedgerows and trees within the site where possible, and 
where they are lost, provide at l east the equivalent in new planting on  site; 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
250                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD66 
Land at Park Lane 
Droxford   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD66  
Land at Park 
Lane 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,600  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
251                                            
 EASEBOURNE  
9.68 Easebourne is located in the Western Weald broad area and is one of the National 
Park’s  larger  villages  with a population  of just under  2,500.  It is a historic  estate  village 
north  of Midhurst  and the centre  of the Cowdray  Estate , which  includes  Cowdray  Park a  
Registered  Historic  Park and Garden.  The core of Easebourne  is a conservation  area 
notable  for its numerous old sandstone buildings. The Ruins of Cowdray Park, the 
Priory, the Refectory and Easebourne Parish Church of St. Mary’s are all Grade I 
buildings. Easebourne has a distinctive local vernacular comprising many historic 
buildings which uti lises the local sandstone and the notable yellow ‘Gold Cup’ painted 
window frames of many of the Cowdray Estate  cottages.  
COWDRAY WORKS YARD, EASEBOURNE  
Site area:  Approximately 0.9ha 
Current Use:  Commercial   
Flood Risk:  Surface water flood risk through western part of site and 
groundwater flood risk  
Historic Environment:  Area of high archaeological interest; site adjacent to Easebourne 
Conservation Area (north and west); Listed Buildings (7) close 
related to the site; site adjacent to Cowdray H ouse Registered 
Park & Garden (south and east)  
9.69 The site is considered suitable for mixed -use development including housing and 
commercial use. The floorspace for each commercial use class will be limited to a 
maximum  amount.  
9.70 The allocation site is previously developed land closely related to a number of 
significant  heritage  assets  including  the Easebourne  Conservation  Area,  Cowdray  Park 
and the Grade I Listed Easebourne Priory, Refectory and St Mary’s church. As such, the 
design of development propo sals should be fully informed by suitable landscape, 
townscape  and historic  environment  analysis  which  takes  full account  of the setting  and 
significance of these heritage assets. A Conservation Area Character Appraisal and 
Management Plan is currently bei ng prepared for Easebourne and the application 
should pay due regard to this when it is  published.  
9.71 Given the high quality of the form and fabric of Easebourne it is expected that 
development proposals should be of a high standard in terms of architecture, 
townscape  and public  realm.  Development  proposals  should  be inclusively  designed  by 
providing publicly accessible pedestrian routes from Easebourne Lane through to 
Cowdray Park where there is a Public Right of Way close to the site  boundary.  
9.72 The site has also high archaeological  interest  and as such development  proposals  should 
be supported  by on-site field surveys.  The western part of the development site is 
identified as having surface water flood risk. The site is also vulnerable from groundwater 
emerge nce associated with the dry valley aligned with Easebourne Lane and Easebourne 
Street. As such, proposals should include suitable flood risk mitigation. The Level 1 Update 
and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and 
the suitability and design of SuDS. Development  proposals  should  be supported  by a site -252                                            
 specific flood risk assessment and will be expected to incorporate sustainable drainage 
to address surface water.  
9.73 Development proposals should include suitable veh icular access, on -site parking and 
suitable pedestrian access to Cowdray Park. Proposals for commercial use should 
include sensitively designed outside storage and vehicular  parking.  Given  the existing  
commercial  use of the site development  proposals should be supported by a land 
contamination  survey.  
9.74 Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Landscape Visual Impact  Assessment; 
 Land Contamination Survey;  and
 Surface Water Flood Risk Assessment and Management  Plan.



















253                                            
 



Allocation Policy SD67: Cowdray Works Yard, Easebourne  
 
1. Land at the Cowdray Works Yard, Easebourne is allocated for mixed use 
development including 16 to 20 residential dwellings (Class C3 use) and commercial 
buildings  (Class  A1, A3 and B1 uses only) with a total net floorspace  of up to 1,500m². 
Development for Class A1 (Shop) units and Class A3 (Food and Drink) with a net 
sales floorspace up to a maximum of 280m² for each will be permitted in principle. 
The design of the proposed form and fabric will be of a high quality, which 
sympathetically conserves and enhances the setting of local heritage assets. Planning 
permission will not be grant ed for any other  uses. 
2. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development requirements 
will be  permitted:  
a) A publicly accessible pedestrian route from Easebourne Lane through to 
Cowdray  Park; 
b) Provision  of all necessary  vehicular  parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking in Easebourne;   
c) The  location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas of 
surface water flooding  and  potential groundwater emergence; and;  
d) Sustainable Drainage Systems to mitigate risk of surfa ce water  flooding.  
3. Proposals  which  include  security  gates or other  barriers  which  preclude  the 
residential areas of the development from becoming fully accessible, inclusive and 
integrated to the local community will not be  permitted.  
4. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural  environment  to contribute  to ecosystem  services,  development  proposals  
must address the  following:  
a) Maximise available space for new tree planting particularly at the site 
boundari es; 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
254                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD67 
Cowdray  Works  Yard 
Easebourne   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD67  
Cowdray 
WorksYard  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,600  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
255                                            
 LAND AT EGMONT ROAD, EAS EBOURNE  
9.75 The site is located on the western side of Easebourne Lane in a predominantly 
residential area. The eastern and northern boundaries of the site are contiguous with 
the Easebourne  Conservation  Area.  On the eastern  boundary  of the site are two listed  
houses. There is an additional listed house to the north of the site , which is visible to 
and from the site. The residential areas to north, west and south predominantly 
comprise two -storey, twentieth century housing. To the north and north -west of the 
site is an extensive area of backland parking and garaging of generally low townscape 
value. To the south of the site is an existing  school.  
9.76 The site is currently under -utilised and provides an opportunity through a well - 
designed residential scheme to improve the overall quality of the local townscape and 
pedestrian accessibility. Development proposals should also conserve and enhance 
local heritage assets including the setting of the Easebourne Conservation Area and 
adjacent listed  buildings.  
9.77 Development should include suitable vehicular access, on -site parking and p edestrian 
routes to improve permeability of the wider  area. The lowermost part of the site, and 
the proposed access is at risk of surface water flooding. There is also groundwater 
emergence vulnerability associated with the dry valley aligned with Ease bourne Street  
and Easebourne Lane. As such, proposals should include flood risk mitigation. The 
Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood 
risk assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.78 Development proposals sh ould therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Heritage Statement;  and
 Surface Water Management  Plan and Flood Risk Assessment .Site area: 
Current Use: 
Flood Risk:  0.7 ha  
Paddock; Car Parking  
Surface water flood risk on western and southern boundaries  
Historic Environment:    Adjacent to Easebourne Conservation Area; ListedBuildings  
  adjacent to the site  256                                            
   Allocation Policy SD68: Land at Egmont Road, Easebourne  
 
1. Land at Egmont Road, Easebourne is allocated for the development of 16 to 20 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Design and landscaping which conserves and enhances the setting of local 
heritage assets including the adjacent Easebourne Conservation Area and 
Listed  Buildings  and provides  a permeab le layout  which  integrates  with existing 
neighbouring residential  areas;  
b) Retention of the existing vehicular parking area adjacent to Egmont Road 
except where necessary to facilitate a new vehicular and pedestrian  access;  
c) Provision  of all necessary  vehicul ar parking  on-site to avoid  additional  on street 
parking in Easebourne;  and 
d) Sustainable Drainage Systems to mitigate risk of surface water  flooding  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to  contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Trees on the site boundary should be retained where possible and new tree 
planting should be undertaken at the eastern boundary of the site. 
Replacement trees should be an  improvement on those  lost; 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) Retain suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating  species; and  
d) The  location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas of 
surface water flooding  and potential groundwater emergence;,  
257                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref:  SD68 
Land at Egmont  Road 
Easebourne   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD68  
Land at Egmont 
Road 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,500  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
258                                            
 FORMER EASEBOURNE SCHOOL, EASEBOURNE  
Site area:  Approximately 2.1ha 
Current Use:  Former School Buildings and Grounds  
Flood Risk:  Surface water flood risk in Easebourne Lane  and groundwater flood 
risk 
Historic Environment:  Site partly within, and partly adjacent to, the Easebourne  
Conservation Area; Listed School building Grade II Listed; Listed 
cottage adjacent to site boundary  
9.79 The site comprises  a disused  former  school  and school  grounds  located  on the western 
side of Easebourne  Street  to the north -east of the core of the village.  Easebourne  Street 
has an, essentially, rural character with many vernacular cottages interspersed with 
larger  historic  houses  and some  modern  dwellings.  There  are a number  of listed  houses 
on Easebourne Lane with particular concentrations to the south -west and north -east of 
the allocation site. To the west and east is open  countryside.  
9.80 The former school buildings are located north -east of a gap in built form across 
Easebourne  Lane.  Development  proposals  should  retain  this gap whilst  including  suitable 
frontage  development.  The northern  portion  of the allocation  site including  the existing 
areas of hardstanding is considered suitable for redevelopment. The southernmost 
portion of the site is considered suitable for 2 residential  dwellings.  
9.81 Given the high quality of the form and fabric of Easebourne Conservation Area it is 
expected that development proposals should be of a high standard in terms of design 
and landscaping. Areas considered suitable for frontage development include the 
portion of the site between the more southern of the two existing vehicular entrance 
and Bellings Barn, and the existing area of hardstanding adjacent to the ne ighbouring 
listed  cottage.  New frontage  buildings  could  be reasonably  staggered  with no particular 
building line in Easebourne  Street.  
9.82 The listed core of the school building is considered suitable for residential conversion. 
The demolition of the modern el ements of the school building would improve the 
setting of the adjacent listed buildings and the Easebourne Conservation Area within 
which they are located. It is considered that the redevelopment of the area 
incorporating the footprint of the modern schoo l buildings and areas of hardstanding 
would be best served by a scheme which predominantly reflected the various local 
estate dwelling vernaculars or suitably reinterpreted it for the twenty -first century.  
9.83 Development proposals must include sufficient on -site vehicular parking to avoid on - 
street parking in Easebourne Lane. Development which incorporates the existing 
vehicular accesses would be preferred. The reprofiling of the existing vehicular access 
from Easebourne  Lane to the large area of hardstanding  adjacent  to the school  buildings 
is acceptable subject to suitable landscape improvements.  
9.84 Some small areas of the site, and the proposed access are at risk of surface water 
flooding. There is also groundwater emergence vulnerability associated with the dry 259                                            
 valley aligned with Easebourne Valley and Easebourne Lane. As such, proposals should 
include suitable flood risk mitigation. Development proposals will be expected to 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems to address surface water flood  risk. The 
Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood 
risk assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.85 Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by  the  following  evidence 
studies:  
 Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Management  Plan; 
 Heritage Statement;  and 
 Landscape Visual Impact  Assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 260                                            
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD69: Former Easebourne School, Easebourne  
 
1. Land at the former Easebourne School is allocated for the development of 16 to 20 
residential  dwellings  (class  C3 use) including  any formed  through  the conversion  of the 
listed portion of the existing school building. Planning permission will not be granted 
for any other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Development proposals should conserve and enhances the setting of local 
heritage assets including the Easebourne Conservation Area and Listed 
Buildings;  
b) The central  portion  of the site shall be retained  as an appropriately  scaled  
open visual gap across the  site; 
c) Frontage development will be permitted either side of this open visual  gap; 
d) Retention of the southernmost existing vehicular access;  and 
e)  The location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas of 
surface water flooding  and potential groundwater emergence.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute t o ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site;  and 
b) New planting should be suitable fo r pollinating  species.  
 
261                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD69  
Former Easebourne  School 
Easebourne   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0      10     20     30      40     50 100 150 200 250 300 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD69  
Former Easebourne 
School  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 2,800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
262                                            
 EAST DEAN (EAST SUSSEX)  
9.86 East Dean  and Friston  lies in the Dip Slope  broad  area and is a civil parish  in East Sussex.  
The two villages in the parish are in a dry valley  on the South  Downs  between 
Eastbourne  and Seaford.  The main A259 road  goes th rough both village centres. Much 
of the surrounding land is owned by the National  Trust.  
LAND BEHIND THE FRIDAYS, EAST DEAN (EAST SUSSEX)  
9.87 The allocation site comprises an existing planning consents  (SDNP/14/03936/FUL) for 
residential development  comprising a total of 11 dwellings . Site area: Approximately 0.54ha  
Current Use:  Agricultural  
Allocated Use:  Residential Development  
  
Allocation  Policy  SD70:  Land  Behind  the Fridays,  East Dean  (East  Sussex)  
1. Land Behind  the Fridays,  East Dean  is allocated  for up to 11 residential  dwellings  
(Class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any other  uses. 
 263                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD70  
Land behind the  Fridays 
East Dean (East  Sussex)   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD70  
Land behind 
the Fridays  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,100  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
264                                            
 FINDON  
9.88 Findon  is a medium  size village  located  in the Dip Slope  broad  area of the National  Park. 
The present village developed in the late middle ages on a junction of historic roads, and  
is focused  around  a compact,  historic  village  core (The Square),  which  has a number of 
small shops, pubs and a post office. The historic hamlet of Nepcote also falls within the 
settlement boundary to the north. From the 19th Century, the village has become 
renowned for its annual Sheep Fair on Nepcote Green and as a centre for racehorse 
training and eques trian activities. The settlement underwent significant residential 
expansion during the 20th Century, such that much of the village is now characterised by 
more mode rn estates and architectural  styles.  
9.89 Findon Parish Council produced an NDP, which was ‘made’ in 2016. The Findon NDP 
does not, however, set a settlement boundary nor allocate housing sites. The National 
Park Authority is therefore determining a settlement boundary and housing site 
allocations through the Local  Plan. 
LAND AT ELM RISE, FINDON  
 
9.90 The site is located to the north east of the village core, and is bordered on three sides by 
residential development. The northern boundary borders a larger area of paddocks to 
the north, along which matur e hedgerows provide significant screening. The site provides 
good opportunity to provide modest -sized dwellings,  
9.91 The site can be seen from the A280  Long Furlong  to the west,  however  these  views  are in  
the context  of existing  residential  development  sitting  above  the site to the  west.  As the  
site is more  elevated  at its western  part, there  is potential  to impact  on views  from the 
public bridleway crossing fields to the north. It will be important that development 
enhances these views. The more substantial built elements of development should be 
focused  on the western  and southern  parts of the site, where  the land sits lower  in the 
landscape and is well -screened. Single -storey housing will be encouraged in the more 
elevated parts of the allocation  site. 
9.92 The site has potential to provide valuable wildlife habitats, and is within a wider area  of 
Protected Notable Species. An ecological survey of the whole site will be required to 
ensure that development enhances opportunities for these species to  flourish.  The site is 
also at risk of potential surface water or groundwater flooding to access. A site specific 
flood risk assessment should therefore accompany any planning application for this site 
and should particularly consider the flood risk to access and egress.  The Level 1 Update 
and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and 
the suitability and design of SuDS.  Site area: 0.7ha  
Current Use:  Paddock  
Environmental  Designation:  Within wider area of various Protected Notable  Species  
Within South Downs Way Nature Improvement Area  
Within Environment Agency Source Protection Zone  265                                            
 9.93 Development of the site would give opportunity to provide a new publicly accessible 
footpath  from Elm Rise to the northern  end of Stable  Lane,  via the existing  track to the 
immediate north -east corner of the site, to create a new link from the village to open 
downland to the east. This is considered appropriate to comply with Policy SD20: 
Walking,  Cycling  and Pedestrian  Routes.  Public  open space  should  be incorporated  
along this corridor, in a way that integrates with the wider site layout and public realm 
within the site.  
9.94 Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by  the  following  evidence 
studies:   
 Landscape  Assessment; 
 Ecology Survey and Protected Species  Survey;
 Landscape and Visual Impact  Assessment; and 
 Flood Risk Assessment 266                                            
 Allocation Policy SD71: Land at Elm Rise, Findon  
 
1. Land at Elm Rise, Findon is allocated for the development of between 15 and 20 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) To enhance biodiversity, and in particular provide for local notable and 
protected  species;  
b) Development should be focused on the western and southern parts of the  
site, and provide a suita bly landscaped transition to more elevated  areas;  
c) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources;  
d) Vehicular access should be provided via existing access from Elm Rise;  and 
e) The development should provide public green space integrate d with an 
attractive, publicly accessible through -footpath and cycle link between Elm 
Rise and the northern end of Stable  Lane.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosy stem services, development proposals 
must address the  following::  
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees on 
the site boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be  
undertaken;  
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  
surface water run -off; and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
267                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD71 
Land at Elm  Rise 
Findon   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD71  
Land at Elm 
Rise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,400  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
268                                            
 SOLDIERS FIELD HOUSE, FINDON  
 
9.95 The site is located on the eastern edge of the village and comprises a large residential 
plot, consisting  of a large,  modern  house  and garden  enclosed  on all sides by a substantial 
beech  hedge.  
9.96 The site is visible from the public footpath network around Cissbury Ring. It is also 
visible from, and therefore within the setting of, the Grade II Listed Wattle House on 
the edge of Nepcote Green. The existing building is prominent from these vi ewpoints, 
and is not considered to be of an architectural quality that benefits the site and local 
area. 
9.97 Redevelopment of the site provides an opportunity to deliver modest -sized dwellings 
that better meet local housing needs. It also provides opportunity to improve the 
character of the area and enhance views of the site, through a design and layout that 
better responds to the traditional architectural styles seen in  Findon.  
9.98 Development proposals should be accompanied by a detailed Landscape and Visual 
Impact Assessment to ensure short -term and long -term enhancement of the site’s 
setting. The existing beech hedge should be retained until improved and mature 
landscaping  and screening,  using native  species,  has been achieved  through  implementing 
the landscape  plan. 
9.99 The site as exists  is not likely to provide  significant  wildlife  interest,  however  the wider 
area hosts Protected Notable Species. Proposals should enhance biodiversity by creating 
new habitats and subsistence, particularly for notable species in the area. Some parts of 
the site are at potential risk from surface and groundwater flooding. Proposals should 
incorporate sustainable drainage systems to address surface water flooding and preserve 
the integrity of the Source Protection  Zone.  The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA 
provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and t he suitability 
and design of SuDS.  
9.100  Access to the site is via a private single -track road (Soldiers Field Lane). A Transport 
Assessment will be required to confirm the trips generated by the proposals and the 
effect on the Lane and surrounding road network . Development proposals should 
suitably address any highway safety or access issues  identified.  
 
 Site area: 0.6ha  
Current Use:  Single resident ial plot with large  house  
Environmental  Designations:  Within wider area of various Protected Notable  Species  
Within South Downs Way Nature Improvement Area 
Within Environment Agency Source Protection Zone  
Flood  risk: Parts of site susceptible to surface water and 
groundwater flooding  269                                            
 9.101  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be suitably  informed  by the following  evidence 
studies:  
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Ecology Assessment and Protected Species  Survey;
 Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment;  
 Transport  Statement and;  
 Flood Risk Assessment.  
Allocation Policy SD72: Soldiers Field House, Findon  
 
1. Land at Soldiers Field, Findon is allocated for the development of 10 to 12 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) To positively enhance the contribution of the site to the downland 
landscape and the setting of the Wattle House, particularly as viewed from 
public rights of way to the east and south and from Nepcote  Green;  
b) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources;  
c) To enhance biodiversity, and in particular provide for local notable 
and protected species ;  
d) The existing beech hedge that follows the site boundary should be 
retained, until improved and mature native species planting provides an 
enhanced boundary  treatment; and  
e) The location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas of 
surface wa ter flooding  and potential groundwater emergence.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of  
the natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development 
proposals must address the  following:  
a) Where trees are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting 
on site. Trees on the site boundary should be retained and new tree 
planting should be  undertaken;  
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas on s ite, and use permeable surfaces and 
soft landscaping where possible to maximise infiltration of water and 
reduce surface water  run-off. 
c) be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
270                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD72 
Soldiers Field  House 
Findon   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD72  
Soldiers Field 
House  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 900  
© Crown copyright  and database   rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
271                                            
 GREATHAM  
9.102  Greatham is a village about 6 miles north of Petersfield with a population of about 800 
people.  Greatham  has a public  house,  primary  school  and village  hall. It is a linear  village 
of the Western Weald which runs along the old main Petersfield to Farnham road, 
straddling two distinct landscape areas. The older part of the village  to the west, much 
of which is covered by a conservation area, lies among the gently rolling fields of the 
Mixed  Farmland  and Woodland  Vale landscape  area, with many  mature  trees and distant 
views  of the Hangers.  Traditional  building  materials  here include  much  use of sandstone.  
9.103  Further  north  east, beyond  the valley  of a tributary  of the Rother,  the housing  along  the 
road becomes newer and denser as the land rises to sandy oak, birch and pine woods 
in the Wealden  Farmland  and Heath  Mosaic  landscape  area, part of which  are designated 
local wildlife sites. The eastern end of the village is in close proximity to land used  by 
military. On the northern and eastern edge of the settlement is the Woolmer Forest 
Special  Area of Conservation  and the Wealden  Heaths  Phase  II Special  Protection  Area.  
LAND AT PETERSFIELD ROAD, GREATHAM  
 
9.104  The site is a wholesale nursery adjacent to the settlement boundary of Greatham. The 
site is surrounded  by residential  properties  to the northeast  of the site, agricultural  land 
to the south a village hall and school to the west. The allocation site is outside but 
closely sited to the north boundary of the Greatham conservation area. There is large, 
listed residential dwelling opposite the western boundary of the site. The site has high 
potentia l for archaeological  interest.  
9.105  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals  should  address  Core  Policy  SD3. The allocation  site is considered  suitable  to 
provide  up to 40 residential  dwellings  and an area of public  open space  within  the central 
portion of the site. The allocation site also provides an opportunity to provide 
Greatham will a modestly sized retail unit in the heart of the village next to the school 
and village hall. As such, a Class A1 (Shop) unit with a floorspace under 280 square 
metres with suitable off -road parking would be acceptable in principle. First floor 
residential accommodation would acceptable above a retail  unit. 
9.106  The site is approximately 600m from the Wealden Heaths Phase II Spec ial Protection 
Area (SPA). Advice from Natural England will be required on appropriate measures to 
mitigate the impacts of recreational  disturbance.  Site area: 2.4ha  
Current Use:  Horticultural Nursery  
Environmental  Designations:  Adjacent to Rother Valley Biodiversity Opportunity Area  
Wealden Heaths Phase II Special Protection Area 
Groundwater Source Protection Zone  
Historic Environment:  Greatham Conservation Area to south of site;  
                                                      Listed Building on western side of Petersfield Road  272                                            
 9.107  Development should be supported by a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment and 
the form and fabric  of development  should  seek to reinforce  the local distinctiveness  of 
Greatham. The appropriate use of local buildings materials such as coursed ironstone 
or malmstone would be welcomed. Existing mature trees and hedgerows should be 
retained and enhanced. New boundary treatments should be carefully considered. The 
eastern boundary of the site should be appropriately landscaped to provide a suitable 
transition to the river  valley.  
9.108  Development will be required to take into account and contribute to the aims of the 
Rother Valley Biodiversity Opportunity  Area.  
9.109  The existing  vehicular  access  should  be utilised  and necessary  improvements  made  to it 
and Petersfield Road where identified. Development should facilitate a publicly 
accessible off -road pedestri an and cycle route from the existing site entrance on 
Petersfield Road through to the existing Public Right of Way on the eastern boundary 
of the  site. 
9.110  Discussion should take place with the National Park Authority prior to any specific 
development proposal  to develop the site, to establish what mineral resource 
information  is required  by the Mineral  Planning  Authority.  It is recommended  that if the 
proposal overlays a safeguarded minerals resource that a Minerals Assessment Report 
is produced  for the Mineral  Planning  Authority,  submitted  prior to the submission  of an 
application to allow for early discussions to take  plan. 
9.111  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  Survey;
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Landscape Visual Impact  Assessment; 
 Minerals Assessment Report;  and
 Project Level Habitats Regulations  Assessment. 273                                            
   Allocation Policy SD73: Land at Petersfield Road, Greatham  
 
1. Land at Petersfield Road, Greatham is allocated for the development of 35 to 40 
residential dwellings (class C3 use) and associated open space. Development for a 
Class A1 (Shop) unit with a net sales floorspace up to a maximum of 280m² with 
suitable vehicular parking for customers will also be permitted Planning permission 
will not be granted  for any other  uses. Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  
site specific devel opment requirements will be  permitted:  
2. The site specific development requirements  are: 
a) Development proposals should provide a suitable transition in form and fabric 
from Petersfield Road to the west to the open countryside to the  east; 
b) Development proposal s should conserve and enhance the setting of local 
heritage assets including the Greatham Conservation Area and local Listed 
Buildings and use local building materials to reinforce local  distinctiveness;  
c) Provide suitable mitigation towards the Wealden Heat hs Special Protection 
Area (SPA), which should be informed by a project -level Habitats Regulations 
Assessment;  
d) Provide suitable mitigation measures to avoid increases in localised surface 
water  flooding;  
e) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources;  
f) Retain the existing vehicular access and, where identified as necessary to 
provide safe access and egress, improvements to both the vehicular access 
and to off -site highways;  
g) Provide a publicly accessible off -road pedestrian and cycl e route from 
Petersfield  Road  to the existing  Public  Right of Way to the east of the 
allocation site;  
h) Provision of an area of suitable public open space within the  site; 
i) Retain and enhance existing mature trees and site boundaries and new site 
boundaries appropriate to the local  landscape.  
3. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance trees w ithin the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees on 
the site boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be  
undertaken;  
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species;  and 
c) be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
274                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD73  
Land at Petersfield  Road 
Greatham   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0        10       20       30        40       50 100 150 200 250 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD73  
Land at 
Petersfield Road  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 2,300  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
275                                            
 LAND AT FERN FARM, LONGMOOR ROAD, GREATHAM  
9.112  The site lies on the southern side of Longmoor Road in Greatha m. Longmoor Road 
links Greatham with the Longmoor Camp and the A3. The site itself is irregularly 
shaped and slopes down from north to south. The northern end of the site adjoins a 
number of residential properties and gardens. The southern part of the allo cation 
contains two pitches plus a utility room, parking and hard standing for Gypsies and 
Travellers.  These  would  be retained.  South  of the allocation  is a paddock,  which  adjoins 
woodland and large ponds to the south and east and further paddocks and smal l 
enclosures to the  west.  
9.113  The site is accessed  from Longmoor  Road.  The northern  part of the allocation  is more 
visually exposed than the central and southern part. The existing Gypsy and Traveller 
site has no visual impacts beyond the immediate boundaries.  The site is closely related 
to the existing village and its relative containment limits its impact on the wider area. 
The allocation  does not include  the southern  extent  of the land and therefore  restricts 
development to following the building line establ ished along Wolfmere  Lane.  
9.114  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Foul Sewerage and Utilities  Assessment; 
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Lighting Assessment;  and
 Biodiversity Survey and  Report ; and
 Project -level Habitats Regulations Assessment .






 
Site area: 0.8ha  
Current Use:  Gypsy & Traveller site plus paddocks (2 temporary 
pitches)  
Environmental  Designations:  Within 400m of the Wealden Heaths Plus Special 
Protection Area  
 276                                            
 Allocation Policy SD74: Land at Fern Farm, Greatham  
 
1. The southern part of the Land at Fern Farm, Greatham is allocated for the 
development of 4 (total) permanent Gypsy and Traveller pitches. Planning 
permission will not be granted for any other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the 
following  site specific development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Provide an attractive street frontage to Longmoor Road, reflecting the 
transition from village to woodland in this  location;  
b) Provide improved sight lines at entrance to  site; 
c) Provide suitable, permanent access to the Gypsy and Traveller pitches taking 
into account the need to manoeuvre larger vehicles. The Gypsy and Traveller 
site must be laid out to ensure sufficient room is available to allow vehicles to 
turn around within the  site; 
d) Using the existing vegetation as a base the boundaries should be reinforc ed to 
enclose the  site; 
e) The site must contain significant planting in order to reduce the urbanising 
impact  of the development  and provide  a transition  to the woodland  and ponds 
beyond;  
f) Surface water drainage must be controlled on  site; 
g) No commercial  activities  should  take place on the land, including  the storage  of 
materials, in order to protect the amenity of existing and new neighbours;  and 
h) The Gypsy & Traveller development should be occupied only by those who 
fulfil the definition of a Gypsy or  Traveller.  
2. The development  of this site must be considered  in a comprehensive  manner  to 
ensure the  cumulative  impact  of the proposals  can be considered  and appropriate  
assessments undertaken.  
3. In order to have an overall positive impact on the ability of th e natural environment 
to contribute  goods  and services,  development  proposals  should  address  the 
following:  
a) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface 
water  run-off. 
 
277                                            
 
 
 
 
 
Site: SD74  
Land at Fern  Farm 
Greatham  South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission 
Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocation  
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Gypsy and Traveller site allocation 
SDNP Boundary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m  
SD74  
Land at Fern 
Farm  
¯ 
Scale at A4  1:1,200  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
278                                            
 HAWKLEY  
9.115  Hawkley is a small village in the Western Weald broad area 3.5 miles north of 
Petersfield.  
HALF ACRE  HAWKLEY ROAD, HAWKLEY  
9.116  The site lies on the eastern  side of Hawkley  Road  and within  a fairly flat open field. This 
is an existing private Gypsy and Traveller site with temporary planning permission. It 
abuts woodland to the north and is screened by hedging along much of Hawkley Road. 
The site is accessed from that same road and contains a number of caravans located in 
the northern  section  adjacent  to a footpath.  To the south  lies a converted  farm building. 
On the opposite side of the road is a single property. The site ha s a limited, localised 
effect on landscape character with views being well contained and it is not subject to 
overlooking.  
9.117  The site lies between Liss to the east which contains a good range of services and 
facilities and the much smaller Hawkley to the  west. 
9.118  Surface water mapping indicates a concentrated flow pathway towards the site along 
Hawkley Road from the northwest. This appears to concentrate at the north western 
corner of the site, with one pathway following the northern boundary and another 
crossin g the centre. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations 
for a site specific flood risk assessment, and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.119  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Foul Sewera ge and Utilities  Assessment; 
 Lighting Assessment;  
 Project Level Habitats Regulations  Assessmen t; and
 Flood Risk Assessment. 









Site area:  
Current use:  0.24 ha  
Gypsy & Traveller site  279                                            
 


Allocation Policy SD75: Half Acre, Hawkley  
 
1. Half Acre, Hawkley is allocated for the development of 3 permanent Gypsy and 
Traveller  pitches.  Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any other  uses. 
Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development requirements 
will be permitted:  
a) Surface water drainage must be controlled on site and foul drainag e must be 
effectively treated before  discharge;  
b) The location of pitches  and access roads  to have regard to areas of surface 
water flooding  and potential groundwater emergence;   
c) Built and mobile units should be positioned to the north of the site to reduce 
the urbanising effects on the road frontage in this rural  area; 
d) It must be laid out to ensure  sufficient  room  is available  to allow  vehicles  to 
turn around within the  site; 
e) The amenity of the public footpath adjoining the site is restored and  protected;  
f) The hedging surrounding the site is retained and further reinforced with 
appropriate species;  and 
g) The development should be occupied only by those who fulfil the definition of 
a Gypsy or  Traveller.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall  positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following::  
a) Ensure there are no negative impacts on access to and amenity of the  adjacent 
Public Right of  Way;  
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on  site; 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
d) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable s urfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface 
water  run-off. 
 
280                                            
 
 
 
 
 
Site: SD75 
Half Acre 
Hawkley  South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission 
Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocation  
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Gypsy and Traveller site allocation 
SDNP Boundary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
SD75  
Half Acre  
¯ 
Scale at  A4  1:800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
281                                            
 ITCHEN ABBAS  
9.120  Itchen  Abbas  is a linear  village  located  in the Western  Downs  approximately  four miles 
north -east of Winchester.  Itchen  Abbas  developed  along  the northern  edge of the River 
Itchen,  a Site of Special  Scientific  Interest  (SSSI)  and Special  Area of Conservation  (SAC). 
Most of the community buildings are located around the junction between the main 
road (B3047) and a north -south lane which crosses the River Itchen. The older houses 
in Itchen Abbas are mainly scattered in a linear fashion along the main road. The 
allocation site is a typical example of this. Characteristic building materials in the older 
houses are brick, sometimes mixed with flints, reflecting the chalky  surroundings.  
LAND AT ITCHEN ABBAS HOUSE, ITCHEN ABBAS  
 
9.121  The site is located  in the east of the village.  The site is closely  related  to the River  Itchen 
SSSI and SAC. Suitable evidence should be provided to demonstrate that development 
would not be harmful to the River Itchen SSSI and  SAC. 
9.122  The site is currently a domestic garden with the land noticeably rising towards the 
north.  The Avington  Park Conservation  area and Grade  II* Registered  Park and Garden 
is approximately150m to the south of the allocation  site. 
9.123  New development would need to ensure that surface water runoff was suitably 
addressed.  
9.124  Vehicular access would need to be from either the existing or a new access. 
Development  should  be served  by sufficient  suitable  off-street  vehicular  parking  to avoid 
additional pressure on local roads. There is an existing Public Right of Way on the 
eastern  boundary  of the site. Development  should  not harm  the amenity  of the PROW.  
9.125  The site is within 250 metres of an historic landfill site and as such investigations into 
potential contamination should be carried  out. 
9.126  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Ecology Assessment including Pr otected Species  Survey;
 Land Contamination  Survey;
 Heritage Statement;  
 Project -level Habitats Regulations Assessment; and 
 Surface Water Management  Plan.Site area: Approximately 0.66  ha 
Current Use:  Reside ntial Garden  
Environmental Designations:   Site closely sited to River Itchen SSSI and SAC  
Itchen Valley Biodiversity Opportunity Area  282                                            
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD76: Land at Itchen Abbas House, Itchen Abbas  
 
1. Land at Itchen  Abbas  House,  Itchen  Abbas  is allocated  for the development  of 8 to 
10 residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for 
any other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) To demonstrate that there would be no likely significant effect on the River 
Itchen Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC);  
b) Development must provide a suitable transition in form and fabric towards 
the open countryside to the east, north and  south;  
c) The site boundaries should be suitably  landscaped;  
d) The development should provide a suitable new vehicular acce ss if the current 
vehicular access is not suitable or  available;  
e) Not to harm the amenity of the adjacent Public Right of  Way;  
f) To contribute towards the aims of the Itchen Valley Biodiversity Opportunity 
Area;  and 
g) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on-site to avoid additional on 
street parking in adjacent  roads.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the following  : 
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees on the 
site boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be  undertaken;  
b) Minimise hard sur faced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
283                                            
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD76  
Land at Itchen Abbas House 
Itchen Abbas  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD76  
Land at Itchen 
Abbas House  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,100  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
284                                            
 KINGSTON NEAR LEWES  
9.127  Kingston near Lewes is located in the Ouse Valley two miles (3.2 km) south of  Lewes . 
CASTELMER FRUIT FARM, KINGSTON NEAR LEWES  
Site area:  Approximately 0.72ha 
Current Use:  Mixed: Residential, Commercial (Garage), Orchard, Woodland  
Environmental 
Designations  The northern half of the site is Priority Habitat - Lowland 
Calcareous Grassland  
9.128  The allocation site comprises a large area of mature woodland, extensive orchards, a 
small commercial garage, two large but dilapidated greenhouses and a residential 
dwelling and gardens. There is an existing vehicular access from Ashcombe Lane which 
serves the allocation site and five other existing residential  dwellings.  
9.129  Development  within  the allocation  site should  take full account  of the local topography 
the trees within the site and be informed by a Landscape Visual Impact Assessment. 
Ecological and arboricultural improvements should be considered across all of the site 
including those parts of the proposed for built  development.  
9.130  The site is considered to provide a particular opportunity to provie new homes with 
both private and shared amenity spaces through, for example, the utilisation of the 
existing  orchards.  It is considered  that local distinctiveness  could  be reinforced  through 
contemporary designs using sustainable materials. The south facing orientation of site 
should be fully exploited in the site layout and building  design.  
9.131  Boundaries between dwellings should be carefully considered and must be compatible 
with the site treescape and local landscape. The site boundaries should be upgraded 
using suitable local materials. Existing mature trees on  the sensitive site boundaries 
should be retained and  protected.  
9.132  Residential development will  be sited only in the south western portion of the wider 
Castelmer Fruit Farm site, in the area currently occupied by the existing dwelling, the 
MOT garage, greenhouses and a small part of the orchard. This area has the lowest 
elevation of the allocation and is reasonably well -enclosed by existing trees on the 
southern boundary. However, the final siting of buildings must be informed by a 
comprehensive arboric ultural  survey.  
9.133  A very small portion of the site is at risk from surface water flooding.  The site is 
situated on the  side of a dry valley feature. Groundwater emergence from the chalk 
aquifer is most likely along the mapped surface water pathways around t he edge of the 
site. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site 
specific flood risk assessment, and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.134  Given there is an existing MOT and servicing garage within the site, development 
proposals  should be informed by a land contamination  survey.  
9.135  Development proposals should be informed by and come forward in conjunction with 
Access,  Landscape,  and Ecological  improvement  strategies.  The undeveloped  part of the 
southern  portion  of the site should  be retained  as a publicly  accessible  open space.  The 285                                            
 northern portion of the allocation site offers the opportunity to provide both public 
access to a high quality woodland and ecological improvements to a Priority Habitat. 
Working with the local community and relevant stakeholders, pedestrian and cycle 
access for the public should be secured across the site through a planning obligation.  
9.136  There is a potential to provide a suitable off -site link to existing Public Rights of Way to 
the north and east of the al location site.  
9.137  Publicly accessible routes and open spaces within the allocation site will be secured 
through a suitable planning obligation. Suitable developer contributions to enable off - 
site cycle and pedestrian improvements may also be  secured.  
9.138  Develo pment  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  Survey;
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species Sur vey;
 Flood Risk Assessment including Surface Water Management Plan; 
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment; and 
 Land Contamination Survey. 
 
 Allocation Policy SD77: Castelmer Fruit Farm, Kingston near Lewes  
1. Land at Castelmer Fruit Farm, Kingston near Lewes is allocated for the development 
of 10 to 12 residential  dwellings  (class  C3 use). Planning  permission  will not be granted 
for any other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) The woodland within the northern portion of the site shall be made publicly 
accessible;  
b) To enhance biodiversity and provide for protected  species;  
c) Protect and enhance trees within the site worthy of  retention;  
d) Provide a suitably landscaped transition at the site  boundaries;  
e) The  location of new housing and access roads  to have regard to areas of 
surface water flooding  and potential groundwater emergence;  
f) Safe vehicular and pedestrian access and egress should be provided and an 
internal  road layout  which  provides  for larger  vehicles  including  refuse  vehicles;  
g) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in local roads;  and 
h) The site layout must not include opportunities to provide future vehicular access 
into either adjacent fields or the remainder of the Castelmer Fruit Farm site  286                                            
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD77  
Land at Castelmer Fruit Farm 
Kingston near Lewes  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 200 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD77  
Land at Castelmer 
Fruit Farm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 2,000  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
287                                            
 THE PUMP HOUSE, KINGSTON RIDGE, KINGSTON  
9.147  The site is located at the north western end of the Kingston Ridge cul -de-sac. To the 
west of The Pump House is a stable block and adjacent to that is a bunded enclosure 
containing a caravan. A mature hedgerow forms the northern boundary of the site 
beyond which is a garden and then expansive, open rolling downland. The site shares 
an access  with The Pump  House.  To the south  is a paddock  and then further  
resident ial properties on large  plots.  
9.148  This is an existing  private  Gypsy  and Traveller  site with temporary  planning  permission. 
The site has a limited, localised effect on landscape character with views being well 
contained and it is not subject to  overlooking.  
9.149  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence  study:  
 Fowl Sewerage and Utilities  Assessment 









 Allocation Policy SD78: The Pump House, Kingston  
1. The Pump House, Kingston is allocated for the development of 1 (total) permanent 
Gypsy and Traveller pitch. Planning per mission will not be granted for any uses other 
than a Gypsy and Traveller pitch and equestrian uses. Detailed proposals that meet 
the following site specific development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) It must be laid out to ensure  sufficient  room  is available  to allow  vehicles  to turn 
around within the  site; 
b) Surface water drainage must be controlled on site and foul drainage must be 
effectively treated before  discharge;  
c) Bunding must be  retained;  
d) Existing mature trees and hedgerows bordering the site must be retained and 
reinforced;  and 
e) The development should be occupied only by those who fulfil the definition of 
a Gypsy or  Traveller.  
 288                                            
 
 
 
 
 
Site: SD78  
The Pump House 
Kingston near  Lewes  South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission 
Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocation  
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Gypsy and Traveller site allocation 
SDNP Boundary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
10 20 30 40 50 m 
SD78  
The Pump 
House  
 
 
L
a
n
d
 
a
t
 
C
a
s
t
e
l
m
e
r
 
F
r
u
i
t
 
F
a
r
m 
 ¯ 
Scale at A4  1:500  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
289                                            
 LEWES  
9.150  Lewes  is the county  town  of the administrative  county  of East Sussex  and historically  of 
all of Sussex.  Lewes  has a long history  as a bridging  point  and as a market  town  located 
on the River  Ouse.  The town  was the site of the Battle  of Lewes  in 1264 and has many 
historic landmarks including Lewes Castle.  As of 2011 Lewes has a population of 
approximately 17,300.  
9.151  Lewes Town Council is preparing an NDP for Lewes, which is due to reach pre - 
submission  in May 2017. The NDP allocates sites for housing, but does not include the 
strategic housing allocation of Old Malling Farm. The NDP does not allocate 
employment  land.  
STRATEGIC HOUSING ALLOCATION: LAND AT OLD MALLING FARM, 
LEWES  
9.141  Parts of site susceptible to fluvial, tidal and groundwater    floodingThe site is situated on 
the northern side of the town in a ‘green finger’ between the 1970s part of the Malling 
Estate to the east and the River Ouse, mainline railway and Landport Estate to the west. 
The site is currently in agricultural  use. 
9.142  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. Development of the site could adversely 
impact the special qualities of the National Park, for instance on landscape and views, on 
recreational activities (the Ouse Valley Way), on tranquillity (including dark night skies), 
on historical features and cultural heritage (including the Conservation Area, Listed 
Building and archaeological remains), and on nearby wildlife and  habitats.  
9.143  The site is located close to significant local heritage assets. To the south of the site lies 
the Malling Deanery Conservation Area, including the Grade II* St Michaels Church. The  
site also lies within  an area of high archaeological  potential  being  in the vicinity of a 
medieval settlement and the ruins of a college of Benedictine  Canons.  
9.144  The site is located close to the Offham Marshes Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) 
on the opposite side of the River Ouse and adjacent to the Disused Railway Cutting Site 
of Importance  to Nature  Conservation  (SINC)  on the eastern  boundary  of the site. 
9.145  Nevertheless, taking and landscape and ecosystem services led approach a sensitively 
designed scheme could be accommodated at Old Malling Farm. Development should 
take into take into account  the range  of significant  constraints  and impacts  on the SDNP 
and incorporate an appropriate range of mitigation measures and suitable green 
infrastructure.  Site area:  10.0ha (approx. 6.6ha developable)  
Current Use:  Agriculture  
 Environmental 
Constraints:  
 
Flood Risk:  
 
 
 Offham Marshes Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
Disused Railway Cutting Site of Importance  
Nature Conservation (SINC)  
Part of site susceptible to fluvial, tidal and groundwater flooding  
 
 
 290                                            
 9.146  Much of the site is Agricultural Land Classification Grade 2, with some Sub -grade 3a, 
and therefore constitutes best and most versatile agricultural land, the loss of which  is 
to be avoided where possible. However, in this case the few alternative options for 
strategic level residential development around Lewes town have been ruled o ut for 
other reasons, such as being of even greater great landscape sensitivity within the 
National Park.  
9.147  As identified by the SDNPA, landscape mitigation measures must address the  following 
sensitivities:  
 Views from the site to local landmark features including chalk hills, church towers 
and Lewes Castle give this site a strong sense of  place;
 The strong rural, tranquil and natural character of the Ouse Valley with no 
development  apparent  on its eastern  banks,  save for historic  settlement  associated 
with Old Malling Farm and Lewes Malling  Deanery;
 The visually sensitive western edge of the site above the Ouse Valley floor where 
development would intrude into the  valley;
 The site is seen in the context  of the wider  Ouse  Valley  floodplain  when  the site is 
viewed from elevated locations to the east and  west;
 From elevated locations to the west the entire site is clearly visible and visually 
separates the historic settlement of Old Malling Farm and Lewes Malling  Deanery;
 From elevated locations to the east the northern field of the site is visually 
prominent and is seen as part of the wider Ouse Valley corridor;  and
 The Ouse corridor to the north of Lewes was included in the South Downs 
National Park as providing a high quality setting to Lewes town for reas ons of its 
intrinsic scenic attraction, cultural heritage and nature  conservation. 
9.148  Various measures are suggested to address these, including development on parts of 
the site only and at a lower density, and pulling development back and away from the 
weste rn, southern and northern parts of the site. Other suggestions  include:  
 Providing only limited night lighting on the site and the use of low level lighting 
where  required;
 Ensuring the use of dark colours for  roofs;
 Retaining views out of the site to surro unding  landmarks; 
 Retaining some areas of floodplain with no access;  and
 Ensuring that any improved access to the floodplain does not unduly extend 
urbanising  influences,  including  that signage  and surfaces,  gates and fencing  are low 
key.
9.149  These  various  measures  will be reviewed  and considered  for inclusion  in a Design  Brief. 
This will be informed by a detailed site appraisal, which shall include as 3D computer 
modelling  of the site and its context;  appropriate  Verified  Photomontages;  and Zone  of 
Theoreti cal Visibility plots from appropriate locations within the  site. 
 291                                            
 The design  of buildings  should  reinforce  local distinctiveness  through  the use of suitable 
materials and vernacular. It is considered by the SDNPA that the site has potential to 
deliver a scheme with a contemporary vernacular although suitable traditional  designs  
would  also be welcomed.  Boundary  treatments  and roof materials  should  be particularly 
sensitively designed and appropriate for the local  context.  
9.150  There  is an existing  access  bridge  over the disused  railway  cutting  providing  single  track 
access  to Old Malling  Farm from Old Malling  Way.  A further  double  width  access  point 
onto Monks Way, which is at grade and currently used for agricultural vehicles, is 
situated  at the northern  end of the site. Monks  Way would  form the principal  access  to 
the site, with the railway  bridge  providing  secondary  access  for pedestrians,  cyclists  and 
emergency use, as well as access to the former farm  buildings.  
9.151  Through the Green Infrastructure Strategy  and a Travel Plan  the development should 
provide a strategic network of non -vehicular routes that link the site to the adjacent 
open countryside, residential areas, open spaces and Lewes town centre. This includes 
improving  existing  routes  where  necessary  and providing  suitably  designed  new routes.  
9.152  Transport  evidence  shows  that significant  development  of this site should  be contingent 
on highway improvement works at the Earwig corner junction of the A26 with the 
B2192 on the edge of the town to the east of  the site. This is a junction that already 
experiences  congestion,  particularly  at peak times,  and therefore  the further  strain  from 
new development (including from other development in Lewes town and at Ringmer) 
will need to be  mitigated.  
9.153  Development cons istent with this policy, as well as other development in the area will 
enable this mitigation to occur, possibly through a traffic light system to improve the 
flow of traffic  through  the junction.  In addition,  mitigation  measures  associated  with the 
impact  of development at Old Malling Farm will be required at the critical junction of 
Church Lane / Malling Hill and at the Brooks Road / Phoenix Causeway roundabout, in 
agreement with the local highway authority. Traffic calming measures are also  required 
to reduce the amount of existing traffic using the access roads to the site so that they 
can accommodate the additional traffic movements that will be generated by the 
development.  
9.154  The development  will provide  a connection  to the sewerage  system  at the nearest  point 
of adequate capacity as advised by the service  provider.  
9.155  Most of the site is at low risk of fluvial flooding apart from the area closest to the 
northern boundary which is prone to both fluvial and tidal flooding. The site access is 
at risk from pote ntial surface water flooding. Groundwater emergence is most likely in 
the north of the site within the floodplain, where the water table is close to the 
surface. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site 
specific flood risk as sessment, and the suitability and design of the SuDS.  
9.156  By virtue of the size of the site and the proposed number of residential dwellings 
development proposals could be considered under the Environmental Impact Assessment  
Regulations . As such, it is recomm ended  that formal  pre-application  advice is sought on 
this issue.  
 292                                            
 9.157  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Drainage  Strategy;
 Ecology Assessment which includes a Protected Species Survey and a Biodiversity 
Strategy;
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Hydrological  Assessment; 
 Land Contamination  Survey;
 Landscape Visual Impact  Assessment; 
 Lighting and Noise  Assessments; 
 Topographical Survey;  and
 Transport Assessment. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 293                                            
  Allocation Policy SD79: Land at Old Malling Farm, Lewes  
 
 
 
1. Land at Old Malling Farm is allocated for the development of between 220 and 240 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Development should be informed by a 
comprehensive and integrated Design Brief to be undertaken either by the National 
Park Authority (NPA) or by the applicant and then subject to the NPA’s  approval.  
2. The Design  Brief should be landscape  and ecosystem  services  led and include  a 
Green Infrastructure Strategy and a Site Masterplan, both of which should be 
informed by suitable evidence on vehicular and non -vehicular access, arboriculture, 
drainage and flood risk, ecology, heritage, hydrology, lighting and  views.  
3. The Green Infrastructure Strategy should provide a suitable strategic scale 
multifunctional network linking together the site, Lewes and the surrounding open 
countryside  taking  into account  the range  of significant  constraints  and impacts  on 
the South Downs National  Park 
4. The Masterplan should fully set out the Green Infrastructure Strategy, provide a 
suitable hierarchy of vehicular and pedestrian routes and an appropriate transition 
across the site in built form, fab ric and  density.  
5. Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site specific  development  requirements  
will be permitted:  
a) The primary vehicular access point is to be off Monks Way at a point 
opposite Mantell Close;  
b) The existing former railway bridge forms a secondary access point for 
emergency use and an access for pedestrians and cyclists and to the existing 
farm buildings;  
c) Suitably designed access for pedestrians and cyclists should be provided from 
the site to the disused railway line adjacent to the  site; 
d) Development on the site is contingent on appropriate off -site highway 
improvement works, to be provided in agreement with the Local Highway 
Authority,  at the Earwig  corner  junction  of the A26 with the B2192,  the 
junction of Church Lane / Malling Hill and at the Brooks Road / Phoenix 
Causeway roundabout and suitable traffic calming in local roads;  
e) Development should provide sufficient clearance for growing space of existing 
and proposed trees within the site and on all site  boundaries;  
f) Residential developme nt to be located sequentially only within those parts of 
the site outside Fluvial Flood Zones 2 and 3 as defined by the Environment 
Agency;  
294                                            
  
 
 g) Floor levels of habitable areas, where appropriate and proven to be necessary, 
to be designed to take into accou nt flood risk and climate change;  
h) Safe vehicular and pedestrian emergency access and egress  to be provided 
taking into account flood risk;  
i) An appropriate surface water and foul water drainage strategy is agreed with 
relevant authorities and service  provid ers; 
j) Development  shall incorporate  views  within,  to and from the site to 
surrounding landmarks and features including from the elevated chalk hills to 
the east and west, from Hamset to the north, and from Lewes  itself;  
k) Residential  development  is restricted  to the parts of the site above  the 10 
metre contour in the northern field and further than 20 metres from the 
western  and southern  boundary  in the southern  field. Through  appropriate  
landscaping  these areas should provide a suitable transition to the adja cent 
Ouse  Valley;  
l) Impacts on tranquillity, dark night skies and biodiversity should be minimised 
through appropriate mitigation and good design;  and 
m) Suitable on -site equipped play space for  youngsters.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positi ve impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Provision of suitable pedestrian and cycle links to the adjacent countryside 
and to the existing rights of way  networ k; 
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees on 
the site boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be 
undertaken particularly at th e western and eastern fringes of the site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
d) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  
surface water  run-off. 
 295                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD79  
Land at Old Malling  Farm 
Lewes   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30  40 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD79  
Land at Old 
Malling Farm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 5,800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
296                                            
 MALLING BROOKS, LEWES  
9.158  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. This is a large greenfield site within the 
settlement boundary for Lewes, between the edge of the principal employment site of 
Central Lewes, which is safeguarded under policy SD35 and resid ential areas to the 
north  and east. Most of the site was previously  allocated  for employment  in the former 
Lewes  Local  Plan Planning  permission  has been granted  for a number  of schemes  on the 
site including  landscaping122. Preparatory  construction  works  began  on the site in summer 
2015, including clearance of the  site. 
9.159  The site is owned by one of the owners of North Street Quarter, which is a strategic 
site allocated in this plan. In 2016 that development was granted planning permission 
for redevelopment,  including a substantial net loss of employment floorspace. The 
committee report recommending approval of that application made note of the 
likelihood that “redevelopment of the North Street Quarter may … trigger the 
implementation of industrial developmen t at Malling Brooks… which indicates a 
reasonable supply of industrial floorspace.” The Employment Land Review Update 2017123 
found that the site should be allocated for employment use, since it constitutes an 
important element of the supply of new employm ent land in the National  Park. 
9.160  The site formerly had the character of ‘brooks’; that is, pastureland drained by 
numerous ditches, which had become overgrown by mature trees. The site is visible in 
views from the hills surrounding Lewes, and partially scree ns the adjacent industrial 
estate  from some  views.  There  are numerous  records  of protected  and notable  species 
in the area and most notably of reptiles on  site. 
9.161  The whole site is within Flood Risk Zone 3A. However, it is defended by the flood 
defences protecting the wider Brooks Road area, and commercial  / industrial uses are 
defined as ‘less vulnerable’ in flood risk terms an d in principle appropriate for Z one 3A. 
A Flood  Risk Assessment  including  Sequential  Test accompanied  the original  application 
for the site. A new watercourse  is proposed  to be constructed  through  the landscaped 
belt around the northern and eastern sides of the site, draining into an existing 
watercourse  which  runs through  the broader  industrial  estate  and into the Ouse  behind 
the Tesco  superstore.  As well as a performing  a drainage  role this feature  will also partly 
mitigate the loss of the former habitats which covered the central portion of the site, 
and buffer adjacent residential areas from the new industrial  units.  
 
122 Planning applications LW/07/1608, LW/12/0342/NP, SDNP/13/02119/NMA, SDNP/16/01255/FUL and 
SDNP/13/04579/DCOND  
123  Employment Land Review Update (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)  Site area: 
Current Use:  
Flood Risk:  2.67ha  
Cleared woodland  
The whole site is within Flood Risk Zone 3  297                                            
 9.161  The roofs  of the industrial  units are proposed  as green  roofs,  which  in combination  with 
the landscape strip will mitigate the impact of the development in wider views. Natural 
England  and the Environment  Agency  raised  no objection  to the scheme,  conditional  on 
the implementation in full of recommendations from the relevant studies that 
accompanied the 2007 application. Since the site has now been largely cleared of 
vegetation it is of additional importance to ensure that these measu res are carried 
forward into any potential revised  scheme.  
9.162  Due to its former wetland nature the site has been identified as having high potential 
for wetland archaeology, including prehistoric organic  remains.  
9.163  There are two historic landfill records overlapping the boundaries of the site and the 
southern end of the site is also within HSE Outer and to some degree Middle Zones, 
However, the latter zones are centred on a site already developed for housing and it  is 
considered that these constraints can be overcome by  condition.  
9.164  A public footpath cuts across the north -western end of the site. The development will 
retain  much  of this footpath  within  the landscaping  belt, but a portion  of it will run past 
one of the proposed  buildings.  This footpath  provides  a link from the South  Malling  area 
into the industrial estate and towards the town centre, and its attractiveness to 
pedestrians must be protected and  enhanced.  
9.165  The main principles of development are already set out in the existing planning 
permis sions on the site, in particular the detailed specifications relating to flood risk 
management,  landscaping  and biodiversity.  It is considered  necessary  to allocate  the site 
to ensure any future changed proposals that come forward continues to accord with 
those  requirements.  In addition,  the development  of the site is needed  to accommodate 
businesses displaced from the North Street Quarter development and for that reason it  
is essential  the site comes  forward  for the proposed  uses in parallel  with the strategic 
site. 
9.166  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Archaeological surveys, including fieldwork  assessment; 
 A transport assessment and travel plan to the satisfaction of the Highway 
Authority; 
 A scheme for the provision of surface water drainage works, including details of 
underground  storage  tanks  to attenuate  flows  to the main drainage  system,  where 
required;  and
 A scheme to deal with the risks associated with contamination of the  site.298                                            
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD80 Malling Brooks, Lewes  
1. Land at Malling Brooks, Lewes is allocated for the development of approximately 
7,040m2 of B1/B2/B8 employment uses and appropriate landscaping. Planning 
permission will not be granted for any other uses. Detail ed proposals that meet the 
following site specific development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Landscaping to retain and enhance the previous ecological connectivity of the 
site, to cover  around  30% of the site. The northern  and eastern  sections  of the 
site must provide broad landscape strips of at least 20m, planted with native 
species and incorporating a watercourse, in accordance with the plans 
submitted with planning applications SDNP/13/04579/DCOND  and 
SDNP/13/02155/FUL , and appropriate  manageme nt proposals  secured  through 
Section 106  agreement;  
b) All main roofs on the site should take the form of green  roofs;  
c) Protection and enhancement of the footpath running through the  site; 
d) The phasing of development to be coordinated with that of the North Street 
Quarter  to provide  a smooth  transition  for businesses  displaced  from the latter 
site; 
e) Development to be undertaken in accordance with the recommendations of 
the Flood Risk Assessment dated 8th November 2006 (Revision  F Feb 2009)  
accompanying Planning Application  LW/07/1608 ; 
f) Development  to be undertaken  in accordance  with the findings  and conclusions 
of the Ecological  Assessment  Report  dated  December  2007 Revision  1 and the 
Ecological Design Strategy dated December 207 Revision 3 , accompanying 
Planning Application LW/07/1608 ; and 
g) Parking  spaces  ancillary  to the development,  at a level acceptable  to the highway 
authority.  
 299                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD80 
Malling Brooks 
Lewes   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Employment  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Employment Allocation  
 
 
0     10     20     30    40    50 100 150 200 250 300 350 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD80  
Malling 
Brooks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 3,100  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
300                                            
 MIDHURST  
9.167  Midhurst is a historic market town  set in the Western Weald of the National Park. It 
lies on the River Rother  12 miles north of Chichester.  Just across the River Rother,  in 
the parish of Easebourne,  is the ruin of the Tudor  Cowdray House.  The population of 
Midhurst in 2011 was approximately 5,000  people.  
9.168  In the post -war period the population expanded significantly with the construction of 
modern  suburbs.  These  were,  however,  built entirely  outside  the historic  core and had 
no significant impact  on its historic structure and character. Midhurst’s historic core 
exhibits an unusual degree of autonomy and separation from later phases of expansion 
due to the topographic  and ownership  characteristics  of the surrounding  landscape.  The 
physical proximit y and influence of the Cowdray estate is one of Midhurst’s special 
features whose spacious, managed natural environment confers stately qualities upon 
the town.  
9.169  The busy area of North Street and surrounding streets contain a mix of both multiple 
retailers  and many  independent  stores,  restaurants  and cafes.  The town  contains  a good 
mix of services  and facilities  including  primary  schools,  the Grange  Community  Centre, 
and the Midhurst Rother College which serves a large area stretching well beyond the 
town.  
STRATEGIC HOUSING ALLOCATION: WEST SUSSEX COUNTY 
COUNCIL DEPOT AND FORMER BRICKWORKS, MIDHURST  
Site area:  2.7ha  
Current Use:  Council depot; public household recycling facility; 
aggregate storage and processing; vehicle and plant hire  
Environmental Designation:  Adjacent to Site of Importance for Nature 
Conservation, Local Wildlife Site, and Priority Habitat 
Area 
Stedham, Iping, Woolbeding Crescent Biodiversity 
Opportunity Area  
Flood risk:  Risk of surface water flooding  
9.170  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals  should  address  Core  Policy  SD3. This strategic  housing  allocation  site consists 
of two adjacent land parcels. The West Sussex County Council (WSCC) Depot is a 
partially derelict area of prev iously developed land, currently used to accommodate 
various local authority operations, with a small amount of office accommodation. 
Approximately 0.2 hectares of the depot site is used as the main public household 
recycling depositary for Midhurst. The Employment Land Review Update124 concluded that 
the WSCC  depot  site was a poor quality  under -occupied  site that should  be considered 
for other  uses. 
 
124  Employment Land Review Update (South Downs National Park Authority, 2017)  301                                            
 9.171  The former  Midhurst  Brickworks,  famed  for producing  “Midhurst  White”  bricks,  closed 
in 1985 and is currently occupied by a company that stores and processes aggregate. 
Some of the original structures remain in situ on site, but are in a state of dereliction. 
This site is also substantially underused, and hence in need of  regeneration.  
9.172  It is considered  that the two parcels  together  offer a substantial  opportunity  to improve 
the local environment for this corner of Midhurst, by providing a housing -led scheme. 
The National Park Authority will be producing a Development Brief for the allocation 
site and will expect proposals to accord with the Brief. A Concept Plan (over leaf), 
which will form the design principles to be provided in the Development Brief, sets out 
the extent of the proposed built development and key topographical features.  
9.173  The site is located  adjacent  to sensitive  heathland  and woodland  at Midhurst  Common , 
which is a Local Wildlife Site (LWS), and identified as a Site of Importance for Nature 
Conservation (SINC). Furthermore, parts of the site have been identified as potential 
habitats for protected and notable species. The site includes an area that is pa rt of the 
Stedham, Iping, Woolbeding Crescent Biodiversity Opportunity  Area.  
9.174  Therefore,  using an ecosystem  services  approach,  development  on the site will need to 
deliver positive benefits to Midhurst Common, in respect of wildlife, setting and green 
infrastructure. Development should enhance identified ecological networks, and 
provide for heathland restoration and creation. It will be particularly important to 
ensure  an appropriate  interface  between  build development  and the adjacent  heathland 
and woodland,  for example  through  providing  a wildlife  buffer  as a ‘soft’ urban  / heathland 
interface,  and carefully  designed  wildlife  corridors  through  the site. The possible  impacts 
of the development  on bats in general  and barbastelle  bats in particular  should  be taken 
into account  as part of the development  control  process.  If mature  hedgerows  / treelines 
and foraging opportunities can be preserved it is likely that no issues will  arise.  
9.175  A further key objective will be to provide high -quality pedestrian links through the site 
which improves public access to the Common. These should be achieved through 
partnership  working  with the National  Park Authority  and other  relevant  stakeholders.  
9.176  The Authority will expect the respective landowners to work closely, t o achieve and 
deliver a comprehensive masterplan, to ensure an exemplar development befitting this 
sensitive part of the National Park. It will be necessary to safeguard a vehicular access 
from the existing  (or equivalent)  access  from Bepton  Road  into and through  the Depot 
site, to residential development on the former Brickworks site such that traffic need 
not pass along Station Road and through the Midhurst Business  Park. 
9.177  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies : 
 Archaeological  Assessment; 
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Ecology Assessment and Protected Species  Survey;
 Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Management  Plan;
 Ground Stability  Survey;302                                            
  Land Contamination  Survey;
 Lighting Assessment;  and
 Project Level Habitats Regulations Assessment.  
Strategic Allocation Policy SD81: West Sussex County Council Depot 
and former Brickworks site, Midhurst  
 
1. The West Sussex County Council Depot and former Brickworks site is allocated for  
a residential -led development (class C3 use). A masterplan for the whole site should 
be submitted as part of any Outline or Full planning application. Development for 
between approximately 65 to 90 dwellings will be permitted. Development for other 
comple mentary uses will be permitted where such uses are justified through the 
whole -site masterplan, and are shown to meet a local need. Planning permission will 
not be granted for any proposals which prejudice the whole of the site being bought 
forward for dev elopment. The National Park Authority will prepare a Development 
Brief to assist  the delivery  of the site. Detailed  proposals  that are in broad  
conformity with the Development Brief and that meet the following site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Deliver an ecosystem services -led solution to mitigate the sensitive interface 
with Midhurst Common, provide positive enhancements to wildlife habitats 
within and surrounding the site, and contribute to the aims of the Stedham, 
Iping, Woolbeding Cresence Biodiversity Opportunity  Area;  
b) To demonstrate  that there  would  be no likely significant  effect  on the 
Singleton and Cocking Tunnels Special Area of  Conservation;  
c) Provide wildlife corridors within the site as part of a site -specific Wild life 
Management and Enhancement  Plan; 
d) Provide high -quality pedestrian links through the site linking into Midhurst 
Common and hence the long distance Serpent  Trail; 
e) Retain,  or relocate  to an appropriate  location  to be approved  by the 
Authority, the  Household  Recycling  Facility  ensuring  an equivalent  standard  
and capacity  of provision;  
f) Safeguard a suitable vehicular access route through the Depot site to allow 
for vehicular access to the former Brickworks site direct from Bepton  Road;  
g) Provide a pedest rian / cycle / emergency vehicle access to the former 
Brickworks site from Station Road;   
h) Provide suitable on -site surface water  drainage and;  
i) The location of new housing and access roads  to have regard to localised areas 
of potential surface water flood risk. 
 
j)  
 
 
303                                            
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute ecosystem services, development proposals 
should address the  following:  
a) Provision of suitable pedestrian and cycle links to the adjacent countryside and 
to the existing rights of way  network;  
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new t ree planting on site. Trees on the 
site boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be  undertaken;  
c) Retain suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
d) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface 
water  run-off. 
3. The National Park Authority will prepare a Development Brief to assist the delivery 
of the site.  Development proposals in broad conformity with the Development Brief 
will be permitted.  
 
 304                                            
 
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD81  
West Sussex County Council Depot and 
former Brickworks site  
Midhurst  
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0    10   20    30   40   50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD81  
West Sussex County Council Depot and 
former Brickworks site  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 3,600  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
305                                            
 
SD81: WSCC DEPOT & B RICKWORKS, MIDHURST:  CONCEPT  PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 306                                            
  
STRATEGIC HOUSING ALLOCATION: HOLMBUSH CARAVAN SITE, 
MIDHURST  
Site area:  Approximately 5.0ha 
Current Use:  Former caravan site and large pond  
Environmental Designations:  Tree Preservation Order  
Flood Risk:  Fluvial flood zones 2/3; Groundwater flooding; Some 
surface water flood risk at site boundaries  
9.178  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. This strategic housing allocation site is 
previously developed land comprising a disused caravan site centred on a large pond. 
The site would appear to be located in an historic mineral extraction site and has 
notably visual advantages being contained within a bowl in the townscape of Midhurst 
and well scree ned by mature  trees.  
9.162  The National Park Authority will be producing a Development Brief for the allocation 
site and will expect proposals to accord with the Brief. A Concept Plan (overleaf), 
which will form the design principles to be provided in the Development Brief, sets out  
the extent of the proposed built development and key topographical features.  
9.161  The Authority will expect the site promoters to deliver an exemplar ecosystem -led 
development which delivers a suitable housing scheme in conjunction with local 
environmental im provements. Given its landscape context it is considered that the site 
could be suitable for housing of either contemporary or traditional  design.  
9.162  Development  on the site will need to deliver  positive  benefits  to biodiversity  within  the 
site such as wildli fe corridors and connected to green infrastructure outside the site. 
The site has an existing Tree Preservation Order. Development proposals should 
include strategies for improving and maintaining the quality of waterbodies within the 
site. Trees worthy of  retention should be identified. Development proposals should 
include  an arboricultural  strategy  which  sets out improvements  to the treescape  of the 
site. The possible  impacts  of the development  on bats in general  and barbastelle  bats 
in particular should be taken into account as part of the development control 
process.  If mature  hedgerows  / treelines  and foraging  opportunities  can be preserved 
it is likely that no issues will  arise.  
9.163  The site has flood risk issues. The centre of the site in within the EA fluvial flood risk 
zones 2 and 3. There is some areas of surface water flood risk in areas adjacent to the 
site boundary. The site is identified as an area of high groundwater floor risk. As such, 
development proposals should be supported by suitable flood  risk assessments and 
hydrogeological  surveys.  The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides 
recommendation for a site specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and design 
of SuDS.  
 
 307                                            
 9.164  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the follow ing evidence 
studies:  
 Development  Masterplan 
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Ecology Assessment incorporating a Protected Species  Survey;
 Flood Risk  Assessment; 
 Ground Stability  Survey;
 Hydrogeological  Survey;
 Land Contamination  Survey;
 Landscape Visual Impact  Assessment; 
 Lighting  Assessment; 
 Project Level Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA);  and                                         
 Transport Assessment. 308                                            
  Strategic Allocation Policy SD82: Holmbush Caravan Park, Midhurst  
 
1. Holmbush Caravan Park, Midhurst is allocated for the development of 50 to 70 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. The National Park Authority will prepare a Development Brief to assist the 
delivery of the site. Detailed proposals that are in broad conformity with the 
Development  Brief and that meet the following  site specific  development  requirements 
will be  permitted:  
a) To provide positive enhancements to the treescape, waterbodies, wildlife 
corridors and habitats within the  site; 
b) To demonstrate  that there  would  be no likely significant  effect  on the 
Singleton and Cocking Tunnels Special Area of  Conservation;  
c) Built development to be located sequentially only within those parts of the 
site outside Fluvial Flood Zones 2 and 3 as defined by the Environment  
Agency;  
d) Floor levels of habitable areas, w here appropriate and proven to be necessary, 
to be designed  to take into account flood risk and climate change;  
e) Safe vehicular and pedestrian emergency access and egress should be 
provided during flooding;  
f) Incorporation of suitable site boundary  treatment s; 
g) Provision  of pedestrian  routes  through  the site linking  into adjacent  open 
spaces; and  
h) Retention and improvement of, where necessary, the existing vehicular  access.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute ecosystem services, development proposals must 
address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible. Trees on the site 
boundary should be retained and new tree planting should be  undertaken;  
b) Retain  suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  
surface water  run-off. 
3. The National Park Authority will prepare a Development Brief to assist the delivery 
of the site. Development proposals in broad conformity with the Development Brief 
will be  permitted.  
 
 
 
 
309                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD82 
Holmbu sh Caravan  Park 
Midhurst   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0      10     20     30    40    50 100 150 200 250 300 350 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD82  
Holmbush 
Caravan Park  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 3,000  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 
 
310                                            
 
SD82: HOLMBUSH CARAVAN PAR K, MIDHURST  : CONCEPT PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 311                                            
 LAND AT THE FAIRWAY, MIDHURST  
 
9.165  The site is located  within  the southern  suburbs  of Midhurst,  with access  off The Fairway. 
A large mature hornbeam tree within the site, which is subject to a Tree Preservation 
Order, contributes to the character of the site. A disused railway tunnel entrance in 
the southeast  corner  of the site provides  historical  character  and context.  The possible 
impacts of the development on bats in general and barbastelle bats i n particular should 
be taken into account as part of the development control  process.  
9.166  The developable area of the site consists of informal residential parking for the three 
apartment blocks, together with landscaped areas. The land is considered to be under - 
used at present,  and suitable  for a well-designed  residential  development  that enhances 
the character of the area and draws attention to its special features. Given the 
surrounding context and topography, flatted development of a suitable scale woul d be 
an appropriate  development.  
9.167  Development proposals will be expected to provide, where necessary, an appropriate 
level of car parking, in line with adopted standards, for both the existing flats (Perth 
House, Adelaide House and Brisbane House) and the n ew dwellings.  
9.168  The site is located at an area where the Centurion Way, an existing long distance 
footpath between Chichester and West Dean, may be incorporated in the future. As 
such, development proposals should not prejudice future potential access for 
pedestrians and cyclists in line with policy SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian 
Routes.  It is recommended  that land for suitable  route  at the edge of the site is suitably 
reserved.  
9.169  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Protected Species Survey;  and
 Project Level Habitats Regulations  Assessment. 










Site area: 0.1ha  
Current Use:  Residential  car parking 
Environmental  Designation:  Tree Preservation  Order  312                                            
 




Allocation Policy SD83: Land at the Fairway,  Midhurst  
1. Land at the Fairway, Midhurst is allocated for the development of 8 to 10 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any other uses. 
Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development requi rements 
will be  permitted:  
a) The existing hornbeam tree will be retained, and an appropriate protective 
buffer  applied;  
b) The development will enhance the setting of the old railway tunnel entrance, 
and ensure that there are public views to  it; 
c) Development mus t provide car parking to appropriately replace existing 
provision, and additionally provide parking for the new development;  and 
d) To demonstrate that there would be no likely significant effect on the 
Singleton and Cocking Tunnels Special Area of  Conservation.  
. 
 
 
 
 313                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD83 
Land at the  Fairway 
Midhurst   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 8 16 24 32 40 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD83  
Land at the 
Fairway  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 400  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
314                                            
 LAND AT LAMBERTS LANE, MIDHURST  
Site area: 0.4 hectares  
Current Use:  Disused youth club, WI meeting hall and  tennis  / netball  courts  
 Flood  risk: Surface water flooding on sports court at northern  boundary  
9.170  The site is a previously developed site which is sustainably located close to Midhurst 
town  centre.  The larger  part of the allocation  site was formerly  part of the old Midhurst 
Grammar School site. This included 3 hard surfaced tennis  / netball courts, and a single 
storey building previously used by a youth group, which has now been replaced by a 
modern building on a separate site to the north. A small portion was formerly owned 
by the Women’s Institute and occupied by a small meeting hall. Both buildings and the 
tennis  / netball courts are now vacant and  derelict.  
9.171  The site is accessed via Lamberts  Lane, which is a narrow residential road, constrained 
at both ends by historic buildings and fabric acting to limit its width and visibility. A 
Transport Statement will be required which in particular addresses whether Lamberts 
Lane and associated  junctio ns can safely  accommodate  the planned  development  set out 
in this allocation and the adjacent allocation, Land at Park Crescent (Local Plan Policy 
SD85 ). The lowermost part of the site and the proposed site access is at risk from 
surface water flooding.  The Level 1 Update and Leve l 2 SFRA provided 
recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and design 
of SuDS.   
9.172  Given the site is contiguous with the allocation site Land at Park Crescent vehicular 
access should be provided through this allocation site. The scheme design and layout 
should ensure that a through vehicular and pedestrian route is provided. Development 
proposals which prejudice the development of the adjacent allocation site will not be 
permitted.  
9.173  The site is located  on the edge of the Midhurst  Conservation  Area,  and within  20 metres 
of a Grade II listed building, Lassiters Cottage, which lies to the east. Development 
proposals  will be required  to respond  positively  to the area’s  historic  character  and the 
setting of the listed building and conservation area. Particular attention should be  given 
to enhancing the frontage onto Lamberts Lane. The possible impacts of the 
development on bats in general and barbastelle bats in particular should be taken 
into account as part of the development control process. If mature hedgerows  / 
treelines and foraging opportunities can be preserved it is likely that no issues will  
arise.  
9.174  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence 
studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and 
associated Tree Protection  Plan;
 Archaeological  survey;
 Heritage  Statement; 
 Surface Water Flood Risk Assessment and Management  Plan315                                            
  Project Level Habitats Regulations Assessment;  and
 Transport  Statement. 
Allocation Policy SD84: Land at Lamberts Lane, Midhurst  
 
1. Land at Lamberts  Lane,  Midhurst  is allocated  for the development  of approximately  
20 residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for 
any other uses. Planning permission will not be granted for development which 
precludes vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent allocation sites. Detailed 
proposals that meet the following site specific development requirements will be  
permitted:  
a) Development must conserve and enhance the setting of the Midhurst 
Conservation Area and preserve the setting of Lassiters  Cottage;  
b) Vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided through the site to allow 
common  access  from Lamberts  Lane to the adjacent  site Land at Park 
Crescent (P olicy SD85);  
c) The location of new housing  and access roads to  have regard to localised areas 
of potential surface water flood risk; and  
d) To demonstrate that there would be no likely significant effect on the 
Singleton and Cocking Tunnels Special Area of  Conservation.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute ecosystem services, development proposals must 
address the  following:  
a) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees 
are lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees 
should be  retained  and additional  planting  should  be undertaken  at the site 
boundaries; and  
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surf aces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  
surface water  run-off. 
. 
 
 
 
 
316                                            
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD84  
Land at Lamberts Lane 
Midhurst   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD84  
Land at Lamberts 
Lane 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 317                                              
 LAND AT PARK CRESCENT, MIDHURST  
 
9.175  The site is located northwest of the historic core of Midhurst, on the edge of the 
settlement. It consists of a large area of residential garden in the curtilage  of 12 Park 
Crescent,  together  with smaller  portions  of the gardens  for 9, 10 and 11 Park Crescent 
respectively. The site is contiguous to the east with the site Land at Lamberts Lane (Policy 
SD84 ), with open sports fields to the north, and a steep incline  up to Midhurst Tennis 
Club forming the western  boundary.  
9.176  The site is located close to Midhurst town centre, and in principle a modest -scale 
residential development would be considered suitable to help meet housing  need.  
9.177  The site is generally well -screened  from the public realm. However, views of the site can 
be gained from Lamberts Lane across the open sports pitches that serve Midhurst and 
Rother College. The site contains three prominent trees that contribute to the wider 
character of the area. These trees should be preserved in situ. To do so will require a 
carefully considered site layout, which avoids buildings intruding on the semi - wooded 
western portion of the site. The possible impacts of the development on bats  in general  
and barbastelle  bats in particular  should  be taken  into account  as part of the development 
control process. If mature hedgerows  / treelines and foraging opportunities can be 
preserved it is likely that no issues will  arise. 
9.178  The current vehicular access to the site is the side acc ess to 12 Park Crescent, which is 
not considered adequate to provide access to new homes, given its restricted width and 
close proximity to neighbouring properties. Access will therefore need to be provided  
from Lamberts  Lane via the adjacent  allocated  site and not via Park Crescent. Lamberts 
Lane is a narrow residential road, constrained at both ends by historic buildings and fabric 
acting to limit its width and  visibility.  
9.179  A Transport  Statement  will be required  which  in particular  addresses  whether  Lamberts 
Lane can safely accommodate the increase in vehicle movements that will arise from the 
proposed  development.  The site is also at risk of potential surface water or groundwater 
flooding to access. A site specific flood risk assessment should theref ore accompany any 
planning application for this site and should particularly consider the flood risk to access 
and egress. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site 
specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and design  of SuDS.  
9.180  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence studies:  
 Transport  Statement;  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection  Plan; 
 Project Level Habitats Regulations Assessment;   
 Protected Species  Survey  and; Site area: 0.3 hectares  
Current Use:  Residential  gardens   318                                              
  Flood Risk Assessment.  
 Allocation Policy SD85: Land at Park Crescent, Midhurst  
 
1. Land at Park Crescent, Midhurst is allocated for the development of between 8 and 
12 residential  dwellings  (class  C3 use). Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided to the site through the 
adjacent allocation site Land at Lamberts Lan e (Policy  SD84);  
b) All necessary vehicular parking should be provided on -site to avoid additional 
on street parking in local  roads;  
c) Protection and enhancement of existing mature trees within the site;   
d) To demonstrate  that there  would  be no likely significant  effect  on the Singleton 
and Cocking Tunnels Special Area of  Conservation, and;  
e) Provision of a site specific SFRA that considers the flood risk to access and 
egress.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Additional planting should be undertaken at site boundaries;  and 
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on  site. 
. 
 
 
 
 
 319                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD85  
Land at Park  Crescent 
Midhurst   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD85  
Land at Park 
Crescent  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 320                                              
 OFFHAM (EAST SUSSEX)  
9.181  Offham  is a small village  on the A275  just north  of Lewes.  Nearby  Cooksbridge  contains 
local services and  facilities.  
OFFHAM BARNS, NORTH OF OFFHAM FILLING STATION, THE 
STREET, OFFHAM  
9.182  The site is located between Lewes and Cooksbridge  on the eastern side of the A275, 
and just to the south of its junction with the B2116. The allocation will enable a small 
northern  extension  of the existing  Gypsy  & Traveller  site at Offham  Barns,  north  of the 
Offham Road Service Station, to take  place.  
9.183  The site as a whole is bordered on its southern and western boundary by mature 
hedging.  The existing  caravans  and mobile  homes  are separated  from the northern  part 
of the site by a further hedge. To the east is a large open field. The site is flat and set 
slightly  below  the field levels.The  existing  Gypsy  & Traveller  site is well established  and 
contains four pitches plus stabling and  horses.  There is a localised area of surface water 
ponding that occupies a significant part of the site. The site is also si tuated on the side 
of a dry valley. While most groundwater emergence will occur in the base of the valley, 
spring flow may also occur in the valley sides in particularly wet periods. The Level 1 
Update and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site s pecific flood risk 
assessment and the sui tability and design of the SuDS.   
9.184  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be suitably  informed  by the following  evidence 
studies:  
 Foul Sewerage and Utilities Assessment;  
 Lighting  Assessment  and; 
 Flood Risk Assessment including Surface Water Management Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Site area: 
Current use:  
0.3 ha  
Gypsy & Traveller site   321                                              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD86: Offham Barns, Offham  
1. Land at Offham Barns, Offham is allocated for the development of four permanent 
Gypsy  and Traveller  pitches.  Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any other  uses. 
Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site specific  development  requirements  will 
be permitted:  
a) Laid out to ensure sufficient room is available to allow vehicles to turn around 
within the  site; 
b) Surface water drainage must be controlled on site and foul drainage must be 
effectively treated before  discharge;  
c) The location of pitches  and new access roads  to have regard to areas of surface 
water flooding and potential groundwater emergence;  
d) Designed to avoid an increase in the feeling of urbanisation in this location, 
including  keeping  any associated  buildings  to a minimum  in both number  and scale;  
e) Contain significant planting in order to break up the hardstanding that will be 
required and reduce the urbanising impact of an increase in the site  size; 
f) Existing hedgerows bordering the site must be retained and reinforced;  and 
g) The development should be occupied only by those who fulfil the definition of a 
Gypsy or  Traveller.  
 
 
 
 
  322                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Site: SD86 
Offham Barns 
Offham  South Downs Local Plan Pre -submission 
Gypsy and Traveller Site Allocation  
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Gypsy and Traveller site allocation 
SDNP Boundary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
SD86 
Offham 
Barns, 
Offham  
¯ 
Scale at A4  1:600  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 323                                              
 PYECOMBE  
9.185  Pyecombe is a village and civil parish  located on the Dip Slope approximately 11 km to 
the north of Brighton.  Pyecombe parish has a population of  237. 
LAND AT CHURCH LANE, PYECOMBE  
 
9.186  The allocation site comprises an existing planning consents (SDNP/15/04137/FUL) for 
residential development comprising a total of 8  dwellings.  Site area : 1.0 ha  
Allocation Policy SD87: Land at Church Lane, Pyecombe  
1. Land at Church  Lane,  Pyecombe  is allocated  for up to 8 residential  dwellings  (C3 use). 
Planning permission will not be granted for any other  uses 
 
 
 
 
  324                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref:  SD87 
Land at Church  Lane 
Pyecombe   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 200 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD87  
Land 
at Church Lane  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 325                                              
 SELBORNE  
9.187  Selborne is an historic village located on the Scarp Slope in the north -west of the National 
Park. Selborne is most famous for its association wit h the eminent naturalist Revd. 
Gilbert  White.  
LAND TO THE REAR OF KETCHERS FIELD, SELBORNE  
Site area:  0.2ha 
Current use:  Agricultural  
Environmental Designation:  Wealden Heath Special Protection Area; Hampshire 
Hangers Biodiversity Opportunity Area  
Flood  Risk: Surface and Groundw ater Flood Risk  
Heritage Designation:  Selborne Conservation Area to north of site  
9.188  The allocation site is located in the south of the village beyond the historic core in the 
Selborne Conservation Area, adjacent to an existing area of modern  housing.  
9.189  The allocation site is suitable for modern housing but given its location on the edge of 
Selborne  the appropriate  use of local traditional  materials  and vernacular  that reinforces 
local distinctiveness  would  also be welcomed.  Development  should  provide  suitable  site 
boundaries given the open countryside to the  east. 
9.190  Development must include suitable vehicular access and on -site parking. The likely access 
is an existing Public Right of Way and as such development is dependent on  this being 
suitable for vehicular use. Where vehicular access is dependent on off -site improvement 
works these should be delivered through a planning obligation. Development  should  be 
served  by sufficient  suitable  off-street  vehicular  parking  to avoid add itional pressure on 
local roads.  
9.191  A small area in the lowermost part of the site along its south eastern boundary and the 
proposed access is at risk from surface water flooding. New development would need 
to ensure that surface water runoff was suitably add ressed. Development may be 
required to be accompanied by a groundwater  study.  The Level 1 Update and Level 2 
SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and the 
suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.192  Development should contribute towa rds the aims of the Hampshire Hangers Biodiversity  
Opportunity  Area.  The site is located  290 metres  from the Wealden  Heath Special 
Protection Area and as such development proposals should provide suitable mitigation.  
9.193  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection  Plan; 
 Highways  Assessment;  
 Project Level Habitats Regulations Assessment;  and 
 Surface Water Flood Risk Assessmen t and Management  Plan.  326                                              
  
 Allocation Policy SD88: Land at Ketchers Field, Selborne  
                                 
1. Land at Ketchers  Field,  Selborne  is allocated  for the development  of 5 to 6 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use).  Planning permission will not be granted for  any other  uses. 
Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development requirements 
will be  permitted:  
a) A suitable  transition  in built form and fabric  from the housing  to the west to the 
open countryside to the  east; 
b) Site boundaries sympathetic to the local  landscape;  
c) Vehicular  access  compatible  with non-vehicular  users  of, and not harmful  to the 
amenity of, the existing Public Right of  Way;  
d) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in local  roads;  
e) The internal site layout should provide suitable turning provision for a long 
wheel based  vehicle;  
f) Appropriate mitigation for the impact of development on the Wealden Heath 
SPA which should be informed by a project -level Habi tats Regulations 
Assessment;  
g)  The location of new housing and access roads to have regard to localised areas 
of potential surface water flooding and groundwater emergence;  and 
h) Retention and protection of existing mature  trees.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural  environment  to contribute  to ecosystem  services,  development  proposals  must 
address the  following:  
a) Provision of suitable pedestrian and cycle links the existing rights of way 
network and perm issive  paths;  
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees should 
be retained and additional planting should be undertaken at the north east and 
south site  boundaries;  
c) Retain suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
d) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface 
water  run-off. 
 
 
 
 
 
 327                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD88  
Land at Ketchers  Field 
Selborne   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD88  
Land at Ketchers 
Field 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,000  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 328                                              
 SHEET  
9.194  Sheet  is a riverside  village  at a bridge  across  the River  Rother,  at the junction  of historic 
roads to Petersfield , Portsmouth, Chichester, Midhurst and London. In the past it 
prospered as a result of its riverside location, with a fulling mill and smithy making use of 
the natural resources of the area. Later, the coming of the turnpikes and railways brought 
more deve lopment to Sheet and its southern edges are now contiguous with Petersfield. 
However, the village centre retains a rural atmosphere with rows of small cottages and 
the tall spire of the Victorian church dominating views along the narrow and sometimes 
sunke n lanes.  
STRATEGIC HOUSING ALLOCATION: LAND AT PULENS LANE, SHEET  
Site area:  Approximately 3. 6ha 
Current Use:  Paddock, Woodland  
Environmental 
Designations  Fluvial Flood Zones 2 and 3  
Priority Habitats (Deciduous Woodland and Floodplain Grazing 
Marsh)  
SINC (Sheet Mill Alders) 
Groundwater Vulnerable  
Rother Biodiversity Opportunity Area  
Minerals:  Mineral Safeguarding Area (Sharp Sand and Gravel)  
9.195  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. The allocation site comprises a large area of 
open paddock and woodland adjacent to the River Rother. The site is located adjacent 
to established residential areas in Petersfield but within Sheet  Parish.  
The N ational Park Authority will be producing a Development Brief for the allocation 
site and will expect proposals to accord with the Brief. A Concept Plan (overleaf), which 
will form the design principles to be provided in the Development Brief, sets out the 
extent of the proposed built development and key topographical features.  
9.196   The site should be developed as a mixed use scheme of between 30 and 32 residential 
dwellings and associated publicly accessible open  space.  
9.197  Development at the site should reinforce  local distinctiveness by taking full account of 
the site’s location adjacent to the River Rother in the far Western Weald and as such 
the townscape shall comprise either traditionally designed and constructed buildings 
and/or comprise innovative designs w hich suitably reinterpret the traditional buildings of 
the Western Weald using contemporary designs with local materials. Development 
proposals  which  include  Carbon  Neutral  or Passivhaus  Standard  homes  will be strongly 
encouraged.  
9.198  The formality, height, enclosure and density of the built form shall broadly decrease 
across the site from the north -west to the south -east. The site building line shall be to 
the west  / south of one main vehicular route which itself shall be located beyond the 
fluvial flood zon es associated with the River Rother. The clear majority of dwellings,  329                                              
 including  market  and  affordable  homes,  will  have  a  frontage  view  of  open space.  
Backland development away from the main route will be limited to one area only, broadly 
located where the depth of the site is greatest.  
9.199  Development proposals should be informed by and come forward in conjunction with 
Access, Landscape and Ecological improvement strategies. The land adjacent to the River 
Rother for a depth of approximately 20 metres shall be provided as a broadly linear, 
publicly accessible woodland park adjacent to the River Rother with the aim improving  
local accessibility  and site ecology.  This will be secured  in perpetuity  through a planning 
obligation. It should be noted that the  proposed area of public open space  is located 
outside the settlement boundary for Sheet as defined on the Policies Map. Policy SD25 
sets a clear distinction between land within a settlement boundary and open countryside. 
Outside of settlement boundaries, land will be treated as open countryside.  
9.200  Development shall come forward only in conjunction with a suitable vehicular access 
from the local highway  network.  Pedestrian  and cycle access  must however  be provided 
through  the existing  site access  from Pulens  Lane even if not utilised  as a main vehicular 
access  route.  The site is also at risk of surface water flooding with several isolated low 
points also at risk, as well as the site access road. Groundwater emergence is most likely 
in the floodplain. The prese nce of flood embankments could prevent the drainage of 
groundwater flooding from affected areas. The  Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides 
recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and design 
of SuDS.  
9.201  There is a Grade  II listed cottage adjacent to existing northern entrance route which 
development proposals should appropriately  address.  
9.202  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural  Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection  Plan; 
 Archaeological  Survey;  
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species  Survey;  
 Flood Risk Assessment including Surface Water Management  Plan; 
 Heritage  Statement;  
 Transport  Assessment;  
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment;  and 
 Land Contamination  Survey.   330                                              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD89: Land at Pulens Lane, Sheet  
1. Land at Pulens  Lane, Sheet is allocated for the development of 30 to 32 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use) and publicly accessible open space. Planning permission will 
not be granted for any other uses. The National Park Authority will prepare a 
Development Brief to a ssist the delivery of the  site. 
2. Detailed proposals that are in broad conformity with the Development Brief and that 
meet the following site specific development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) A publicly  accessible  cycle and pedestrian  route  should  be provided  through  the 
entirety of the site from Pulens Lane to the eastern  boundary;  
b) An area of publicly accessible open space should be provided adjacent to the 
River  Rother;  
c) Enhance biodiversity and provide for protected  species;  
d) Protect and enhance trees  within the site worthy of  retention;  
e) Provide a suitably landscaped transition at the site  boundaries;  
f) All residential development  to be located in Flood Zone 1;  
g) Floor levels of habitable areas, where appropriate and proven necessary, to be 
designed to t ake into account flood risk and climate change;  
h) Incorporation of a buffer strip between the development and Flood Zone 3b, the 
extent of which should be investigated as part of the master planning process;  
i) Safe vehicular and pedestrian access and egress s hould be provided (including 
during flooding);  
j) The internal  road layout  to provide for larger  vehicles  including  refuse  vehicles;  
k) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in local  roads;  
l) Demonstrate that the  proposal would not have a significant harmful impact on 
the supply of local minerals;  and 
m) The site layout must not include opportunities to provide future vehicular 
access into adjacent  fields.  
 
 
 
 
  331                                              
 
 332                                              
 SD89: LAND AT PULENS LANE , SHEET  : CONCEPT PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 333                                              
 SOUTH HARTING  
9.203  South Harting is a springline  village on the greensand terrace, dominated by the chalk 
ridge immediately to the south, from which the South Downs Way overlooks the 
settlement.  It is located  in the Scarp  Slope  broad  area of the National  Park. The original 
main village street, partly the main Chichester to Petersfield road, roughly follows the 
route of a stream away from the foot of the Downs. A conservation area covers the 
historic core, extending some way up the road leading to Midhurst. Older bui ldings in 
the village  are notable  for their rich variety  of materials  derived  from the varied  geology of 
the parish. More modern housing areas are found to the east. There is a small 
employment  site at Church  Farm.  The village  supports  a school,  public  house, post office 
and shop as well as the imposing Grade I listed  church.  
LAND AT LOPPERS ASH, SOUTH HARTING  
Site area:  Approximately 0.6ha  
Current Use:  Arable land  
  
  
9.204  This site forms  part of a much  larger  arable  field on the eastern  edge of the village.  The 
allocated area is along the frontage of New Lane, a narrow country lane which leads away 
from Elsted Road towards the South Downs ridge, forming a popular route for walkers 
and cyclists. The site is set around one metre above the lane, which i s slightly sunken. 
There is a gentle but noticeable slope up from the northern to the southern end of the  
site. 
9.205  To protect a view of the Downs from the north end of New Lane, the space between 
the access  road and the northern  end of the site should  either  be retained  as agricultural 
land, or converted to use for a small number of community allotments or other local 
green space, in such a way as to retain the view of the South Downs across the  land. 
9.206  The site is immediately to the west of the main core zone f or the Dark Night Sky Reserve 
and this should be accounted for in design proposals. High archaeological potential has 
also been identified on the  site. 
9.207  There is an area of surface water flood risk in the lane adjacent to the site. Suitable 
mitigation shoul d be used to ensure the development addresses this flood  risk. 
9.208  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence studies:  
 Archaeological  Assessment;  
 Highways Assessment;  and  334                                              
  Landscape  Assessment.  
Allocation Policy SD 90: Land at Loppers Ash, South Harting  
 
1. Land at Loppers Ash, South Harting is allocated for the development of 6 to 8 
residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development  
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) A single vehicular access to the allocation site from New  Lane;  
b) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in adjacent  roads;  
c) The site layout must not include opportunities for future vehicular access into 
adjacent fields;  and 
d) Development  to incorporate  open space  in the centre  of the site to retain  wider 
landscape views from New  Lane.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
 
 
 
 
 335                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref:  SD90 
Land at Loppers  Ash 
South  Harting   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD90  
Land at 
Loppers  Ash 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 900  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 336                                              
 LAND NORTH OF THE FORGE, SOUTH HARTING  
9.209  This site forms  part of a much  larger  arable  field on the north -eastern  edge of the village. 
The allocated area is along the frontage of Elsted Road, a relatively busy lan e which 
connects South Harting with Midhurst. The site is located in a sensitive position in its 
immediate context, being adjacent to the village conservation area, though of limited 
impact  in wider  views  as a result  of topography.  The field slopes  down  relatively  sharply 
to the road and especially  to the south -eastern  corner  of the site. A flat stream  corridor 
lies adjacent to the  east. 
9.210  The site is of importance to the setting of South Harting Conservation Area and any 
development must preserve and enhan ce that setting. Since the site currently makes a 
positive  contribution  to that setting,  this means  that the development  must be designed 
to a high standard. The site adjoins the South Harting Conservation Area to the west 
(the house called ‘South Bank’), the south (Elsted Road, including the site’s own verge, 
and the new housing opposite) and close by to the west (Horses Knapp cottages, 
although the intervening field is outside the conservation  area).  
9.211  Particular care must be had to the impact of developmen t on views eastwards along 
Elsted Road towards the site. Boundary treatments on the site will be particularly 
important.  
9.212  Entrance(s) to the site must be carefully sited with adequate visibility  splays.  
9.213  The site is immediately to the west of the main core z one for the Dark Night Sky Reserve 
and this should be accounted for in design  proposals.  
9.214  Surface water flood risk is an issue adjacent to and overlapping the site, with no public 
surface  water  sewers  available.  However,  the adjacent  stream  valley  is also of ecological 
value. Care will therefore be needed with surface water disposal.  The Level 1 Update 
and Level 2 SFRA provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and 
the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.215  Lighting and fenestration must al so be ecologically sensitive to avoid light pollution 
impacts on the stream  corridor.  
9.216  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be suitably  informed  by the following  evidence 
studies:  
 Archaeological and historic environment  surveys;  
 Ecology  Assessment;  
 Heritage Statement;  and 
 Surface Water  Flood Risk Assessment and  Management  Plan. 
 
 
Site area: 
Current Use:  
Flood Risk:  
0.1ha 
Arable land  
Surface  water  flood  risk  affects  southern  corner  and  
adjacent road.   337                                              
  
 Allocation Policy SD91: Land North of the Forge, South Harting  
 
1. Land North of the Forge, South Harting is allocated for the development of 5 to 6 
residential dwellings  (class C3 use). Planning permission will not be granted for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Development must preserve and enhance the setting of South Harting 
Conservatio n Area,  with special regard to views from the  west;  
b) The location of new housing and access roads  to have  regard to  localised areas 
of potential surface water flooding;  and 
c) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street  
parking in local  roads.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site,  and 
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
 
 
 
 
 338                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD91  
Land North of the  Forge 
South  Harting   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD91  
Land North of 
the Forge  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale at A4 500  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
 339                                              
 STEDHAM  
9.217  The village of Stedham together with the smaller village of Iping are combined into a single  
parish  approximately  two miles west of Midhurst  in West  Sussex  to the north  of the  
A272.  The parish  is located  in the Western  Weald  broad  area of the National  Park. The  
historic  core of Stedham,  a conservation  area, is the northern  portion  of the village. The 
southern portion of Stedham is a larger area of modern housing. To the south of the 
A272 is Iping  Common  SSSI. 
STEDHAM SAWMILL, STEDHAM  
Site area:  1.3ha 
Current use:  Commercial; undeveloped open space  
Environmental Designation:  Iping Common SSSI (to south of site)  
Heritage Designation:  Listed building adjacent to northern boundary of site  
9.218  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals should address Core Policy SD3. The allocation site is a large open area 
located between Stedham and the A272. The eastern portion of the site is previously 
develope d land currently  used for commercial  storage.  The western  portion  of the site 
is currently open and undeveloped. The north, west and south of the site are mostly 
bounded by mature trees and vegetation which affords the site a degree of enclosure. 
To the ea st of the site are fields and outbuildings. The site has an existing vehicular 
access from A272. There are Public Rights of Way on the eastern boundary of the site 
and in the registered common land on the western boundary of the  site. 
9.219  The allocation site is located close to the Iping Common Site Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI) which is south of the A272. The site is within the SSSI impact risk zone and as 
such development  proposals  must demonstrate  that any impacts,  including  hydrolo gical 
impacts, can be suitably mitigated. The site is located within an area of particular 
ecological  value including  protected  species.  An ecological  survey  and mitigation  plan of 
the site will be required to ensure that development enhances opportunities  for local 
ecology and protected species to flourish. Given the history of commercial use on the 
site, development proposals should be informed by a land contamination  survey.  
9.220  The allocation  site is suitable  for mixed -use development  comprising  business  units and 
residential  development.  The western  portion  of the allocation  site is suitable  for Class 
B1 (Business)  units and the eastern  portion  of the allocation  site is suitable  for a modest 
residential scheme of up to 20 dwellings. Given the enclosed nature of the site and the 
proposed co -location of commercial buildings there is scope for the design of the 
housing to be either contemporary or traditional. Development proposals should 
address the setting of the listed farmhouse closely sited to the nor th of the  site. 
9.221  Vehicular access to both portions of the allocation site should be from the existing 
access onto the A272 to the south of the site. Security gates must not be placed at  the 
shared vehicular entrance so as to form a gated residential  communi ty. 
9.222  A suitably designed and publicly accessible pedestrian and cycle route should be 
provided  which  links through  the centre  of that portion  of the allocation  site proposed   340                                              
 for housing from the existing Public Right of Way to the north of the site to the southern site 
boundary. The re -routing and incorporation of the Public Right of Way on  the eastern  
boundary  into this new route  would  be supported  in principle  but is not considered a 
necessity for development to be  permitted.  
9.223  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by  the  following  evidence 
studies:  
 Ecology Assessment including Protected Species  Survey;  
 Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Management  Plan; 
 Heritage  Statement;  
 Hydrogeological  Survey;  
 Land Contamination  Survey;  
 Landscape Visual Impact Assessment;  and 
 Lighting  Assessment .  
Allocation Policy SD92: Stedham Sawmill, Stedham  
 
1. Land at Stedham Sawmill, Stedham  is allocated for mixed -use development for 
between 16 and 20 residential dwellings (class C3 use), and employment buildings 
(class B1 Business use) providing a maximum overall floorspace of 3,000m². Planning 
permission will not be granted for any other us es. The residential development shall 
be located in the eastern portion of the site and the employment development shall 
be located in the western portion of the  site. 
2. Proposals  which  include  security  gates or other  barriers  which  preclude  the residential 
areas of the development from becoming fully accessible, inclusive and integrated to 
the local community will not be  permitted.  
3. Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site specific  development  requirements  will 
be permitted:  
a) To demonstrate  that there  would  be no significant  impact  on the Iping Common 
SSSI through development of the site for residential and employment  use; 
b) Not to harm the amenity of the Public Right of Way on the southern, western 
and northern boundaries;  
c) To provide a publicly accessibl e cycle and pedestrian route through the 
residential portion of the allocation site from site vehicular access to the Public 
Right of Way north of the  site; 
d) To provide for the amenity and privacy of its occupants and those of 
neighbouring  properties;  
 341                                              
 e) To provide for acceptable levels of daylight and sunlight reaching new 
residential dwellings and associated private amenity spaces;  
f) The existing vehicular access should be suitably improved for use by occupants 
of all buildings;  
g) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking;  and 
h) Existing mature trees to be  retained  
4. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals must 
address the  following:  
a) Maximise  available  space  for tree planting.  Protect  and enhance  trees within  the 
site where possible, and where trees are lost, provide at least the equivalent in 
new tree planting on site. Trees on the site boundary should be retained and 
new tree planting should be  undertaken;  
b) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
c) New planting should be suitable for pollnating  species . 
  342                                              
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD92 
Stedham  Sawmill 
Stedham   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 200 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD92  
Stedham 
Sawmill  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,800  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
343                                               
 STEEP  
9.224  Steep is a village and civil parish  located on the Scarp Slope of the National Park. Its 
nearest  town  is Petersfield,  which  lies 1.4 miles (2.3 km)  south  of the village,  just off the 
A3. It has two public  houses,  The Harrow  and the Cricketers  Inn, with the former  being 
an 18th -century Grade II listed  building. According to the 2011 census , it had a population 
of 1,391.  
LAND SOUTH OF CHURCH ROAD, STEEP  
Site area:  0.7ha  
Current use:  Field 
9.225  The allocation site is located in the centre of Steep, north of Bedales School. The site is 
undeveloped. The site is closely sited to the Hampshire Hangers Biodiversity 
Opportunity Area. Development should seek to support the aims of the related Hangers 
strategy. The site is bounded by mature trees which should be reta ined and protected.  
A very small part of the site at the south eastern corner is shown to be at risk of surface 
water flooding which may increase as a result of climate change over the lifetime of the 
development. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provid es recommendations for a site 
specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.226  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection Plan;  
 Heritage  Statement  and; 
 Surface Water Flood Risk Assessment.  
 344                                               
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Allocation Policy SD93: Land South of Church Road, Steep  
 
1. Land South  of Church  Road,  Steep  is allocated  for the development  of between  8 and 
12 residential  dwellings  (class  C3 use). Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Site boundaries sympathetic to the local  landscape;  
b) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in local  roads;  
c) The site layout must not include opportunities for future vehicular access into 
adjacent fields;  
d) Retention and protection of existing mature  trees and;  
e)  The location of housing and access roads to have regard to localised areas of 
potential surface water flood risk.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services,  development proposals must 
address the  following:  
a) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site;  and 
b) New planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
345                                               
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD93  
Land South of Church Road 
Steep  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD93  
Land South of 
Church Road  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,000  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
346                                               
 STROUD  
9.227  Stroud is a village  and civil parish  in in the Western Downs broad area of the National 
Park. It is 1.4 miles (2.3 km) west of Petersfield,  on the A272  road.  The nearest  railway 
station is Petersfield,  1.4 miles (2.3 km) east of the  village.  
LAND AT RAMSDEAN ROAD, STROUD  
Site area:  1.4ha 
Current use:  Paddock  
9.228  To the north of the  application site is the Seven Stars public house and the northern 
boundary of the site itself is defined by a small watercourse. To the south of the site are  
terraced  houses  with long rear gardens.  The terraced  houses  front on to Ramsdean  Road 
and the rear gardens extend significantly to the east. Further to the south of the terraced 
houses is Langrish Primary School. To the south of the school  is a public right of way 
(PROW) running in a west to east direction. The site is bounded by Rams dean Road to 
the west and a field boundary to the east. To the north -east of the site (approximately  
180 metres  from the site) is a Roman  Villa which  is a Scheduled  Ancient Monument.  Within  
the north -west corner  of the site itself are some  existing  brick built stables.  
9.229  The proposed  allocation  site is considered  to comprise  major  development  and as such 
proposals  should  address  Core  Policy  SD3. The allocation  site is suitable  for residential 
development delivering between 26 and 30 new dwellings. Provision of a community 
building such as village hall is also acceptable in  principle.  
9.230  Development proposals should be landscape -led and provide a masterplan which 
integrates the development into local green infrastructure. Existing topographical 
features such as s treams and vegetation should be suitably accounted for in the 
masterplan and contribute towards achieving a sense of place. Development proposals 
should also reinforce local distinctiveness through built form and  fabric.  
9.231  The site is of archaeological poten tial and is located in a wider area noted for high 
archaeological interest and adjacent to an area noted for land contamination. As such, 
development proposals should be supported by suitable  assessments.  
9.232  The northern end of the site adjacent to the existi ng watercourse is prone to surface 
water flooding and therefore any proposal should address the related flood  risk. The 
flood risk also affects the adjacent Ramsdean Road from which access is gained to the 
site. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA provides  recommendations for a site specific 
flood risk assessment and the suitability and design of SuDS.  
9.233  Development proposals would need to be supported by at least a Phase 1 ecological 
survey report concentrating on those species that are realistically likely  to occur.  
9.234  There are trees on and adjacent to the northern and eastern boundaries of the site, 
which  are important  in the landscape  and thus retained.  Development  proposals  should 
be supported by a suitable Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method 
Statement and associated Tree Protection Plan which informs the site  masterplan.  347                                               
 9.235  Development  proposals  should  therefore  be informed  by the following  evidence  studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection  Plan; 
 Archaeological  Assessment;  
 Ecology  Survey;  
 Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Management  Plan; 
 Heritage  Statement;  
 Highways  Assessment;  
 Land Contamination Assessment; and  
 Landscape Visual Impa ct Assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 348                                               
 Allocation Policy SD94: Land at Ramsdean Road, Stroud  
 
1. Land at Ramsdean  Road,  Stroud  is allocated  for the development  of 26 to 30 residential 
dwellings (class C3 use) and a community building (class D1 use). Planning permission 
will not be granted  for any other  uses. Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site 
specific development requirements will be  perm itted: 
a) Development must provide a suitable transition in form and fabric from the 
existing  residential  areas  to the west and the open countryside  to the west and 
south;  
b) To provide  suitable  pedestrian  and cycle links to the adjacent  open countryside;  
c) To provide a new vehicular and pedestrian from Ramsdean  Road;  
d) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking;  
e) The site layout must not include opportunities for future vehicular access into 
adjacent  fields;  
f) To prov ide biodiversity  enhancements;  
g) Existing mature trees and hedgerows to be retained and enhanced;  and 
h)  The location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas at risk of 
flooding from the watercourse forming the northern boundary of the site;  
i) Floor levels of habitable areas, where appropriate and proven to be necessary, to 
take into account flood risk and future climate change; and  
j) Safe means of emergency access and egress during flooding to be demonstrated 
for all developed areas of the site.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Provision of suitable pedestrian and cycle links to the adjace nt countryside  and 
to the existing rights of way  network;  
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees  are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees should 
be retained  and additional  planting  should be undertaken  at the site boundaries;  
c) New planting should be suitable for pollinating species;  and 
d) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface  
water  run-off. 
 
349                                               
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD94  
Land at Ramsdean  Road 
Stroud   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD94  
Land 
at Ramsdean Road  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,500  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
350                                               
 WEST ASHLING  
9.236  West  Ashling  is a village  located  on the Coastal  Plain of the National  Park approximately  3.5 
miles west of Chichester.  
LAND SOUTH OF HEATHER CLOSE, WEST ASHLING  
Settlement:  West Ashling  
Site area:  
Mineral:  
Current Use:  0.7ha  
Mineral Safeguarding Area  
Paddock  
9.237  The site is located  to the south  of the village.  Vehicular  and pedestrian  access  would  be 
from Portal Close, a recent residential development. There are no particular historic 
constraints.  
9.238  The form and fabric of development should take account of the site’s location in the 
wider landscape with appropriate landscape boundaries on each side of the site. The local 
area and existing site boundaries may host protected species and as such development 
proposal should be supported by suitable ecological  surveys.  
9.239  The allocation site is within 5.6km of the Solent Coast Special  Protection Areas and as 
such development will need to provide suitable mitigation in order for development to 
demonstrate compliance with the Habitats  Regulations.  
9.240  Development  should  be served  by sufficient  suitable  off-street  vehicular  parking  to avoid 
additional pressure on local  roads.  
9.241  The site is within a Mineral Safeguarding Area for unconsolidated gravel. Development 
proposals will need to demonstrate that development can acceptably sterilise the site 
without significant harmful impact on the supply  of local  minerals.  
9.242  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the following evidence studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection Plan;  and 
 Ecology  Assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 351                                               
  
 
 Allocation Policy SD95: Land South of Heather Close, West Ashling  
 
1. Land South of Heather Close, West Ashling is allocated for the development of 
between 18 and 20 residential dwellings (class C3 use). Planning permission will not 
be granted  for any other uses. Detailed  proposals  that meet the following  site specific 
development requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Provide suitable mitigation towards the Solent Special Protection Area  (SPA);  
b) Development must provide a suitable transition in form and fabric from the 
housing east and north and the open countryside to the south and  west;  
c) The site boundaries should be suitably landscaped and the mature trees on the 
western boundary  protected;  
d) The existing vehicular access should be made from Portal  Close;  
e) To pro vide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on street 
parking in adjacent  roads;  
f) The site layout must not include opportunities for future vehicular access into 
adjacent fields;  and 
g) Demonstrate that the proposal would not have a signif icant harmful impact on 
the supply of local  minerals.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Protect a nd enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees should 
be retained  and additional  planting  should  be undertaken  at the site boundaries;  
b) New planting should be su itable for pollinating species;  and 
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas on site, and use permeable surfaces and soft 
landscaping  where  possible  to maximise  infiltration  of water  and reduce  surface 
water  run-off 
352                                               
 
 
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
Site Ref: SD95  
Land South of Heather Close 
West Ashling  
 
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD95  
Land South of 
Heather Close  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,200  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
353                                               
 WEST MEON  
9.243  West Meon is an historic village located on the Dip Slope broad area of the National 
Park. Its hilly relief gives views across the surrounding countryside to and from the village. 
The nucleus of the village is at a crossroads where the main road between Fa reham and 
Alton (the A32) rises up northwards out of the Meon Valley, separating from the road 
that continues along the valley to East Meon and Petersfield. The village has a complex 
form. Traditional building materials in the village include brick, flint and render, and there 
are a notable number of thatched houses. West Meon is sited at the head of the Meon 
Valley Trail, and the South Downs Way passes nearby to the south, across the hill fort 
of Old Winchester  Hill. 
LAND AT LONG PRIORS, WEST MEON  
Site are a: Approx 0.5ha  
Current Use:  
Flood Risk:  
 Agricultural field  
Surface water and ground water  
 
9.244  The site is located in the north -west of the village. The site is a portion of a larger 
agricultural field. The site is located between two existing housing estates and tennis 
courts. The elevation of the site rises notably from west to east. The site is located in  a 
sensitive position in the wider open landscape. A landscape and visual impact assessment 
will be required to inform the site layout and design. Existing mature trees should be 
safeguarded. The northern and eastern boundaries of the site should include suitable new 
hedgerows and biodiversity  improvements.  
9.245  A new vehicular access should be facilitated from Long Priors an adjacent residential road. 
A new pedestrian access should be provided linking the site with the adjacent recreation 
ground to improve pedestrian permeability in a part of the village with a number  of cul-
de-sacs, and link through  to the Public  Right of Way to the west of Long Priors.  The 
lowermost part of the site adjacent to the existing access and the wider road network in 
the vicinity are at risk of surface water flooding. Climate change may increase this risk 
over the lifetime of the development. Groundwater emergence is also most  likely 
towards the western lower part of the site. The Level 1 Update and Level 2 SFRA 
provides recommendations for a site specific flood risk assessment and the suitability and 
design of SuDS.  
9.246  Development proposals should therefore be informed by the fo llowing evidence studies:  
 Arboricultural Impact Assessment, Arboricultural Method Statement and associated 
Tree Protection  Plan; 
 Flood Risk  Assessment;  
 Highways  Assessment;  
 Hydrogeological Survey;   
 Landscape and Visual Impact  Assessment ; and 
 Surface Water and Groundwater Flood Risk Assessment.  354                                               
  
 Allocation Policy SD9 6: Land at Long Priors, West Meon  
 
1. Land at Long Priors, West Meon is allocated for the development of between 10 and 
12 residential  dwellings  (class  C3 use). Planning  permission  will not be granted  for any 
other uses. Detailed proposals that meet the following site specific development 
requirements will be  permitted:  
a) Development must provide a suitable transition in form and fabric from the 
housing to the south and west  to the open countryside to the  north;  
b) The site boundaries should be compatible with the open character of the 
adjacent  countryside;  
c) A publicly accessible footpath to be secured through a suitable planning 
obligation should be provided from the Public Right of Way to the west into 
the site through to the recreation ground to the  east; 
d) The development should be supported by a suitable vehicular access which 
safeguards existing mature trees, including their Root Protection  Zones;  
e) To provide all necessary vehicular parking on -site to avoid additional on  street 
parking in adjacent  roads;  
f) Existing  vehicular  parking  spaces  in Long Priors  lost to facilitate  a new vehicular 
access must be re -provided within the development site in addition to those 
serving the p roposed new  dwellings;  
g) The location of new housing and access roads to have regard to areas of surface 
water flooding and potential groundwater emergence; and  
h) Demonstrate no significant harm to be caused to groundwater  resources.  
2. In order for the development to have an overall positive impact on the ability of the 
natural environment to contribute to ecosystem services, development proposals 
must address the  following:  
a) Provision of suitable pedestrian and cycle links to the adjacent countryside and  
to the existing rights of way  network;  
b) Protect and enhance trees within the site where possible, and where trees are 
lost, provide at least the equivalent in new tree planting on site. Trees should 
be retained  and additional  planting  should  be undertaken  at the site boundaries;  
c) Minimise hard surfaced areas;  and 
d) Retain suitable existing habitat for pollinating species where possible. New 
planting should be suitable for pollinating  species.  
 
355                                               
 
 
 
Site Ref: SD96 
Land at Long Priors 
West Meon   
South Downs Local  Plan Pre-submission  
 Housing  Allocation  
 
 
 
SDNPA Pre -submission Housing Allocation  
 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 100 150 m 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SD96  
Land at Long 
Priors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¯ 
Scale  at A4 1,400  
© Crown copyright  and database  rights  2017 Ordnance  Survey  100050083  
356                                                                10. MONITORING AND 
IMPLEMENTATION FRAME WORK  
10.1 The Local Plan will be subject to regular monitoring over the plan period through the use of 
targets  and indicators . This will assess its impact and whether or not the delivery of the 
vision and Local Plan objectives are being achieved. These indicators and targets will be 
reported on once a year in the Authority Monitoring Report  (AMR).  
10.2 If a policy is not delivering i ts targets adequately, this will be identified by the monitoring 
indicators reaching a ‘ trigger point’ . If this happens, various actions  will be taken, as set out 
in Figure 10.1 below.  
10.3 The policies of the Local Plan will be implemented in three main ways:  
 Core and strategic policies set the overall context and parameters for appropriate land 
use and will guide the type, location and nature of future development pro posals across 
the National Park  
 Development management polices set detailed criteria for types  of development or 
specific planning issues, against which planning applications for development will be 
assessed  
 Allocation policies allocate land for specific types of development and set site sp ecific 
development requirements  
10.4 The table at Figure  10.2 sets out the Local Plan policies and relates them to the objectives 
listed in Chapter 2. It lists the targets set out to achieve the policies and individual indicators 
that will be used to measure policy performance , and the source of the data is set out for  each 
indicator.   
10.5 Many of the indicators are already monitored through the South Downs Partnership Management 
Plan, the National Park Authority’s  Corporate Plan  and other internal monitoring. Other indicators 
are specific to the Local Plan. The indicators presented here also relate to those used to 
monitor the Sustainability Apprais al and may be appropriate for the monitoring of 
Neighbourhood Development Plans.  Some indicators are used for monitoring more than one 
policy, which leads to repetition in the table; these are indicated with an asterisk.  
10.6 The final column of Figure 10.2 sets out the delivery partners  for each policy, as well as the 
trigger points a nd which action will have to be taken if a policy is not delivering its target. For 
most policies, the delivery mechanisms  are covered by the bullet points above  and the  
actions to be taken when trigger points are reached  are shown in Figure 10.1. For polici es 
where there are additional  delivery mechanisms and actions, these are also shown in the final 
column of Figure 10.2.  It should be noted that delivery partners, mechanism, triggers  and 
actions are only named in F igure 10.2 when known.    
10.7 In Figure 10.2  below, ‘permission granted’ includes permission granted at appeal.  
 
 357                                                                                                           FIGURE 10.1: DIAGRAM OF ACTIONS A RISING FROM ‘TRIGGER  POINTS’ IF  LOC AL PLAN TARGETS ARE NOT MET  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monitoring indicator 
reaches trigger point  
Trigger reached (at least in part) as a 
result of developments granted 
planning permission  Trigger reached (at least in part) 
as a result of non -planning  factors  
Investigate planning history of those 
developments (including relevant appeals / 
case law)  
Negative impacts on 
indicator caused by 
weaknesses or lack 
of detail in policy or 
changes to national 
policy  Negative impacts on indicator 
caused by case specific 
factors e.g. misinterpretation 
of policy, other material 
considerations and 
enforcement issues.  
Review policy  Consider production of 
Supplementary 
Planning Document or  
guidance  Review Development 
Management /specialist 
consultee /enforcement 
procedures, practice, 
resourcing or monitoring  Other actions, as 
listed in table 
below against 
specific indicators  Assess cause  
Review 
implementation 
of other SDNPA 
strategies  Review 
allocation 
of CIL 
spending  Engage with partners 
and land managers to 
resolve specific issues  Log issue to 
address in next 
review  of 
Partnership 
Management Plan  358                                                                                                            
FIGURE 10.2:  LOCAL PLAN MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION FRAME WORK  
Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Core Policy SD1: 
Sustainable 
Development  n/a n/a No indicator proposed  n/a n/a 
Core Policy SD2: 
Ecosystems Services  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  Ensure that all 
development has a net 
positive impact on the 
ability of the natural 
environment to deliver 
ecosystem servi ces SDLP1:   
Citation of policy SD2 
in planning decisions   
SDLP2:   
Increase in multiple 
provision of ecosystem 
services  
 
 Development 
Management filing 
system  
Evidence base work 
(Ecoserve mapping, 
Habitat Connectivity 
mapping)  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers /  
Land managers  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan  
 359                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
3. To conserve and 
enhance large areas 
of high -quality and 
well-managed habitat 
to form a network 
supporting wi ldlife 
throughout the 
landscape  
4. To achieve a 
sustainable use of 
ecosystem service s 
thus enhancing 
natural capital across 
the landscapes of the 
National Park and 
contributing to SDLP3:   
The value of key 
Natural Capital a ssets 
is maintained or 
enhanced  Triggers:  
Policy SD2 not cited as 
a material 
consideration in 2 0% 
or more of planning 
decisions  
Decline in the value or 
benefit delivered by 
key Natural Capital 
Assets.  
No increase in the 
value or benefit 
delivered by key 
Natural Capital Assets 
by 2023  360                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
wealth  and human 
health and wellbeing  
Core Policy SD3: 
Major Development in 
the South Downs 
National Park  n/a Avoid major 
development, other 
than in exceptional 
circumstances  SDLP4:   
Citation of p olicy SD3 
in planning decisions  Development 
Management filing 
system  Triggers:  
1 major development 
proposal granted 
permission in 3 
consecutive years o r 3 
such developments in 1 
year 
Planning decision 
regarding major 
development 
overturned  361                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD4: 
Landscape Character  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  Landscape character 
conserved and 
enhanced  
Restoration of lost or 
degraded landscape 
features  SDLP5 *:  
Change in land use by 
category  
SDLP6:   
Citation of policy SD4 
in planning decisions   
SDLP7:   
Number of Local 
Landscape Character 
Assessments prepared  Land use monitoring 
(Land Cover + dataset)  
Corporate Plan 
indicator  
Development 
Management filing 
system  Partners:  
SDNPA / Landowners / 
Land managers  / 
Community G roups  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan  
Triggers:  
Decrease or increase 
in one type of land use 
by 5%  362                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Negative changes to 
landscape identifi ed in 
SDILCA  
No restoration of lost 
or degraded landscape 
features through 
development by 2023  
Planning decisions 
citing landscape  
character overturned 
at appeal  
Strategic Policy SD5:  
Design  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  No development 
proposals permitted, 
or refused on design 
grounds, contrary to 
the advice of the SDLP8:   
Applications permitted, 
or refused on design 
grounds, contrary to 
the advice of the Internal monitoring of 
DRP process  
Officer knowledge  Partners:   
SDNPA  / Design 
Review Panel  / 
Developers  / 
Community groups  363                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Design R eview Panel 
and Design Officers  Design Review Panel 
and SDNPA Design 
Officers  
SDLP9:   
Number of Vi llage 
Design Statements 
adopted  
SDLP10:   
Quality of design on 
new developments  Post construction 
review assessments  Triggers:  
SDLP8: 1 development 
in this category in each 
of 3 consecutive years 
or 3 such 
developments in 1 year  
10% of new 
developments 
(assessed through post 
constructi on review) 
scored as inadequate  
Strategic Policy SD6: 
Safeguarding Views  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  Conservation and 
enhancement of views 
and landmarks  SDLP11:   
Changes to views 
identified in the 
Viewshed 
Characterisation Study  Evidence base work 
(Viewshed  
Characterisation 
Study)  Partners:  
SDNPA /  landowners 
and land managers  / 
developers  364                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan   
Trigger :  
Negative chan ges to 
views identified in VCS  
Strategic Policy SD7: 
Relative Tranquillity  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National  Park Conservation and 
enhancement of 
relative tranquillity  SDLP12:   
Percentage of the 
National Park that is 
relatively tranquil for 
its area  Evidence base work 
(Tranquillity study) - 
PMP indicator  Partners:   
SDNPA / landowners 
and land managers /  
developers  / people 
travelling through the 
National Park  365                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan  
Trigger s: 
10% d ecrease in the % 
area of the National 
Park that has ‘high’ 
relative tranquillity 
scores  
Lack of positive 
changes to tranquillity 
in areas of poor 
tranqui llity 366                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD8: 
Dark Night Skies  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  Maintain the 
percentage of the 
National Park with 
skies of bronze level 
darkness, and increase 
the percentage with 
skies of silver level 
darkness  SDLP13:   
Percentage of the 
National Park 
considered to have a 
dark night sky  Evidence base work 
(Dark Night Skies 
assessment) - PMP 
indicator  Partners:   
SDNPA / Landowners 
and L and managers /  
Householders  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan   
Triggers:  
Negative changes to 
dark night skies 
identified in dark night 
skies assessment.  367                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
No increase in 
percentage of skies 
with silver level 
darkness by 2023  
Strategic Policy SD9: 
Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity  3. To conserve and 
enhance large areas 
of high -quality and 
well-managed habitat 
to form a network 
supporting wi ldlife 
throughout the 
landscape  A well -managed and 
better -connected 
network of habitats in 
the National Park  
Increased populations 
and distributions of 
priority species  
An increased number 
of SSSIs in favourable 
condition  
Any developments 
within, or within SDLP14 *:  
Area, condition and 
connectivity of target 
priority habitats  
SDLP15:   
Population and 
distribution of priority  
species  
 
 
 PMP indicator - Habitat 
Connectivity mapping  
PMP indicator  
PMP indicator  
Development 
Management filing 
system  
Developme nt 
Management filing 
system/GIS  Partners:   
SDNPA / County and 
District C ouncils /  
Wildlife Trusts  / 
Natural England /  Land 
Owners and Land 
Managers  
Delivery 
mechanism : 
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan  368                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
impact zones or 
buffers (as relevant) 
for, designated wildlife 
sites, to conform with 
policies SD9 
Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity and/or 
SD10 International 
Sites.  
No net loss of 
biodiversity  as a result 
of any development  SDLP16:   
Condition of Sites of 
Special Scientific 
Interest  
SDLP17:   
Developments granted 
planning permission 
contrary to ecological 
advice from Natural 
England or county 
councils  
SDLP18:  
Developments gra nted 
planning permission 
within designa ted 
wildlife sites  or ancient Triggers:   
Net reduction in area, 
condition and /or 
connectivity of priority 
habitats  and designated 
sites 
Failure to increase the 
area, condition and /or 
connectivity of priority 
habitats and designated 
sites by 2023  
Increase in barriers 
and/or decrease in 
connectivity between 
designated sites an d 369                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
woodland or 
overlapping veteran 
trees surroun ding landscape 
matrix  
Overall downward 
trend in populations 
and distributions of 
priority species by 
2023 
Failure to increase the 
population and 
distributi on of priority 
species by 2023  
Reduction in the 
percentage of SSSIs in 
favourable condition  
Developme nts granted 
planning permission 370                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
within designated 
wildlife sites which do 
not conform with SD9 
and/or/SD10  
Action:   
Work with relevant 
stakeholder  
e.g. Natural England, 
landowners, wildlife  
and conservation 
groups to further  
promote and 
implement wildlife and 
habitat conservation 
schemes  371                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD10: 
International Sites  3. To conserve and 
enhance large areas 
of high -quality and 
well-managed habitat 
to form a network 
supporting wi ldlife 
throughout the 
landscape  No more than 30 new 
dwellings permitted 
within 400m of the 
Wealden Heaths Phase 
II SPA  
Roadside NOx does 
not exceed the critical 
level at specific 
internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites  
Roadside Nitrogen 
deposition does not 
exceed the critica l load 
at specific 
internationally SDLP19:   
Number of dwellings  
completed and 
permitted within zones 
of proximity to 
internationally 
designated wildlife sites 
identified in Local Plan 
as requiring such 
monitoring  
SDLP20:  
Atmospheric 
concentration of NOx 
within 200m of the 
roadside measured at 
specific internationally Housing monitoring 
data/ GIS  
On-site measurements  
UK Air Pollution  
Information System  
www.APIS.ac.uk  
On-site measurements  
UK Air Pollution  
Information System  
www.APIS.ac.uk  Partners:   
SDNPA / district and 
county councils / 
Natural England / 
developers  
Triggers:   
Net new dwellings 
permitted within 400m 
of the Wealden Heaths 
Phase II SPA, other 
than allocations  
Harm caused to Solent 
& Southampton Water, 
Portsmouth Harbour 
or Chichester and 
Langstone Harbours 372                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
designated nature 
conservation sites  
 designed nature 
conservation sites  
SDLP21:  
Nitrogen deposition 
within 200m of the 
roadside calculated 
from pollutant 
concentrations 
measured at specif ic 
internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites  Special Protection 
Areas by additional 
recreational activity  
Action:  
Review of the 
operation of the Solent 
Disturbance Mitigation 
Strategy (all affected 
authorities)  
Triggers:   
For sites listed in the 
South Downs Local 
Plan HRA as currently 
below the critical level, 
a trend of movement 
towards the critical 373                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
level for NOx at 
specific internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites 
reviewed at 3 year 
intervals.  
For sites listed in  the 
South Downs Local 
Plan HRA as currently 
above the critical level, 
no improvement in 
NOx concentrations at 
specific internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites 
reviewed at 3 year 
intervals.  374                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Triggers:  
For sites listed in the 
South Downs Local 
Plan HRA as currently 
below the critical load, 
a trend of movement 
towards critical load 
for N deposition at 
specific internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites 
reviewed at 3 year 
intervals.  
For sites li sted in the 
South Downs Local 
Plan HRA as currently 
above the critical load, 375                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
no improvement in N 
deposition at specific 
internationally 
designated nature 
conservation sites 
reviewed at 3 year 
intervals.  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD11: Trees, 
Woodland and 
Hedgerows  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  Increase in area of 
woodland  
A well -managed and 
better -connected 
network of habitats in 
the National Park  
Increase in Ha of 
woodland in active 
management  SDLP 14*:  
Area, condition and 
connectivity of target 
priority habitats  Corporate Plan 
indicator  
PMP indicator  Partners :  
SDNPA  / Fores try 
Commission / Natural 
England /  Landowners 
and Land M anagers  
 
 376                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
3. To conserve and 
enhance large areas 
of high -quality and 
well-managed habitat 
to form a network 
supporting wi ldlife 
throughout the 
landscape  
6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of cli mate 
change and other 
pressures  Adaptation of  
woodlands to c limate 
change  SDLP 22: 
Developments granted 
planning permission 
within designated 
wildlife sites or ancient 
woodland or 
overlapping veteran 
trees 
SDLP 23*:  
Percentage of f armland 
and of woodland area 
that is managed under 
agreement to deliv er 
environmental scheme 
options  
 Delivery 
mechanism:   
Landscape & 
Biodiversity Strategy + 
Action Plan  
Triggers:  
Net reduction in area, 
condition and/or 
connectivity of 
woodland  
Failure to increase the 
area, condition and /or 
connectivity of 
woodland by 2023  
Percentage loss of 
woodland species that 377                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
SDLP 24: 
Planning applications 
granted for loss o f 
TPO trees without 
replacement  are more  susceptible 
to climate change  
Strategic Policy SD12: 
Historic Environment  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultural 
heritage of the 
National Park  Conservation of the 
historic environment  SDLP 25: 
Planning permissions 
granted for enabling 
development  Officer knowledge  Partners:  
SDNPA /  Historic 
England  / District and 
County Councils / 
Developers /  Land 
Managers  
 
 
 378                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Cultural Heri tage 
Strategy and Action 
Plan 
Trigger :  
Enabling development: 
3 such developments 
granted planning 
permission by 2023  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD13: Listed Buildings  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultural  
heritage of the 
National Park  A reduced percentage 
of listed buildings at 
risk of being lost as a 
result of neglect, dec ay 
or inappropriate 
development  SDLP 26:  
Percent age of Listed 
Buildings at risk  PMP indicator  
Officer knowledge  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Historic 
England  / District and 
Dounty Councils / 379                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Developers /  Residents 
and B usinesses  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Cultural Heritage 
Strategy and Action 
Plan  
Triggers:  
Percentage of Listed 
Buildings at risk 
increases  
Percentage of Listed 
Buildings at risk does 
not show a net 
reduction by 2023  380                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD14:  Climate Change 
Mitigation and 
Adaptation of Historic 
Buildings  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultura l 
heritage of the 
National Park  None  No indicator    
Development 
Management Policy 
SD15: Conservation 
Areas  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultura l 
heritage of the 
National Park  Preserve and enhance 
the special interest, 
character and 
appearance of 
Conservation Areas  
Six Conservation Area 
Appraisals and/or 
Management Plans 
produced per year  SDLP2 7: 
Conservation Area 
Appraisa ls and 
Management Plans 
written  Internal monitoring  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Historic 
England /  District and 
Dounty C ouncils / 
Developers /  Residents 
and B usinesses  
 
 381                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Cultural Heritage 
Strategy and Action 
Plan  
Trigger :  
Recent or ongoing 
harm to special 
interest, character and 
appearance of a CA , 
resulting from 
development subject 
to the planning system,  
identified through 
Conservation Area 
Appraisal  382                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD16: Archaeology  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultura l 
heritage of the 
National Park Protect archaeological 
heritage assets in a 
manner appropriate to 
their significance   
SDLP2 8:  
Planning permissions 
for development on 
the site of a Scheduled 
Monument  
SDLP 29:  
Developments granted 
planning permission 
with a condition 
requiring 
archaeological 
assessment  
 
 Development 
Management filing 
system  
Archaeological 
Advisers  Partners:  
SDNPA / Historic 
England /  District and 
County Councils; 
Developers;  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Cultural Heritage 
Strategy and Action 
Plan  
Trigger:  
Development granted 
permission that causes 
harm to or loss of a 
Scheduled Monument  383                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
SDLP 30:  
Number of additions 
to the Historic 
Environment Record   
Strategic Policy SD17: 
Protection of the 
Water Environment  3. To conserve and 
enhance large areas 
of high -quality and 
well-managed habitat 
to form a network 
supporting wil dlife 
throughout the 
landscape  
6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of cli mate Quality of ground and 
surface water 
protected and 
enhanced  
Quantity of g round and 
surface water 
protecte d  
SDLP 31:  
% surface water bodies 
achieving ‘good’ 
ecological status  
SDLP 32:  
% surface and 
groundwater bodies 
achieving ‘high’ 
chemical status  
 National data  
National data  
CAMs documents for  
surface and 
groundwater bodies  
CIL database  Partners:  
SDNP A / Environment 
Agency / Water 
Companies / 
Developers  
Triggers:  
Decrease in 
percentage of surface 
water bodies achieving 
‘good’ ecological 
status, or of surface o r 
groundwater bodies 384                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
change and other 
pressures  
4. To achieve a 
sustainable use of 
ecosystem services 
thus enhancing 
natural capital across 
the landscapes of the 
National Park and 
contributing to 
wealth  and human 
health and wellbeing  SDLP 33:  
Percentage of water 
resource available for 
licensing  achieving ‘high 
chemical status  
Percentage of surface 
water bodies achieving 
‘good’ ecological 
status, or of surface or 
groundwater bodies 
achieving ‘high’ 
chemical status, fails to 
increase by 2023  
Decline in percentage 
of water resou rce 
available for licensing.  
Low base flows 
resulting from over -
abstraction  385                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD18: The Coast  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  
6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of climate 
change and other 
pressures  Character of the 
undeveloped coast 
protected  
Deliver the objectives 
of the Beachy Head to 
Selsey Bill Shoreline 
Mana gement Plan, or 
its replacement  SDLP3 4:  
All developments 
granted planning 
permission within the 
Sussex Heritage Coast 
and ‘Undeveloped 
Coastal Zone’  Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS  data Partners:  
SDNPA / Natural 
England /  Environment 
Agency / Marine 
Management 
Organisation  / Herit age 
Coast/Cuckmere 
Partnership   
Triggers:  
Developments granted 
within the Sussex 
Heritage Coast and 
‘Undeveloped Coastal 
Zone’ which do not 
meet the criteria of 
SD19  386                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD19: 
Transport and 
Accessibility  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National Park 
and its special 
qualities  
6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of cli mate 
change and other 
pressures  Provide good facilities 
at gateway and hub 
points for visitors to 
the National Park  
Increase the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
National Park by public 
transport  SDLP3 5:  
CIL funds spent on 
transport projects  
SDLP3 6: 
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
transport 
infrastructure  
SDLP3 7:  
Proportion of visits to 
the National Park by 
public transport  
SDLP3 8:  
Development of hubs 
and gateways schemes  CIL database  
Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Evidence base (Visitor 
Survey)  
Corporate Plan 
monitoring  Partners:  
SDNPA  / DfT /  
Network Rail / 
Transport C ompanies / 
Local Transport 
Authorities /  
Developers  
Triggers:  
No planning 
permissions granted 
for sustainable 
transport schemes at 
hubs by 2023  
Increase in the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 387                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
National Park by 
private car  
No net increase in the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
National P ark by public 
transport by 2023  
No CIL funds spent on 
transport projects  
Strategic Policy SD20: 
Walking, Cycling and 
Equestrian Routes  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National  Park Increase the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
Natio nal Park by non -
motorised means   
SDLP 39:  
Gross increase in non-
motorised multi -user 
routes (km)  
 Internal monitoring  
Evidence base (Visitor 
Survey)  
National indicator  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Local 
Transport Authorities /  
Developers  
 
 388                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
and its special 
qualities  SDLP 40:  
Proportion of visits by 
non-motorised means  
SDLP 41:  
Length of public rights 
of way  Delivery 
mechanism:   
Walking and Cycling 
Strategy  
Triggers:  
No gross increase in 
non-motorised 
transport routes by 
2023 
Increase in the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
National Park by 
private car  
No net increase in the 
proportion of journeys 389                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
made within the 
National Park by non -
motorised means by 
2023 
Development 
Management Policy 
SD21: Public Realm, 
Highway Design and 
Public Art  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultural 
heritage of the 
National Park  
5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National Park 
and its special 
qualities  Protect and enhance 
peoples’ experience of 
the public realm  SDLP 42:  
Visitor enjoyment 
levels   
SDLP4 3:  
Road accidents 
involving death or 
serious injury  Evidence base (Visitor 
Survey)  Partners:  
SDNPA / Local 
Transport Authorities / 
Developers  
Triggers:  
No net increase in 
visitor enjoyment 
levels by 2023 
Yearly number of road 
accidents involving 
death or serious injury 
shows an upward 390                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
trend over 2018 – 
2023 
Development 
Management Policy 
SD22: Parking 
Provision  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National Park 
and its special 
qualities  Increase the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
National Pa rk by non -
motorised means  SDLP4 4:  
Proportion of visits by 
private car  Evidence base (Visitor 
Survey)  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Local 
Highway Authorities  / 
Local communities  / 
Businesses  
Triggers:  
Increase in the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 
National Park by 
private car  
No net increase in the 
proportion of journeys 
made within the 391                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  National Park by non -
motorised means by 
2023 
Strategic Policy SD23: 
Sustainable Tourism  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National  Park 
and its special 
qualities  Promote opportunities 
for the understanding 
and enjoyment of the 
special qualities of the 
National Park by the 
public  SDLP4 5:  
CIL funds spent on 
leisure and recreational 
projects connected 
with the National 
Park’s Special Qualities   
SDLP4 6:  
Developments granted 
planning permission for CIL database  
Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Evidence base (Visitor 
Survey)  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  / 
Visitor 
Accommodation and 
Recreation I ndustry  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Tourism Strategy  392                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
visitor accommodation 
facilities   
SDLP4 7*:  
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
community, culture, 
leisure and recreation 
facilities   
SDLP4 8:  
Average length of 
visitor sta y and spend 
per visitor per day  Triggers:  
No CIL funds spent on 
leisure and recreational 
projects connected 
with the National 
Park’s special qualities  
Visitor 
Accommodation 
Survey finds a deficit of 
accommodation in a 
category that would 
promote opportunities 
for the understanding 
and enjoyment of the 
special qualities of the 
National Park.  393                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Reduction in length of 
visitor stay and spend  
No upwards trend o f 
visitor stay and spend 
by 2023   
Development 
Management Policy 
SD24: Equestrian Uses  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National Park 
and its special 
qualities  Promote opportunities 
for the understanding 
and enjoyment of the 
special qualities of the 
National Park by the 
public  SDLP 49:  
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
equestrian facilities  Monitoring of weekly 
lists Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  
Delivery 
mechanism:   
Tourism Strategy  394                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD25:  
Development Strategy   
7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  Delver a medium level 
of development 
dispersed across the 
towns and villages of 
the National Park, 
while protecting the 
National Park’s Special 
Qualities.  
Support 
Neighbourhood 
Planning  SDLP 50:  
Percentage of 
permissions for new 
homes within and 
outside settlement 
boundaries  
SDLP 51:  
Number and 
percentage of housing 
completions on 
previously developed 
land (net)  Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS  data 
Housing monitoring 
information  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers/  
Community groups  
Trigger :  
Proportion of housing 
completions on  
previously developed 
land below 50% for 
three consecutive 
years  395                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD26:  
Supply of Homes  7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  Make overall provision 
for approximately 
4,750 additio nal homes 
between 2014 and 
2033 SDLP 52:  
Plan period and 
housing target for 
Local Plan  
SDLP 53:  
Number of dwellings 
completed (net)  
SDLP5 4:  
Dwellings with e xtant 
planning permission 
(net) 
SDLP5 5:  
Net additional 
dwellings expected to 
come forward within Local Plan  
Housing monitoring 
information  
Housing monitoring 
information  
Housing monitoring 
information  
Housing monitoring 
information  
T.B.C. follow ing 
introduction of 
regulations  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  
Trigger :  
Dwelling permission 
and completions are 
more than 20% above 
or below the level of 
housing required at 
that time to maintain a 
five year housing land 
supply or to achieve 
the Local Plan figure up 
to 2033  396                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
the next five years 
from the date of 
monitoring  
SDLP5 6:  
Net additional 
dwellings expected to 
come forward between 
five and fifteen years 
from the date of 
monitoring  
SDLP5 7: 
Carrying out of 
functions  in relation to 
self build and custom 
housebuilding  397                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD27:  
Mix of Homes  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Protect and increase 
the proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings in the 
dwelling stock  SDLP5 8:  
Number of dwellings 
completed (net), by 
number of bedrooms † Housing monitoring 
information  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  
Triggers:  
20% of sites granted 
planning permission for 
housing not having a 
housing mix in 
accordance with SD27  
Proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings does not 
increase by 2023  398                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Policy SD28:  
Affordable Housing 
and Strategic Policy 
SD29:  Rural Exception 
Sites (Monitored 
together)  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Deliver new affordable 
homes to meet local 
need between 2014 
and 2033  SDLP 59:  
Number of affordable 
dwellings completed 
(net), broken down by 
tenure  
SDLP 60:  
Number of affordable 
dwellings completed 
on rural exception 
sites 
SDLP 61:  
Carrying out of 
functions in relation to 
starter homes  Housing monitoring 
information  
Housing monitoring 
information  
T.B.C.  follow ing 
introduction of 
regulations  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Registered 
Providers  / Developers 
/ Landowners /  
Community groups  
Trigger :  
The thresholds in 
criteria 1 of the policy 
are not being met in 
over 2 0% of cases by 
2023 399                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD30: Replacement 
Dwellings  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Protect and increase 
the proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings in  the 
dwelling stock  SDLP 62:  
Number and size of 
replacement dwellings 
completed in the 
reporting year  Housing monitoring 
information  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  
Triggers:  
20% of replacement 
dwellings granted 
planning permission for 
housing not in 
accordance with SD30  
Reduced proportion of 
small and medium 
sized dwellings  
Proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings does not 
increase by 2023.  400                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD31: Extensions to 
existing dwellings, 
annexes and 
outbuildings  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Protect and increase 
the proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings in the 
dwelling stock   No indic ator proposed   Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers  
Triggers:  
Reduced proportion of 
small and medium 
sized dwellings  
Proportion of small 
and medium sized 
dwellings does not 
increase by 2023  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD32: New 
Agricultural and 9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are 
broadly compatible Maintain and increase 
the viability of 
sustainable farming in 
the National Park  SDLP6 3:  
Net additional 
agricultural and 
forestry workers’ Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Monitoring of weekly 
lists Partners:  
SDNPA/ Farm and 
Forestry Businesses / 
Landowners  
 401                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special qualities of 
the Natio nal Park  Ensure that if 
agricultural or forestry 
occupancy conditions 
are removed, the 
dwelling is used as an 
affordable dwelling 
wherever possible  dwellings granted  
planning permission  
SDLP6 4:  
Permissions for the 
removal of agricultural 
or forestry worker 
occupancy conditions  Trigger :  
Proportion of 
permissions for the 
removal of agricultural 
or forestry worker 
conditions, where the 
dwelling does not 
become an affordable 
dwelli ng, exceeds 50% 
over five years  
Strategic Policy SD33: 
Gypsies and Travellers 
and Travelling 
Showpeople  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, Gypsies and Travellers: 
Provide for 13 pitches 
in Brighton and Hove 
(2016 -28), 8 pitches in 
East Sussex (2016 -28) 
and 11 pitches in 
Hampshire (2016 -27) SDLP6 5:  
Net additional 
permanent Gypsy or 
Traveller pitches and 
Travelling Showpeople 
plots per annum, on Gypsy/Traveller/ 
Travelling Showpeople 
(GTSS) monitoring 
system  
GTTS monitoring 
system  Partners:  
SDNPA/ Gypsies, 
Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople 
/ Distri ct, County and 
Unitary councils  402                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Travelling Showpeople: 
Provide for 4 plots in 
Hampshire (2016 -27) allocated and windfall 
sites 
SDLP6 6:  
Net additional transit 
pitches with extant 
planning permission  Trigger :  
GTTS pitch and plot 
permission and 
completions are more 
than 20% above or 
below the level 
required at that time 
to maintain a five year 
land supply, when 
measured against the 
most up to date GTAA 
for that area  
Strategic Policy SD34: 
Sustaining the Local 
Economy and Strategic 
Policy SD35: 9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are Accommodate 
approximately 2 to 3 
hectares of office 
development  SDLP6 7:  
Total net and gross 
new employment 
floorspace completed  Employment / Retail 
monitoring system  
mployment  / Retail 
monitoring system  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Developers / 
Businesses  / District 
and County C ouncils  403                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Employment Land 
(monitored together)  broadly compatible 
with and relate to 
the la ndscapes and 
special  qualities of 
the National Park  Accommodate 
approximately 5 
hectares of industrial 
and small -scale 
warehousing 
development  
Any developments 
involving the loss of 
employment  land to 
conform wi th policy 
SD33: Employment 
Land  
 
 
SDLP6 8:  
Total net and gross 
new employmen t 
floorspace extant 
permissions  Delivery 
mechanism:  
Rural Economy 
Strategy  
Triggers:  
Permission granted for 
net loss of employment 
land, contrary to Policy 
SD35  
Employment land 
permission  and 
completions are more 
than 20% above or 
below the level 
required to achieve th e 404                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Local Plan figure up to 
2033 
Strategic Policy SD36: 
Town and Village 
Centres  7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  Focus development of 
main town centre uses 
in identified town and 
village centres  SDLP 69:  
Total net and gross 
new retail  floorspace 
completed, by use class  
SDLP 70:  
Total net and gross 
new retail floorspace 
extant permissions, by 
use class  Emplo yment /Retail 
monitoring system  
Emplo yment /Retail 
monitoring system  Partners:  
SDNPA / Deve lopers / 
Businesses / District 
Councils  (Town 
Centre Managers and 
Economic 
Development T eams)  
Triggers:  
Decline in number of 
retail units  in town and 
village centres , as 
identified in retail 
surveys  405                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Vacancy rates 
significantly above 
regional trends  
Action s: 
Town and Village 
Centre Health Check  
Consider policy review 
and/or preparation of 
SPD, and seek viability 
assessment  406                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD37: Development in 
Town and Village 
Centres  7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  Protect units in use 
class A within def ined 
primary shopping 
frontages  SDLP 71: 
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
loss or expansion of A 
use space within 
defined primary 
shopping frontages  Employment /Retail 
monitoring system   
Partners:  
SDNPA / Deve lopers / 
Businesses / District 
Councils  
Trigger :  
Permission granted for 
loss of retail units in 
defined primary 
shopping frontages: 1 
development of this 
type in 3 consecutive 
years or  3 such 
developments in 1 year  
 407                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
 
Action:  
Carry out market 
town health check  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD38: Shops Outside 
Centres  8. To pro tect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
afford able homes 
and local facilities  Protect and enhance 
the provision of small 
convenience stores to 
meet the everyday 
shopping needs of local 
comm unities  SDLP 72: 
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
developments affecting 
A use space outside 
market town and 
larger village centre 
boundaries  Employment /Retail 
monitoring system  Partners:  
SDNPA / Deve lopers / 
Businesses / District 
Councils  
Trigger :  
Permission granted for 
retail units outside 
market town and 
larger village centres, 
which either does not 
comply with SD38 408                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
criteria 1 -4, or exceeds 
the thresholds in SD38 
criteria 5 or 6: 1 
development of this 
type in 3 consecutive 
years o r 3 suc h 
developments in 1 year  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD39: Agriculture and 
Forestry  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park  
9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are 
broadly compatible Over 70% of farmland 
in the National Park 
managed  under agri -
environment schemes  SDLP7 3:  
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
agricultural 
developments in the 
reporting year  
SDLP 5*:  
Change in land use by 
category  Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Land use monitoring  
PMP indicator  
Corporate Plan 
indicator  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Farming and 
forestry businesses  
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Rural Economy 
Strategy  
 409                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special  qualities of 
the National Park  SDLP 23*: Percentage 
of farmland and of 
woodland area that is 
managed under 
agreement to deliv er 
environmental scheme 
options  
SDLP 74:  
Hectarage of woodland 
in active management    
 
Triggers:  
Decrease or increase 
in one type of land use 
by 5%  
Decline in % of 
farmland under 
agreement to deliver  
environmental scheme 
options  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD40: Farm and 9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are Maintain and increase 
the viability of 
sustainable farming in 
the National Park  SDLP7 5: Citation of 
policy SD40 in planning 
decisions  Development 
Management filing 
system  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Farming and 
Forestry Bu sinesses  
 410                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Forestry 
Diversification  broadly compatible 
with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special  qualities of 
the National Park  Delivery 
mechanism:   
Rural Economy 
Strategy  
Triggers:  
Decrease or increase 
in one type of land use  
by 5%  
Decline in % of 
farmland under 
agreement to deliver 
environmental scheme 
options  411                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD41: Conversion of 
Redundant Agricultural 
or Forestry Buildings  9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are 
broadly compatible 
with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special  qualities of 
the National Park  
2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultura l 
heritage of the 
National P ark Protect the agricultural 
character of the 
National Park  SDLP7 6:  
Employment and 
housing completions 
resulting from 
conversion of 
agricultural or forestry 
buildings  Employment and 
housing monitoring 
systems  Partners:  
SDNPA  / Farming and 
Forestry B usinesses  / 
Landowners/ 
Developers  
Triggers:  
Residential conversions 
not in accordance with 
policy criteria: 1 
development of this 
type in 3 consecutive 
years o r 3 such 
developments in 1 year  
10% of new 
developments of this 
type (assessed through 412                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
post con struction 
review) by 2023 
scored as inadequate  
Strategic Policy SD42: 
Infrastructure  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
afford able homes 
and local facilities  All development is 
supported by 
infrastructure as far as 
necessary no mitigate 
its impact  SDLP 77:  
Total CIL monies 
gathered  
SDLP 78:  
Total CIL monies 
passed to parish 
councils  
SDLP 79:  
Total CIL monies 
passed to other 
infrastructure delivery 
partners  CIL database  n/a 413                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
SDLP 80:  
Level of match -funding 
secured through 
commitment of CIL 
funds  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD43: New and 
Existing Community 
Facilities  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Protect and enhance 
the provision of 
community facilities to 
meet the everyday 
needs of local 
communities  SDLP 47*: 
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
community, culture, 
leisure and recreation 
facilities  
SDLP 81:  
CIL funds spent on 
facilities/services, 
education, health and 
wellbeing projects  Monitoring of weekly 
lists Partners:  
SDNPA / Community 
groups / Developers / 
Businesses / Distri ct, 
County and  Unitary 
Councils  
Triggers:  
Community facilities 
lost through change of 
use: 1 development of 
this type in 3 414                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
consecutive years or  3 
such developments in 1 
year 
No permissions for 
new community 
facilities, outs ide the 
market towns and 
larger villages, for 
three consecutive 
years  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD44: 
Telecommunications 
and Utilities 
Infrastructure  8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporti ng local jobs, Provide infrastructure 
without harm to the 
National Park special 
qualities  
Ensure all new 
dwellings are served by SDLP 82:  
Schemes carried out 
for undergrounding of 
cables  
  Partners:  
SDNPA / 
Telecommunications 
and U tility companies  
 415                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
affordable homes 
and local facilities  superfast broadband or 
equivalent  
Removal, reduction in 
prominence and 
undergrounding of 
telecommunications/ 
utilities infrastructure 
where feasible   
SDLP 83:  
CIL funds spent on 
utility services  projects  
SDLP8 4:  
Refusals citing SD44  Trigger s:  
No schemes carried 
out for 
undergrounding of 
cables for three 
consecutive years  
Refusals on SD44 
overturned at appeal  
Strategic Policy SD45:  
Green Infrastructure  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National  Park Provide new green 
infrastructure while 
protecting existing 
assets and the integrity 
of the Green 
Infrastructure network 
as a whole   
 
SDLP8 5:  
CIL funds spent o n 
Green Infrastructure 
projects  
 CIL database  
Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Post construction 
review assessments  Partners:   
SDNPA / District, 
County and Unitary 
Councils / NGOs / 
Community G roups / 
Developers  
 416                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
and its special 
qualities  
8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities   
 
SDLP 86:  
Developments granted 
planning permission for 
new Green 
Infrastructure assets  
SDLP 87:  
Quality of Green 
Infrastructure in new 
developments  Triggers:  
Downward trend in 
number of 
developments granted 
planning permission for 
new Green 
Infrastructure assets 
per annum between 
2018 and 2023  
10% of new 
developments 
(assessed through post 
construction review) 
have on -site green 
infrast ructure scored 
as inadequate  417                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD46:  Provision and 
Protection of Open 
Space, Sport and 
Recreational Facilities 
and Burial 
Grounds/Cemeteries  8. To protect and 
provide for the soci al 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Protect existing open 
space, sports and 
recreation facilities  
Provide for additional 
open space, sports and 
recreational facilities 
commensu rate with 
assessed local need  SDLP 47*: 
 Developments granted 
planning permission for 
community, culture, 
leisure and recreation 
facilities  
SDLP 88:  
Developments granted 
planning permission 
within recreational 
areas, as mapped in the 
HLC   
SDLP 89:  
Standards for open 
space, sports and Monitoring of weekly 
lists 
Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS  data 
Evidence base: Open 
Space, Sports and 
Recreation Facilities 
review  
Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS data  
CIL database  Partners:  
SDNPA / District, 
County and Unitary 
Councils / NGOs / 
Community G roups / 
Developers  
Triggers:  
Developments granted 
planning permission 
within recreational 
areas that do not 
comply with the policy: 
1 development of this 
type in 3 consecutive 
years o r 3 such 
developments in 1 year  418                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
recreational facilities 
being met  
SDLP 90:  
Decisions on planning 
applications that cite 
SD46  
SDLP 91:  
CIL funds spent on 
Social/Leisure schemes  Lack of improvement 
in local standards being 
met by 20  
Residential planning 
applications re fused on 
SD46 grounds 
overturned at app eal 
Development 
Managem ent Policy 
SD47: Local Green 
Spaces  5. To protect and 
provide 
opportunities for 
everyone to 
discover, enjoy, 
understand and value 
the National Park Prevent development 
that prejudices the role 
of Local Green Spaces 
or conflicts with their 
reasons for d esignation  SDLP 92:  
Developments granted 
planning permission 
within Local Green 
Space  Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS  data Partners:  
SDNPA  / Community 
Groups  
Trigger:   
Any developments 
granted permission on 419                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
and its special 
qualities  
8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, 
affordable homes 
and local facilities  Local Green Spaces 
not in accordance with 
the policy  
Strategic Policy SD48: 
Climate Change and 
Sustainable Use of  
Resources  6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of climate 
change and other 
pressures  Residential 
development to 
achieve 19% carbon 
reduction 
improvement against 
Building Regulations 
Part L (2013)   
SDLP9 3: 
Decisions on planning 
applications that cite 
Strategic Policy SD4 8  Development 
Management filing 
system  
CIL database  
Climate Change 
Adaptation Report  Partners:  
SDNPA / District, 
County and u Uitary 
Councils / Water 
Companies / National 420                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
and c onsumption of no 
more than 110 litres of 
water per person per 
day 
Non-residential 
development to 
achieve BREEAM Very 
Good   
SDLP9 4:  
Increase or decrease in 
the risks posed by 
climate change  Parks Climate Change 
Group 
Delivery 
mechanism:  
Climate Change 
Adaptation Report 
Risk Assessment and 
Action Plan 
Triggers:  
Permission for 
developments which 
breach the thresholds 
in this policy: 1 
development of this 
type in 3 consecutive 421                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
years o r 3 such 
developments in 1 year  
Level  of risk from 
climate change 
increased  
Proposed mitigation 
and adaptation 
responses in CCAR 
risk assessment are not 
delivered  
 
Strategic Policy SD49:  
Flood Risk 
Management  6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of climate 
change and other 
pressures  Reduction in the 
impact and extent of all 
types of flooding  SDLP 95: 
Developments granted 
planning permission 
contrary to the advice 
of the Environment Development 
Management filing 
system/GIS  data, plus 
subsequent analysis  
CIL database  Partners:  
SDNPA  / County and 
Unitary councils / 
Internal D rainage 
boards / Environment 
Agency  422                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Agency in Flood Risk 
Zones 2 and 3 Trigger :  
Any development 
granted planning 
permission in flood 
zones contrary to the 
advice of the 
Environment Agency  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD50:  Sustainable 
Drainage  6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of climate 
change and other 
pressures  No net increase in 
surface water run -off 
as a result of new 
development  SDLP 96: Decisions 
on planning 
applications that cite 
Strategic Policy SD 50 Development 
Management filing 
system  Partners:  
SDNPA  / County and 
Unitary Councils / 
Internal Drainage 
Boards / Environment 
Agency  
Trigger:  
30% or more of new 
development of 3 or 423                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
more houses, granted 
planning permission by 
2023, does not 
incorporate SuDS  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD51: Renewable 
Energy  6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of climate 
change and other 
pressures  Delivery of renewable 
energy installations 
where compatible with 
the Special Qualities of 
the National Park  SDLP 97: 
Number of full 
planning permissions 
for renewable energy 
development  Monitoring of weekly 
lists Partners:  
SDNPA/ Developers  / 
Community G roups/ 
Residents and 
Businesses  
Trigger : 
No planning 
permissions granted 
for appropriate, 
community renewable 
energy schemes by 
2023 424                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD52: Shop Fronts  2. To conserve and 
enhance the cultural  
heritage of the 
National Park  
9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are 
broadly compatible 
with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special  qualiti es of 
the National Park  None  No indicator proposed   Partners:   
SDNPA  / Businesses  
Delivery 
mechanism s: 
Design SPD ; 
Conservation Area 
Management P lans 425                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD53: Adverts  1. To conserve and 
enhance the 
landscapes of the 
National Park 
9. To protect and 
provide for local 
businesses including 
farming, forestry and 
tourism that are 
broadly compatible 
with and relate to 
the landscapes and 
special qualities of 
the National Park  None  No indicator proposed  n/a  n/a 
 
 6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of cli mate Improvements in air 
quality  SDLP 98:  
Number and status of 
Air Quality Information from 
partners   
 426                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
 
 
Development 
Management Policy 
SD54: Pollution and 
Air Quality  change and other 
pressures  Management Areas 
(AQMAs)  Triggers:  
Increase in number of 
AQMAs  
Increase in pollutants 
in Lewes AQMA  
Action:   
Review Air Quality 
Action Plan/Transport 
Strategy  
Development 
Management Policy 
SD55: Contaminated 
Land 6. To adapt well to and 
mitigate against the 
impacts of cli mate 
change and other 
pressures  None  No indicator proposed  n/a n/a 427                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
Strategic Site Policy 
SD56: Shoreham 
Cement Works   Restoration of the site 
in accordance with 
Strategic Site Policy 
SD54  SDLP 99:  
Progress of restoration 
of Shoreham Cement 
Works  Officer knowledge./ 
employment 
monitoring system  Partners:   
SDNPA / Developers  
Trigger :  
No progress on site 
for three consecutive 
years (where such 
progress is expect ed 
according to the Local 
Plan) 
Strateg ic Site Policy 
SD57:  North Street 
Quarter and adjacent 
Eastgate area, Lewes  7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  Redevelopment of the 
site in accordance with 
Strategic Site Policy 
SD55  SDLP 100:  
Progress of 
redevelopment of 
North Street Quarter 
and adjacent Eastgate 
area Officer knowledge / 
employment  / housing 
monitoring systems  Partners:   
SDNPA / Developers  
Trigger:   
No progress on site 
for three consecutive 
years (where such 428                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
progress is expect ed 
according to the Local 
Plan) 
Allocation Policies  7. To conserve and 
enhance the villages 
and market towns of 
the National Park as 
thriving centres for 
residents, visitors 
and businesses  
8. To protect and 
provide for the social 
and economic 
wellbeing of National 
Park communities 
supporting local jobs, Development of the 
allocated sites for 
housing, Gypsy and 
Traveller 
accommodation or 
employment, as 
relevant  SDLP 101:  
Progress of 
development on the 
allocated sites  Officer knowledge  / 
employment/  housing/  
Gypsy and Traveller 
monitoring systems  Partners:   
SDNPA / Developers  
Trigger :  
No progress on any 
given si te for three 
consecutive years 
where such progress is 
expec ted according to 
the Local Plan  
 429                                                                                                           Policy  Objective (s) Target (s) Indicator (s) Data source (s) Partners, Delivery 
mechanism (s), 
Trigger (s) and 
Action (s) required if 
policy not being 
achieved  (excluding 
actions listed in Fi g. 
10.1)  
afford able homes 
and local facilities  
 430                                                               APPENDIX 1:  BROAD AREAS AND RIVER 
CORRIDORS  
Broad 
Areas & 
River 
Corridors  Towns & villages 
(SD25)  Strategic 
Site Gateways  Hubs  
Western 
Downs  Chawton  
Cheriton  
Itchen Abbas  
Lower & Upper 
Farringdon  
Stroud  None  Winchester*  
Alton*  
Alresford*  None  
Western 
Weald  Liss 
Petersfield  
Midhurst  
Petworth  
Binstead  
Easebourne  
Fernhurst  
Fittleworth  
Greatham, Hampshire  
Lodsworth  
Milland  
Northchapel  
Rogate  
Sheet  
Stedham  Syngenta  
(Fernhurst 
NDP)  Haslemere*  
Liphook*  
Pulborough*  Petersfield  
Midhurst  
Petworth  
Liss 431                                                               Broad 
Areas & 
River 
Corridors  Towns & villages 
(SD25)  Strategic 
Site Gateways  Hubs  
Scarp Slope  Buriton  
Cocking  
Ditchling  
Graffham  
Poynings  
Selborne  
South Harting  
Steep  
Washington  None  Worthing*  
Brighton & Hove*  
Eastbourne*  
Polegate*  
Steyning*  
Hassocks*  Amberley station  
Dip Slope  Compton  
Droxford  
East Dean & Friston  
Findon  
Corhampton & 
Meonstoke  
Pyecombe  
Singleton  
Twyford  
Hambledon  
Clapham  
East Meon  
West Meon  None  Worthing*  
Brighton & Hove*  
Eastbourne*  
Polegate*  
Storrington*  
Steyning*  
Rowlands Castle*  
Seaford*  None  
Coastal 
Plain Funtington  
Lavant  
West Ashling  None  Chichester*  None  
Arun Bury 
Amberley  
Coldwaltham  
Watersfield  None  Pulborough*  
Arundel*  None  432                                                               Broad 
Areas & 
River 
Corridors  Towns & villages 
(SD25)  Strategic 
Site Gateways  Hubs  
Adur None  Shoreham 
Cement 
Works  
(Strategic Site 
Policy SD56)  Shoreham -by-Sea* None  
Ouse  Lewes  
Rodmell  
Kingston near Lewes  North Street 
Quarter  
(Strategic Site 
Policy SD57)   Lewes  
Newhaven*  
Southease  
Cuckmere  Alfriston  None  None  Exceat  
* Settlemen t not in the National Park  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
433                                                               APPENDIX 2:  LOCAL PLAN POLICIES 
SUPERSEDED BY THE SOUTH DOWNS 
LOCAL PLAN  
Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
AG1: Location of Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
AG3: Relationship Between 
Development and Provision of 
Infrastructure  SD42: Infrastructure  
AP4: Development and Land Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
AP5: Development and Maintenance of 
Water Courses  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
AP9: Minimising Visual Pollution  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
AC1: Development of the Countryside 
Generally  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
AC2: Sussex Downs AONB  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
434                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
AC3: Sussex Downs AONB  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
AC4: Strategic Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
AC6: Agriculture, Horticulture and 
Forestry  SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
AC7: Agriculture, Horticulture and 
Forestry Residential Accommodation  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellings  
AC8: Diversification of the Rural 
Economy  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
AC9: Existing Buildings in the 
Countryside  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or Forestry 
Buildings  
AC15 : Horse Riding Establishments  SD24: Equestrian Uses 
AB1: Archaeology  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB3: Conservation Areas and their 
Enhancement  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB4: Conservation Areas and Increased 
Traffic  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB5: Conservation Areas and New 
Development  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB6: Conservation Areas and Demolition  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB7: Listed Buildings and Alterations  SD5: Design  
AB8: Listed Buildings and Reinstatement 
of original features  SD5: Design  
SD12: Historic Environment  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
435                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
AB9: Listed Buildings and Materials  SD5: Design  
SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
AB10 : Listed Buildings and change of use  SD5: Design  
SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed  Buildings  
AB11 : Listed Buildings and Design of 
New Development  SD5: Design  
SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
AB13 : Improving Town Centres and 
Public Realm  SD37: Develop ment in Town and Village Centres  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
AB14 : Improving Town Centres and 
Economic vitality  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
AB15 : Improving Town Centres and 
traffic calming  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
AB17 : Advertisements  SD53: Adverts  
AB19 : Advertisements in Conservation 
Areas  SD53: Adverts  
SD15: Conservation Areas  
AB20 : Shopfronts  SD52: Shop Fronts  
SD15: Conse rvation Areas  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
436                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
AB22 : Development of Open Spaces in 
BUAB  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
AB23 : Trees in the Urban Area  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
AB25 : Trees in the Urban Area  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
AB26 : Trees in the Urban Area  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
AB27 : Landscaping  SD5: Design  
AB28 : Satellite Dishes  SD5: Design  
SD42: Infrastructure  
SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
AB29 : Other Telecommunications 
Development  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
AB30 : Crime Prevention  SD5: Design  
AB32 : Per Cent for Art  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
AT2: The A2 83 SD56: Shoreham Cement Works  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
AT5: Roadside Facilities for Motorists  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
AT10 : Facilities for Pedestrians, 
Equestrians and Cyclists  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
AH2: Infill and Development  SD25: Development Strategy  
AH3: Housing to Meet Local Need  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
SD27: Mix of Homes  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
437                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
AH5: Dwelling Size  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
AH6: Loss of Dwellings  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
AH7: Householder Proposals  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
AH9: Flat Conversions  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
AH10 : Residential Care and Nursing 
Homes  SD27: Mix of Homes  
AH11 : Residential Mobile Homes  SD25: Development Strategy  
AS2: Large Retail Development Outside 
Town Centres  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
AS3: Large Retail Expansion Outside 
Town Centres  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
AS4: Retail Development Outside Town 
Centres  SD37: Development in Town and Village Cent res 
AS5: Neighbourhood Parades  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
ACS1 : Education  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
ACS2 : Lancing College  SD25: Development Strategy  
ACS3 : Lancing College  SD25: Development Strategy  
ACS4 : Health Services  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
ACS5 : Community Centres, Worship, 
Police, Fire Service  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
438                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DPAN1 : Land to the south of Sompting 
Village  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR1: Public Open Space owned by ADC 
on Proposals map  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR2: Publicly Accessible Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR3: Private Playing Fields  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities a nd Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR5: Children’s Play Areas  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR6: New Areas of Open Space in 
Residential Development  SD46:  Provision and Protec tion of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
DPAR1 : Land adjacent to Sompting 
Cemetery  Refer to Sompting Neighbourhood Plan  
AR7: Development of Leisure & Sporting 
Faculties  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR8: Recreation in Countryside  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
AR9: Lancing Ring and Mill Hill  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
DPAR4 : Shoreham Cement Works  SD56: Shoreham Cement Works  Adur District Council - Saved Policies from Adur District Local Plan (1996)  
 
439                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
AR11 : Public Recreational Facilities on 
Beaches  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD4: Landscape Character  
AR20 : Tourist Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the L ocal Economy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
 
 Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
440                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
GEN2: Built Up Area Boundary  SD25: Development Strategy  
GEN3 : Protection of the Countryside  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD4: Landscape Character  
GEN5 : Provision of new Residential 
Development  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
GEN6 : Amount of New Commercial 
Development  SD35: Employment Land  
GEN7 : The Form of New Development  SD5: Design  
GEN8 : Development and the Production 
of New Infrastructure  SD42: Infrastructure  
GEN9 : Foul and Surface Water Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
GEN10 : Tidal Flooding and Coastal 
Defence  SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
GEN11 : Inland Flooding  SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
GEN12 : Parking in New Development  SD22: Parking Provision  
GEN14: Public Transport  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
441                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
GEN15 : Cycling and Walking  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
GEN18 : Crime Pre vention  SD5: Design  
GEN19 : Coast Protection and Sea 
Defence Works  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
GEN20 : Provision of Public Open Space 
within New Development  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
GEN21 : Renewable Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation  of 
Historic Buildings  
GEN22 : Buildings or Structures of 
Character  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
GEN23 : The Water Environment  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
GEN25 : Water Resources  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
GEN26 : Water Quality  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
GEN28 : Trees and Woodlands  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
442                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
GEN29 : Nature Conservation Across the 
District  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
GEN32 : Noise Pollution  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD35: Employment Land  
GEN33 : Light Pollution  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
GEN34 : Air Pollution  SD35: Employment Land  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
AREA1 : Areas of Special Character  SD12: Historic Environment  
AREA2 : Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AREA3 : The Setting of Arundel  SD6: Safeguarding Views  
AREA5 : Protection of Open Spaces  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
AREA6 : Allotments  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
AREA7 : Public Car Parks  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
AREA9 : Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
AREA11 : Local Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
AREA13 : Sites of International Importance 
for Nature Conservation  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
AREA14 : Sites of National Importance for 
Nature Conservation  SD2: Ecosystems Services  Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
443                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
AREA15 : Sites of Local Importance for 
Nature Conservation  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
AREA16 : Ancient Monuments and Sites of 
National Archaeological Importance  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AREA17 : Sites of Archaeological Interest  SD15: Conservation Areas  
AREA19 : Primary Shopping Frontages  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
AREA20 : Arundel Shopping Frontages  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
AREA21 : Re-Use of Redundant 
Floorspace  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
DEV1 : Conversion of Rural Buildings for 
Industrial or Business Uses  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
DEV2 : Conversion of Rural Buildings for 
Residential Uses  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
DEV3 : Horticulture  SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
DEV5 : Horse Related Development  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
DEV6 : Agricultural Buildings  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
DEV8 : Circumstances in Which Additional 
Development May be Permitted – Local 
Firms  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
DEV14 : Listed Buildings and Enabling 
Development  SD13:  Listed Buildings  Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
444                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DEV15 : Safeguarding the Main Road 
Network  SD42: Infrastructure  
DEV17 : Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
DEV18 : Affordable Housing Outside the 
Built Up Area  SD28: Affordable Housing  
DEV19 : Extensions to Existing Residential 
Buildings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
SD5: Design  
DEV21 : Accommodation Restricted to 
Occupancy by the Elderly  SD27: Mix of H omes  
DEV22 : Relaxation of Restrictions 
Relating to Occupation by the Elderly  SD27: Mix of Homes 
DEV26 : Criteria for Retail Development  SD52: Shop Fronts  
DEV27 : Retail Development Outside the 
Principal Shopping Area  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
DEV30 : Local Village Centres  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
DEV31 : Farm Shops  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
DEV32 : Garden Centres  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
DEV33 : Markets and Car Boot Sales  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
DEV34 : Tourist Accommodation and 
Attractions  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
DEV36 : Change of Use of Hotel and 
Guest House Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  Arun District Council - Saved P olicies from Arun Dist rict Local Plan (2003)  
445                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DEV37 : Existing Caravan Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
DEV39 : New Touring Caravan  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
DEV41 : Telecommunications  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
SITE3 : New Public Open Space 
Allocations  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SITE5 : Commercial Allocations  SD35: Employment Land  
 Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
446                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
TR1: Development and the Demand for 
Travel  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR2: Public Transport Accessibility and 
Parking  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR3: Development in Areas of Low Public 
Transport Accessibility  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR4: Travel Plans  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR5: Sustainable Transport Corridors and 
Bus Priority Routes  SD19: Transport and Acce ssibility  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
TR6: Park and Ride  SD22: Parking Provision  
TR7: Safe Development  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR8: Pedestrian Routes  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR9: Pedestrian Priority Areas  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR10 : Traffic Calming  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
TR11 : Safe Routes to School and School 
Safety Zones  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
TR12 : Helping the Independent 
Movement of Children  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR13 : Pedestrian Network  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
447                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR14 : Cycle Access and Parking  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equest rian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR15 : Cycle Network  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR17 : Shopmobility  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR18 : Parking for People with a Mobility 
Related Disability  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR19 : Parking Standards  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR21 : Long Term Coach and Overnight 
Lorry Park  SD22: Parking Provision  
SU2: Efficiency of Development in the Use 
of Energy, Water and Materials  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SU3: Water Resources and Their Quality  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SU4: Surface Water Run -off and Flood 
Risk SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
448                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SU5: Surface Water and Foul Sewerage 
Disposal Infrastructure  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SU6: Coastal Defences  SD18: The Coast  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SU7: Development within the Coastal 
Zone  SD18: The Coast  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SU8: Unstable Land  SD55:  Contaminated Land  
SU9: Pollution and Nuisance Control  SD35: Employment Land  
SU10 : Noise Nuisance  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD35: Employment Land  
SU11 : Polluted Land and Buildings  SD55: Contaminated Land  
SU12 : Hazardous Substances  SD55: Contaminated Land  
SU13 : Minimisation and Re -use of 
Construction and Industry Waste  SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SU14 : Waste Management  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SU15 : Infrastructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD42: Infrastructure  
SU16 : Production of Renewable Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
449                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
QD1: Design – Quality of Development 
and Design Statements  SD5: Design  
QD2: Design – Key Principles for 
Neighbourhoods  SD5: Design  
QD3: Design – Efficient and Effective Use 
of Sites  SD5: Design  
SD45 : Green Infrastructure  
QD4: Design – Strategic Impact  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
QD5: Design – Street Frontages  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
QD6: Public Art  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
QD7: Crime Prevention Through 
Environmental Design  SD5: Design  
QD8: Shopshutters  SD52: Shop Fronts  
QD9: Boarding up of Flats, Shops and 
Business Premises  SD5: Design  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
QD10 : Shopfronts  SD5: Design  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
QD11 : Blinds  SD5: Design  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
QD12 : Advertisements and Signs  SD53: Adverts  
QD13 : Advertisement Hoardings  SD53: Adverts  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
450                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
QD14 : Extensions and Alterations  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
QD15 : Landscape Design  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
QD16 : Trees and Hedgerows  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD11: Trees, Woodland and  Hedgerows  
QD17 : Protection and Integration of 
Nature Conservation Features  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: Inte rnational Sites  
QD18 : Species Protection  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
QD19 : Greenways  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
QD20 : Urban Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
QD21 : Allotments  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
QD22 : Satellite Dish Aerials  SD5: Design  
SD44: Telec ommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
QD23 : Telecommunications Apparatus 
(general)  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
QD24 : Telecommunications Apparatus 
Affecting Important Areas  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
QD25 : External Lighting  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
QD26 : Floodlighting  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
QD27 : Protection of Amenity  SD5 Design  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
451                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
QD28 : Planning Obligations  SD42: Infrastructure  
HO1: Housing Sites and Mixed use Sites 
with an Element of Housing  SD26: Supply of Homes  
HO2: Affordable Housing – Windfall Sites  SD28: Affordable Housing  
HO3: Dwelling Size and Type  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO4: Dwelling Densities  SD19: Transport and Accessibilit y 
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO5: Provision of Private Amenity Space 
in Residential Development  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
HO6: Provision of Outdoor Recreation 
Space in Housing Schemes  SD5: Design  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
HO7: Car Free Housing  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Pr ovision  
HO8: Retaining Housing  SD26: Supply of Homes  
HO9: Residential Conversions and the 
Retention of Smaller Dwellings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
HO10 : Accommodation for Homeless 
People  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO11 : Residential Care and Nursing 
Homes  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO12 : Sheltered and Managed Housing 
for Older People  SD27: Mix of Homes  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
452                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
HO13 : Accessible Housing and Lifetime 
Homes  SD5: Design  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO14 : Houses in Multiple Occupation  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO15 : Housing for People with S pecial 
Needs  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HO16 : Safeguarding Existing Gypsy and  / 
or Traveller Sites  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
HO17 : Sites for Gypsies and  / or 
Travellers  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
HO18 : Sites for Travelling Showpeople  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
HO19 : New Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
HO20 : Retention of Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
HO21 : Provision of Community Facilities 
in Residential and Mixed Use Schemes  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
HO26 : Day Nurseries and Child Care 
Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
EM3: Retaining the Best Sites for Industry  SD35:  Employment Land  
EM4: New Business and Industrial uses on 
Unidentified Sites  SD35: Employment Land  
EM5: Release of Redundant Office 
Floorspace and Conversions to Other 
Uses SD35: Employment Land  
EM6: Small Industrial, Business Units and 
Warehouse Units  SD35: Employment Land  
EM7: Warehouses (B8)  SD35: Employment Land  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
453                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
EM8: Live-work Units on Redundant 
Industrial and Business and Warehouse 
Sites SD35: Employment Land  
EM9: Mixed Uses and Key Mixed Use 
Sites SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
SR1: New Retail Development within or 
on the Edge of Existing Defined Shopping 
Centres  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
SR2: New Retail Development Beyond 
the Edge of Existing Established Shopping 
Centres  SD38: Shops outsi de Centres  
SR3: Retail Warehouses  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SR8: Individual Shops  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SR11: Markets and Car Boot Sales  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SR12: Large Use Class A3 (Food and 
Drink) Venues and Use Class A4 (Pubs 
and Clubs)  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SR13: Nightclubs  SD37: Development in  Town and Village Centres  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SR14: New Hotel and Guest 
Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SR16: Major Sporting and Recreation 
Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SR17: Smaller Scale Sporting and 
Recreational Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
454                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SR18: Seafront Recreation  SD18: The Coast  
SD46:  Provision  and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SR20: Protection of Public and Private 
Outdoor Recreation Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
SR21: Loss of Indoor Recreation Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
SR22: Major Sporting Venues  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
NC2: Sites of National Importance for 
Nature Conservation  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NC3: Local Nature Reserves (LNRs)  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NC4: Sites of Nature Conservation 
Importance (SNCIs) and Regionally 
Important Geological Sites ( RIGS)  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
NC5: Urban Fringe  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
NC6: Development in the 
Countryside/Downland  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
NC7: Sussex Downs Area or Outstanding 
Natural Beauty  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
455                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD3: Major  Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD25: Development Strategy  
NC8: Setting of the Sussex Downs Area 
of Outstanding Beauty  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD25: Development Strategy  
HE1: Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
HE2: Demolition of a Listed Building  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
HE3: Development Affecting the Setting of 
a Listed Building  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
HE4: Reinstatement of Original Features 
of Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
HE6: Reinstatement of Original Features 
on Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Envir onment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  Bright on & Hove City Council - Saved P olicies from Brighton & Hove Local Plan 2005  
456                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
HE8: Demolition in Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE9: Advertisements and Signs Within 
Conservation Areas and on, or in the 
Vicinity of a Listed Building  SD53: Adverts  
SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE10 : Buildings of Local interest  SD12: Historic Environment  
HE11 : Historic Parks and Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
HE12 : Scheduled Ancient Monuments and 
other Important Archaeological Sites  SD15: Conservation Areas  
 
 
 Chichester District Council - Saved Policies from Chichester District Local Plan (1999)  
457                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan  Policy  
RE1: Development in the Rural Area 
Generally  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
RE4: Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
– Chichester Harbour and Sussex Downs: 
Protection of Landscape Character  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
RE6: Strategic Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
RE7: Nature Conservation – Designated 
Sites SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
RE8: Nature Conservation – Non-
Designated Sites  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
RE11A : Horticultural Development: Areas 
for Horticu ltural Development  SD39 : Agriculture and Forestry  
RE11B : Horticultural Development 
Elsewhere  SD39 Agriculture and Forestry  
RE12 : Rural Diversification  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
RE14 : Conversions in the Rural Area  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
RE15 : Major Institutions  SD25: Development Strategy  
RE17 : Community Facilities in the Rural 
Area SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
RE19 : Removal of Agricultural Workers 
Dwelling Conditions  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  Chichester District Council - Saved Policies from Chichester District Local Plan (1999)  
458                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan  Policy  
RE21 : Safeguarding Existing Travelling 
Showpeople’s Sites  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and  Traveling Showpeople  
RE23 : Safeguarding Existing Gypsy S ites SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and  Travelling 
Showpeople  
RE28 : Historic Parks and Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
BE1: Settlement Policy Boundary  SD25: Development Strategy  
BE2: Loss of Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
BE3: Archaeology  SD15: Conservation Areas  
BE4: Buildings of Architectural or Historic 
Merit  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
BE5: Alterations to Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
BE6: Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
BE9: Advertisements  SD53: Adverts  
BE11: New Developm ent SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
BE12: Alterations, Extensions and 
Conversions  SD5: Design  
SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
BE13: Town Cramming  SD5: Design  Chichester District Council - Saved Policies from Chichester District Local Plan (1999)  
459                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan  Policy  
BE14: Wildlife Habitat, Trees, Hedges and 
Other Landscape Features  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
BE16: Energy Conservation  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
TR5: Other Existing Car Parks  SD22: Parking Provision  
TR6: Highway Safety  SD19 Transport and Accessibility  
SD21 Pu blic Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
TR8: Catering for Cyclists and Pedestrians  SD21 Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art 
SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR9: Public Transport  SD21 Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR12 : Chichester to Midhurst Disused 
Railway Line  SD20 Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
TR13 : Roadside Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
H1: Dwelling Requirement  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD82: Holmbush Caravan Park, Midhurst  
H3: Polluted Sites  SD55: Contaminated Land  
H4: Size and Density of Dwellings  SD26: Supply of Homes  
H5: Open Space Requirements  SD5: Design  Chichester District Council - Saved Policies from Chichester District Local Plan (1999)  
460                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan  Policy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial  Grounds  / 
Cemeteries  
H6: Maintenance of Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
H8: Social and Low Cost Housing in 
Settlement Policy Areas  SD28: Affordable Housing  
H9: Social Housing in the Rural Area  SD28: Affordable Housing  
H10: Loss of Dwellings  SD28: Affordable Housing  
H11: Residential Caravans  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD33 Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
H12: Replacement Dwellings and 
Extensions in the Rural Area  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
B1: Floorspace Provision  SD35: Employment Land  
B5: Rural Area – New Build and Extension  SD35: Employment Land  
B6: Redevelopment of Authorised uses  SD35: Employment Land  
SD4: Landscape Character  
B8: Safeguarding Business Floorspace  SD35: Employment Land  
S6: East Wittering, Midhurst, Petworth 
and Selsey Shopping Centres  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
R2: Provision of Facilities in Rural Area  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  Chichester District Council - Saved Policies from Chichester District Local Plan (1999)  
461                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan  Policy  
R3: Existing and Allocated Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
R4: Public Rights of Way and Other Paths  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
R5: Chichester Canal and Wey and Arun 
Canal  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
R6: Equestrian Facilities  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
R8: Noisy Sports  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
T1: Accommodation and Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T3: Provision in Rural Areas  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T4: Provision in Areas of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty  SD23: Sustainable To urism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T6: Occupancy Periods for Holiday 
Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T7: Touring Caravans and Tented 
Camping  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry  Diversification  
T9 :Change of Use from Touring to Static 
Holiday Caravan Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T10: Winter Storage of Touring Units  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
462                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
NE1: Development Outside the Built Up 
Area Boundary  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
NE3: Conserving Water Resources  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
NE4: Sustainable Drainage Systems  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
NE5: Minimisation of Construction 
Industry Waste  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
NE6: Recycling Facilities  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
NE7: Waste Minimisation Measures in 
Residential Areas  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
NE11 : Energy Efficiency  SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
NE12 : Renewable Energy  SD51: Renewable Energy  
NE14 : Source Protection Zone  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
NE15 : Protection of Water Quality  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
NE16 : Development within 250 Metres of 
a Former Landfill Site  SD55: Contaminated Land  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
463                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
NE17 : Contaminated Land  SD55: Contaminated Land  
NE18 : Noise  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD35: Employment Land  
NE19 : Local Nature Reserves  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NE20 : Sites of Nature Conservation 
Interest  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NE22 : Wildlife Habitats  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NE23 : Nature Conservation of Other 
Sites SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
NE27 : Developed  / Partly Developed 
Coast  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD18: The Coast  
NE28 : Environmental Amenity  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
D1: Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
D2: Heritage Coast  SD18: The Coast  
D4: Agricultural Development  SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
D5: Change of Use of Agricultural 
Buildings  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
464                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
D6: Recreation and Leisure  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
UHT1 : Design of New Development  SD5: Design  
UHT2 : Height of Buildings  SD5: Design  
UHT3 : Setting of AONB  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
UHT4 : Visual Amenity  SD5: Design  
UHT5 : Protecting Walls  / Landscape 
Features  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
UHT6 : Tree Planting  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
UHT7 : Landscaping  SD5: Design  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
UHT8 : Protection of Amenity Space  SD5: Design  
UHT9 : Protection of Historic Parks and 
Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
UHT10 : Design of Public Areas  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
UHT11 : Shopfronts  SD52: Shop Fronts  
UHT12 : Advertisements  SD53: Adverts  
UHT13 : External Floodlighting  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
UHT14 : Public Art  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
465                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
UHT15 : Protection of Conservation 
Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
UHT16 : Protection of Areas of High 
Townscape Value  SD12: Historic Environment  
UHT17 : Protection of Listed Buildings and 
their Settings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
UHT18 : Buildings of Local Interest  SD12: Historic Environment  
UHT19 : Retention of Historic Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
HO1: Residential Development within the 
Existing Built -up Area  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO2: Predominantly Residential Areas  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO3: Retaining Residential Use  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO5: Other Housing Commitments  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO6: Infill Development  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO7: Redevelopment  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
HO8: Redevelopment of Garage Courts  SD25: Development Strategy  
HO9: Conversions and Change of Use  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
HO12 : Residential Mix  SD27: Mix of H omes  
HO13 : Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
HO14 : Houses in Multiple Occupation  SD27: Mix of H omes  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
466                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
HO15 : Dedicated Student 
Accommodation  SD27: Mix  of Homes  
HO16 : Sheltered Housing  SD27: Mix of H omes  
HO17 : Supported and Special Needs 
Housing  SD27: Mix of H omes  
HO18 : Wheelchair Housing  SD27: Mix of H omes  
HO19 : Sites of Gypsies and Travelling 
Show People  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
HO20 : Residential Amenity  SD5: Design  
BI1: Retention of Class B1, B2 and B8 
Sites and Premises  SD35: Employment Land  
BI6: Business and Industry in Residential 
and Tourist Areas  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
BI7: Design Criteria  SD5: Design  
TR2: Travel Demands  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR4: Quality Bus Corridors  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR5: Contributions to the Cycle Network  SD22: Parking Provision  
TR6: Facilities for Cyclists  SD22: Parking Provision  
TR7: Provision for Pedestrians  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway  Design and Public Art  
TR8: Contributions to the Pedestrian 
Network  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
467                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
TR9: Homes Zones  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway  Design and Public Art  
TR10 : Safer Routes to Schools  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway  Design and Public Art  
TR11 : Car Parking  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR12 : Car Parking for Those with 
Mobility Problems  SD19: Transport an d Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR13 : Park and Ride  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR14 Coach Parking  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR15 : Lorry Park  SD22: Parking Provision  
SH2: Business Uses Outside the Retail 
Hierarchy  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
SH6: New Local Convenience Stores  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SH7: District, Local and Neighbourhood 
Centres  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
TO1: Tourist Accommodation Area  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TO2: Retention of Tourist 
Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TO3: Tourist Accommodation Outside 
the Designated Area  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
468                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
TO4: Improvements to Existing 
Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TO5: New Tourist Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TO8: New Tourist Attractions and 
Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining  the Local Economy  
TO10 : Language Schools  SD34: Sustaining the Rural Economy  
LCF2 : Resisting Loss of Playing Fields  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD43: New and Existing C ommunity Facilities  
LCF3 : Criteria for Children’s Play Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LCF4 : Outdoor Playing Space 
Contributions  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LCF8 : Small Scale Sport and Recreation 
Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
LCF10 : Location of Major Leisure 
Developments  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
LCF11 : Major Leisure Developments  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemet eries  Eastbourne Borough Council - Saved P olicies from Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003)  
469                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
LCF16 : Criteria for New Schools  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LCF17 : Education Requirements  SD42: Infrastructure  
LCF20 : Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LCF21 : Retention of Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LCF23 : Library Requirements  SD42: Infrastructure  
LCF24 : Redevelopment of Public Houses  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
US1: Hazardous Installations  SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
US2: Water Resource Adequacy  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
US3: Infrastructure Services for Foul 
Sewerage and Surface Water Disposal  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
US4: Flood Protection and Surface water 
Disposal  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
US5: Tidal Flood Risk  SD49: Flood Risk Management  
US6: Integrity of Flood Defences  SD49: Flood Risk Management  
US7: Telecommunications Development 
on the Eastbourne Downlands  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
US8: Prior Approval for 
Telecommunications Development  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
US9: Telecommunications Development  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
US10 : Underground Ducting  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
IR2: Infrastructure Requirements  SD42: Infrastructure  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
470                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
E1: Infrastructure Delivery  SD42: Infrastructure  
GS3: Protecting the Countryside  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
GS4: Making the Most of Existing 
Infrastructure, Services and Facilities  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
C6: Tree Protection  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
C12: Equestrian  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
C13: Rural Diversif ication  SD40: Farm  and Forestry  Diversification  
HE2: Alterations and Extensions to 
Buildings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
HE3: Advertisements  SD53: Adverts  
HE4: New Development in a 
Conservation Area  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE5: Alterations to a Building in a 
Conservation Area  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE6: Change of Use of a Building in a 
Conservation Area  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE7: Demolition in a Conservation Area  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE8: Development Affecting the Setting of 
a Conservation Area  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE9: Demolition of a Listed Building  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
HE10 : Extension or Alteration of a Listed 
Building  SD12: Historic Environment  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
471                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
HE11 : Change of Use of a Listed Building  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
HE12 : Development Affecting the Setting 
of a Listed Building  SD12: Historic E nvironment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
HE13 : Buildings of Local Architectural, 
Historic or Townscape Interest  SD12: Historic Environment  
HE14 : Under Utilisation of Historic 
Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
HE15 : Commercial Frontages  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
HE16 : Commercial Frontages  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: S hop Fronts  
HE17 : Archaeology and Ancient 
Monuments  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE18 : Historic Parks and Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
HE19 : Ancient Tracks and Lanes  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD15: Conservation Areas  
T2: Public Transport Provision and 
Improvement  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
T3: Pedestrians and Cyclists  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
472                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
T4: Pedestrians and Cyclists  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
T5: New Recreational Footpaths  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
T7: Road Schemes  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD19: Transport and Acc essibility  
SD42: Infrastructure  
T11: Road User Facilities  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
T14: Servicing  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
E2: Renewable Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
P7: Contaminated Land  SD55: Contam inated Land  
H1: Housing Allocations  SD26: Supply of Homes  
H2: Reserve Housing Allocations  SD26: Supply of Homes  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
473                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
H3: Residential Development Within 
Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
H6: Loss of Residential Accommodation  SD25: Development Strategy  
H7: Subdivision of Dwellings Outside of 
Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
H8: Houses in Multiple Occupation  SD27: Mix of Homes  
H9: Areas of Special Housing Character  SD26: Supply of Homes  
H10: Special Housing Areas  SD26: Supply of Homes  
H13: Accommodation for the Elderly and 
Rest and Nursing Homes  SD27: Mix of Homes  
H14: Other Housing Outside Settlement 
Policy Boundaries  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD29: Rural Exce ption Sites  
H15: Removal of Occupancy Conditions  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
H16: Maintaining a Range of dwelling Sizes 
Outside Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
H17: Mobile Homes  SD27: Mix of Homes  
IB1: Industrial and Business Allocations  SD35: Employment Land  
IB2: Industrial or Business Development 
Within Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
IB3: Industrial and Busi ness Development 
in the Countryside  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD25: Development Strategy  
IB4: Retention of Industrial or Business 
Uses SD35: Employment Land  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
474                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
IB6: Special Industrial Estates, Town and 
Village Centres, Town Centre 
Development  SD34:  Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
TC2: Large Retail, Leisure and 
Entertainment Uses  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
TC3: Development in Town and Village 
Centres and Retail Development  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
S2: Primary Shopping Frontages  SD52: Shop Fronts  
S3: Primary Shopping Frontages  SD52: Shop Fronts  
S4: Secondary Shopping Frontages  SD52: Shop Fronts  
S5: Local and Village Shops  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
S6: The Control of Shops on Farms  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
S7: Garden Centres  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
TM1: Tourism Development  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TM2: Visitor Accommodation within 
Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD23: Sustainable Tourism SD34: Sustaining the Local 
Economy  
TM3: Visitor Accommodation outside 
Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TM4: Hotel Allocations  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TM5: Camping and Touring C aravan Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
475                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry Diversification  
TM6: Queen Elizabeth Country Park  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TM7: Conference Facilities  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
MOD1 : Buildings or Land Surplus to 
Requirem ents Within Settlement Policy 
Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
MOD2 : Buildings or Land Surplus to 
Requirements Outside Settlement Policy 
Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
HC1: Protection of Existing Facilities and 
Services  SD43: New and Existing  Community  Facilities  
HC2: Provision of Facilities and Services 
with New Development  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD42: Infrastructure  
HC3: Public Services, Community, 
Cultural, Leisure and Sports Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Pro vision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CF1: Community Facility Allocations  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
PS1: Public Service Allocations  SD43 New and Existing Community Facilities  
PS2: Buildings or Land Surplus to Public 
Service Requirements  SD25 : Development Strategy  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from East Hampshire District Local Plan: 
Second Review (2006)  
476                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
RI1: Residential Education Establishments  SD25: Development Strategy  
CR1: Crematorium and Burial Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and  Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
UI1: New Utility Infrastructure in the 
Countryside  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
UI3: Buildings or Land Surplus to the 
Requirements of Utility and Service 
Providers  SD25: Development Strategy  
UI4: Telecommunications  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
R1: Outdoor Sport and Recreation  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R2: Protection of Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R3: Public Open Space Requirements  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Ceme teries  
R4: Open Space Allocations  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R5: Recreation Facilities Requiring 
Extensive Areas of Land  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space , Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from Joint Core Strategy (2014)  
477                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP1: Presumption in Favour of 
Sustainable Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
CP2: Spatial Strategy  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD25: Development Strategy  
CP3: New Employment Provision  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
CP4: Existing Employment Land  SD35: Employment Land  
CP5: Employment and Workforce Skills  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
CP6: Rural Economy and Enterprise  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
CP7: New Retail Provision  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
CP8: Town and Village Facilities and 
Services  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
CP9: Tourism  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Sp ace, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
CP10 : Spatial Strategy for Housing  SD25: Development Strategy  
CP11 : Housing Tenure, Type and Mix  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
CP12 : Housing and Extra Care Provision 
for the Elderly  SD27: Mix of Homes  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from Joint Core Strategy (2014)  
478                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP13 : Affordable Housing on Residential 
Development Sites  SD28: Affordable Housing  
CP14 : Affordable Housing for Rural 
Communities  SD28: Affordable Housing  
CP15 : Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
CP16 : Protection and Provision of Social 
Infrastructure, Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CP17 : Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation and Built Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreationa l Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
CP18 : Provision of Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation and Built Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
CP19 : Development in the Countryside  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
CP20 : Landscape  SD4: Landscape Character  
CP21 : Biodiversity  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
CP22 : Internationally Designated Sites  SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
CP23 : Gaps Between Settlements  SD4: Landscape Character  East Hampshire District Council - Saved Policies from Joint Core Strategy (2014)  
479                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP24 : Sustainable Construction  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
CP25 : Flood Risk  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
CP26 : Water Resources  / Water Quality  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
CP27 : Pollution  SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
SD55: Contaminated Land  
CP28 : Green Infrastructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
CP29 : Design  SD5: Design  
CP30 : Historic Environment  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
CP31 : Transport  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
CSWB1 : Strategic Allocation  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
 Horsham District Council - Horsham District Local Development Framework: The Core  
Strategy (2007)  
480                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP1: Landscape and Townscape 
Character  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
CP2: Environmental Quality  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD7: Relative Tranqui llity 
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD54:  Pollution and Air Quality  
CP3: Improving the Quality of New 
Development  SD5: Design  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CP4: Housing Provision  SD26: Supply of Homes  
CP5: Built-up Areas and Previously 
Developed Land  SD25: Development Strategy  
CP8: Small Scale ‘Greenfield’ Sites  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
CP9: Managing the Release of Housing 
Land SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
CP10 : Employment Provision  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  Horsham District Council - Horsham District Local Development Framework: The Core  
Strategy (2007)  
481                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP11 : Employment Sites and Premises  SD35: Employment Land  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry Diversification  
CP12 : Meeting Housing Needs  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
CP13 : Infrastructure Requirements  SD42: Infrastructure  
CP14 : Protection and Enhancement of 
Community Facilities and Services  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CP15 : Rural Strategy  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry  Diversification  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
CP16 : Inclusive Communities  SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
CP17 : Vitality and Viability of Existing 
Centres  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
CP18 : Tourism and Cultural Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries    
SD40: F arm and Forestry  Diversification  
CP19 : Managing Travel Demand and 
Widening Choice of Transport  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  Horsham District Council - Horsham Local Development Framework: General 
Development Control Policies (2007)  
482                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DC1: Countryside Protection and 
Enhancement  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
DC2: Landscape Character  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
DC3: Settlement Coalescence  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
DC4: Areas of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty (AONBs)  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD9: Biodiversity  and Geodiversity  
DC5: Biodiversity and Geology  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
DC6: Woodland and Trees  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
DC7: Flooding  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
DC8: Renewable Energy and Climate 
Change  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
DC9: Development Principles  SD1: Sustainable Development  Horsham District Council - Horsham Local Development Framework: General 
Development Control Policies (2007)  
483                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD5: Design  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD22: Parking Provision  
DC10 : Archaeological Sites and Ancient 
Monuments  SD15: Conservation Areas  
DC11 : Historic Parks and Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
DC12 : Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
DC13 : Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
DC14 : Shop Fronts and Advertisements  SD52: Shop Fronts  
SD53: Adverts  
DC16 : Park Homes  / Residential Caravans  SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
DC17 : ReDevelopment  / Change of Use 
of Dwellings to Non -residential Use  SD26: Supply of Homes  
DC18 : Smaller Homes  / Housing Mix  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
DC19 : Employment Site  / Land Protection  SD35: Em ployment Land  
DC20 : New Employment Development  SD35: Employment Land  Horsham District Council - Horsham Local Development Framework: General 
Development Control Policies (2007)  
484                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DC21 : Protection of Existing Open Space, 
Sport and Recreation Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
DC22 : New Open Space, Sports and 
Recreation  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Groun ds / 
Cemeteries  
DC23 : Sustainable Farm Diversification  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
DC24 : Conversion of Agricultural and 
Rural Buildings for Industrial, B usiness or 
Residential Uses  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
DC25 : Rural Economic Development and 
the Expansion of Existing Rural 
Commercial Sites  / Intensification of Uses  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National  
Park 
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
DC26 : Replacement Buildings for 
Commercial Uses in the Countryside  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry  Diversification  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural o r 
Forestry Buildings  
DC27 : Essential Rural Workers Dwellings  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
DC28 : House Extensions, Replacement 
Dwellings and Ancillary Accommodation  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
DC29 : Equestrian Development  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
DC30 : Exceptions Housing Schemes  SD5: Design  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  Horsham District Council - Horsham Local Development Framework: General 
Development Control Policies (2007)  
485                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DC31 : New / Extensions to Retirement 
Housing and Care Home Schemes  SD27: Mix of H omes  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
DC32 : Gypsies and Travellers  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
DC33 : Travelling Showpeople  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
DC34 : New Retail Development within 
the Defined Town and Village Centres  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
DC35 : New Reta il and Leisure 
Development Outside the Defined Town 
and Village Centres  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
DC36 : Change of use within Defined 
Town and Village Centres  SD35: Empl oyment Land  
DC37 : Neighbourhood and Village Shops  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
DC38 : Farm Shops and Garden Centres 
in Rural Areas  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
DC39 : Tourism  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries   
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
DC40 : Transport and Access  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public  Art 
SD22: Parking Provision  
DC41 : Protection of Car Parks  SD22: Parking Provision  Lewes District Council – Saved policies from Lewes District Local Plan  (2003)  
486                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
ST3: Design, Form and Setting of 
Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
ST4: Design, Form and Setting of 
Development  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
ST5: Access for People with Limited 
Mobility  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
ST6: Access for People with Limited 
Mobility  SD5: Design  
ST11: Landscaping of Development  SD5: Design  
ST14: Water Supply  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
ST20: Recycling and Re -use of Materials  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
ST21: Recycling and Re -use of Materials  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
ST25: Pylons and Overhead Lines  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
ST29: Advertisements  SD15: Conservation Areas  
SD53: Adverts  
ST30: Protection of Air and Land Quality  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
RES6: Residential Development in the 
Countryside  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  Lewes District Council – Saved policies from Lewes District Local Plan  (2003)  
487                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
RES7: Residential Conversions in the 
Countryside  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD29: Rural Except ion Sites  
SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
RES8: Replacement Dwellings in the 
Countryside  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
RES10 :Affordable Homes Exception Sites 
(i.e. Outside Planning Boundary)  SD28: Affordable Housing  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
RES13 : Extensions  SD5: Design  
SD31: Extensions to existing buildings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
RES14 : Extensions in the Countryside  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD31: Extensions to existing buildings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
RES18 : Garages and Other Buildings 
Ancillary to Existing Dwellings  SD5: Design  
SD31: Extensions to existing buildings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
RES19 : Provision of Outdoor Playing 
Space  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
E14: Bunk House Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  Lewes District Council – Saved policies from Lewes District Local Plan  (2003)  
488                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
E15: Existing Camping  / Touring Caravan 
Sites SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
E17: New Camping  / Touring Caravan 
Sites SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
H2: Listed Buildings  SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
H3: Buildings of Local, Visual or Historic 
Interest  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
H4: Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
H5: Development within or affecting 
Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
H7: Traffic in Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
H12: Areas of Established Character  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
H13: Parks and Gardens of Special 
Historic Interest  SD12: Historic Environment  
H14: Parks and Gardens of Local Historic 
Interest  SD12: Historic Environment  Lewes District Council – Saved policies from Lewes District Local Plan  (2003)  
489                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
RE1: Provision of Sport, Recreation and 
Play SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
RE7: Recreation and the Rivers  SD17: Protection of the Water  Environment  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
RE8: Equestrian and Related Activities  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
CT1: Planning Boundary and Key 
Countryside  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
CT5: Institutional Sites  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD35: Employment Land  
T3: Rail SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
T4: The Lewes  / Uckfield Railway  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
T16: Telecommunications  SD44: Te lecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
LW1: Lewes House Site  SD26: Supply of Homes  
LW3: Malling Brooks Business Area  SD26: Supply of Homes  
LW4: Malling Brooks Business Area  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD80: Malling Brooks, Lewes  
LW5: Malling Brooks Business Area  SD80: Malling Brooks, Lewes  
LW6: Land south of Pinwell Road  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
LW8: The Townscape  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD12: Historic Environment  
SD15: Conservation Areas  Lewes District Council – Saved policies from Lewes District Local Plan  (2003)  
490                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
LW9: Lewes Battlefield  SD12: Historic Environment  
LW10 : Access to the River Ouse  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
LW11 : The Green Core  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
LW13 : Cliffe High Street  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
LW14 : Bear Yard  SD22: Parking Provision  
SD4: Landscape Character  
PT15 : Telscombe Tye and Telscombe 
Village  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilit ies and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
PT17 : Land North of Bannings Vale  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
PT19 : The Valley Area  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
PT20 : Private Recreation Proposals  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
SF11: Bishopstone Conservation Area  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD15: Conservation Areas  
SF12: Land North of Alfriston  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
BG1: Industrial Development at Balcombe 
Pit SD25: Development Strategy  Lewes District Council  – Joint Core Strategy (Local Plan Part 1) (2016)  
491                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
Spatial Policy 3 : North Street and Eastgate 
Area SD57: North Street Quarter and adjacent Eastgate area, 
Lewes  
Core Policy 1 : Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
Core Policy 2 : Housing, Type, Mix and 
Density  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
Core Policy 3 : Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
Core Policy 4 : Economic Development & 
Regeneration  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
Core Policy 5 : The Visitor Economy  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
Core Policy 6 : Retail and Town Centres  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
Core Policy 7 : Infrastructure  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
Core Policy 8 : Green Infr astructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
Core Policy 9 : Air Quality  SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
Core Policy 10 : Natural Environment and 
Landscape  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  Lewes District Council  – Joint Core Strategy (Local Plan Part 1) (2016)  
492                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
Core Policy 11 : Built and Historic 
Environment & Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
Core Policy 12 : Flood Risk, Coastal 
Erosion & Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD18: The Coast  
SD49:  Flood Risk Management  
SD50:  Sustainable Drainage  
Core Policy 13 : Sustainable Travel  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD22: Parking Provision  
Core Policy 14 : Renewable and Low 
Carbon Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
 Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
493                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
G1: Sustainable Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable  Use of Resources  
G2: Sustainable Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
G3: Infrastructure Requirements  SD42: Infrastructure  
C1: Protection of the Countryside  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
C2: Strategic Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
C3: Local Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
C4: Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
C5: Nature Conservation  SD2: Ec osystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
C6: Trees, Hedgerow and Woodlands  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
494                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
C8: Farm Fragmentation  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
C9: Incorporation of Agricultural Land 
into Residential Curtilages  SD4: Landscape Character  
C10: Prior Notification  SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
C11: Livestock Units  SD39: Agriculture and Forestry  
C12: Farm Diversification  SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
C13: Reuse of Conversion of Rural 
Buildings  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
C14: Reuse of Institutional Buildings and 
Country Houses  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
SD34: Sustaining  the Local Economy  
C15: Extensions to Institutional or 
Converted Rural Buildings in Business Use  SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
B1: Design  SD5: Design  
B2: Residential Estate Developments  SD5: Design  
SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
B3: Residential Amenities  SD5: Design  
B4: Energy and Water Conservation  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
495                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
B5: Designing for the Disabled  SD5: Design  
B6: Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD47: Local Green Spaces  
B7: Trees and Development  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
B8: Public Art  SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
B9: Crime Prevention and Design  SD5: Design  
B10: Listed Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
B11: Buildings of Merit  SD12: Historic  Environment  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
B12: Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
B13: Demolition in Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
B14: Pavements in Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Are as 
B15: Setting of Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
B16: Areas of Townscape Character  SD5: Design  
B17: Historic Parks and Gardens  SD12: Historic Environment  
B18: Archaeological Sites  SD15: Conservation Areas  
B19: Advertisements  SD53: Adverts  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
496                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
B20: Advertisements in Conservation 
Areas  SD15: Conservation Areas  
SD53: Adverts  
B21: Area of Special Control  SD53: Adverts  
B22: Shopfront Security  SD52: Shop Fronts  
B23: Noise Pollution  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD35:  Employment Land  
B24: Light Pollution  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
B25: Satellite Dishes  SD5: Design  
SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
H1: Housing Allocation  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD87: Land at Church Lane, Pyecombe  
H2: Density and Dwelling Mix  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
H3: Infill within Built -up Areas  SD25: Development Strategy  
H4: Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
H5: Rural Exception Housing  SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
H6: Conservation of Residential 
Accommodation  SD25: Development Strategy  
H7: Housing for the Elderly  SD27: Mix of H omes  
H8: Nursing and Residential Care Homes  SD27: Mix ofH homes  
H9: Extensions of Dwellings in Built -up 
Areas  SD5: Design  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
497                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
H10: Conversions of Flats and Housing in 
Multiple Occupation  SD27: Mix of H omes  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
H11: Housing in the Countryside  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
H12: Rebuilding of Existing Dwellings in 
the Countryside  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
H13: Extensions to Dwellings in the 
Countryside  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
H14: Gypsy Sites  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
H15: Safeguarding Existing Gypsy Sites  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
H16: Sites for Travelling Showpeople  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
E1: Allocated Business Sites  SD35: Employment Land  
E2: Retention of Business Land  SD35: Employment Land  
E3: Storage and Warehousing  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
E4: Proximity of Residential Property to 
Established Business Areas  SD5: Design  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
E5: Additional Business Development  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
E6: Business Development in the Villages  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
498                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
E7: New Business Development in the 
Countryside  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
E8: Inappropriately Located Uses  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
S1: Town Centre Shopping Developments  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
S2: Requirements for New Retail 
Developments  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
S3: Primary Shopping Frontages  SD52: Shop Fronts  
S4: Secondary Shopping Frontages  SD52: Shop Fronts  
S5: Vacant Space above Shops  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
S6: Local Shopping Areas  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
S7: Local Shopping Facilities  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
S8: Developments on Edge -of-Centre 
Sites SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
S9: Development on Out -of-Centre Sites  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
S10: Garden Centres and Farm Shops  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
T3: Heavy Goods Vehicles  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
T4: New Development  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
499                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
T5: Parking Standards  SD22: Parking Provision  
T6: Cycle Parking  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
T7: Lorry and Coach Parking  SD22: Parking Provision  
T8: Road Side Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
R1: Sporting and Recreational 
Development in the Built -Up Areas  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R2: Protection of Existing Recreational 
Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R3: Outdoor Playing Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R4: Off Site Provision of Outdoor Playing 
Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial Grounds / 
Cemeteries  
R5: Artificial Turf Pitches and Flood Lights  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
R6: Informal Public Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
R7: Retention of Existing Facilities in the 
Countryside  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
SD23: Sustain able Tourism  
R8: New Countryside Recreational 
Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries SD23: Sustainable Tourism  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
500                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
R9: Golf Courses  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
R10: After Use of Mineral Workings  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
R11: Noisy Sports  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
R12: Equestrian Development  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD24: Equestrian Uses  
R13: Proposals for New or Extended 
Tourism Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and P rotection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
R15: Hotel and Other Serviced 
Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
R16: Self-Catering Accommodation  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
R17: Static Holiday Caravan Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
R18: Touring Caravan and Camp Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: S ustaining the Local Economy  
CS1: New Educational Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS2: Dual Use of Educational Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
501                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CS3: Reuse of Educational Land and 
Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS4: Pre-school Educational Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS5: Medical Practitioners  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS6 Retention of Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS7: Retention of Public Houses  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS8: Extension of Community Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS9: Requirements of New Residential 
Development for Community Facilities  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS10 : Retention of Allotments  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD45: Green Infrastruc ture 
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CS11 : Infrastructure  SD42: Infrastructure  
CS12 : Water Supplies and Sewerage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
CS13 : Land Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
CS14 : Safeguarding Flood Defences  SD49: Flood Risk Management  
CS15 : Flooding  SD2: Ecosystems Services  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
502                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
CS16 : Water Quality  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
CS17 : Telecommunications  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
CS18 : Recycling Facilities  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
CS19 : Renewable Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SD45: Green  Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
CS20 : Derelict and Contaminated Land  SD55: Contaminated Land  
CS21 : Unstable Land  SD55: Contaminated Land  
CS22 : Pollution  SD55: Contaminated Land  
CS23 : Hazardous Substances  SD55: Contaminated Land  
KH5: Recreation and Formal Sport  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
KH6: Butchers Wood and Lags Wood  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
KH7: Footpath Link  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  Mid Sussex District Council Saved policies from Mid Sussex Local Plan (2004)  
503                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
PO1: Public Open Space  SD46:  Provision and Protec tion of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
PO2: Dyke Railway Trail  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
PY1: Land Between Church Lane and 
A273  SD87: Land at Church Lane, Pyecombe  
 Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
504                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
GD1: Development Within Development 
Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
GD2: Development Within Development 
Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
EN1: Sustainable Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
EN2: Development Pattern  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD25: Development Strategy  
EN5: Water Resources  SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
EN8: Low Weald  SD4/WW : The Western Weald  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
EN9: Sussex Downs AONB  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs 
National Park  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
EN12 : Protection of Trees and Woodlands  SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
EN13 : Ancient Semi -natural Woodland  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodi versity  
SD11: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows  
EN14 : Landscaping Within Developments  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
EN15 : Designated Nature Conservation Sites  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD10: International Sites  
EN18: Protection of Open Areas within 
Settlements  SD2: Ecosystems Services  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
505                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
EN19 : Development Within Conservation Areas  SD15: Conservation Area s 
EN27 : Layout and Design of Development  SD5: Design  
EN28 : Design of Development for People with 
Disabilities  SD5: Design  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public 
Art 
EN29 : Light Pollution  SD8: Dark Night Skies  
DC2: Agricultural Dwellings  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
DC3: Agricultural Buildings and Other Farm 
Development  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry  Diversification  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Building s 
DC6: Conve rsion of Rural Buildings – General  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Building s 
DC7: Conversion of Rural Buildings – Non-
residential Use  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Building s 
DC8: Conversion of Rural Buildings – Residential 
Use SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Building s 
DC9: Recreational Development in the Sussex 
Downs AONB & Ashdown Forest  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
DC11 : Golf Driving Ranges  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space , 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
DC12 : Stables and Loose Boxes  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
DC13 : Larger Equestrian Developments  SD24: Equestrian Uses  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
506                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
DC14 : Motor and Gun Sports  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
DC17 : Housing Development in the Countryside  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: M ajor Development in the South Downs 
National Park  
SD25: Development Strategy  
DC18 : Replacement Dwellings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
DC19 : Extensions to Dwellings  SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and 
provision of annexes and outbuildings  
DC20 : Subdivision of Large Dwellings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
DC22 : Residential Mobile Homes  SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
HG5: Dwelling Mix within New Development 
Schemes  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
HG6: Crime Prevention in New Housing 
Developments  SD5: Design  
HG7: Energy Consideration in New Housing 
Developments  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
HG8: Retention of Existing Housing Stock  SD25: Development Strategy  
HG9: Subdivision of Large Buildings in 
Development Boundaries  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
HG10 : Extensions to Dwellings in Development 
Boundaries  SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and 
provision of annexes and outbuildings  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
507                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
HG11 : Special Needs Housing in Development 
Boundaries  SD27: Mix of Homes  
HG12 : Special Needs Housing Outside 
Development Boundaries  SD27: Mix of Homes  
BS3: Town Business Areas  SD35: Employment Land  
BS4: Business Development within Towns  SD35: Employment Land  
BS5: Retention of Existing Businesses within 
Towns  SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
BS6: Village Business Areas  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
D43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
BS7: Retention of Existing Businesses within 
Villages  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
BS8: Business Development in Village 
Development Boundaries  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD36: Town and Village Centres  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
BS9: Expansio n, Redevelopment, Intensification in 
Existing Business Sites Outside Development 
Boundaries  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
BS11: Business Class B1 Use, with Business Areas  SD35: Employment Land  
BS12: General Industry, Class B2, in Business 
Areas  SD35: Employment Land  
BS13: Warehousing, Class B8, in Business Areas  SD35: Employment Land  
BS14: Alternative Uses for Business Sites Outside 
Business Area  SD35: Employment Land  
BS15: Home Working  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SH11 : Farm Shops  SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SH12 : Garden Centres  SD38: Shops outside Centres  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
508                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
TR1: Environment Impact of New Road 
Proposals  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public 
Art 
TR2 Design of New Road Proposals  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public 
Art 
TR3: Traffic Impact of New Development  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TR10 : Heavy Goods Vehicles in Rural Areas  SD22: Parking Provision  
TR13 : Footpaths and Bridleways  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
TR16 : Car Parking Standards  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
TM1: Tourist Attractions and Facilities  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
TM2: Tourist Attractions and Facilities: Sussex 
Downs AONB  & Ashdown Forest  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
TM3: Conversions to Hostel Accommodation for 
Walkers and Cyclists  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD22: Parking Provision  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
TM4: Holiday Villages and Chalet Parks  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
509                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
TM5: Static Caravan Sites  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
TM7: Touring Caravan and Camping Sites: Sussex 
Downs AONB and Coastal Levels  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
TM8: Touri ng Caravan and Camping Sites  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD40: Farm  and Forestry Diversification  
TM9: Caravan Storage  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
TM10 : Interpretive Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
LR1: Provision of Outdoor Playing Space  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds / Cemeteries  
LR2: Protection of Existing Recreational Open 
Space  SD46:  Provision and Pr otection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds / Cemeteries  
LR3: Children’s Play Space in Developments of 
30+ Dwellings  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds / Cem eteries  
LR4: Artificial Turf Pitches  SD5: Design  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  
LR5: Informal Amenity Space in New Residential 
Developments  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, 
Sport and Recreational Facilities and Burial 
Grounds  / Cemeteries  Wealden District Council  - Saved policies from Wealden District Local Plan (1998)  
510                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
LR7: Indoor Sports Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
LR8: Community Halls  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CS1: Provision of Capital Works and Services  SD42: Infrastructure  
CS2: Drainage  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
CS3: Willingdon Levels Drainage Catchment Area  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of 
Resources  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
CS4: Recycling Enclosures: Residential 
Development  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
CS5: Recycling Enclosures: Commercial and 
Community Development  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
VB7: Old Willingdon Road and Western 
Downlands Housing Policy Area, Friston  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD25: Development Strategy  
 
 Wealden District (Incorporating Part of the South Downs National Park) Core Strategy 
Local Plan (2013 ) 
511                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
WCS1 : Provision of Homes and Jobs 
2006-2027 SD25: Development Strategy  
SD35: Employment Land  
WCS2 : Distribution of Housing Growth 
2006-2027 SD26: Supply of Homes  
WCS3 : Distribution of Employment (B 
Class) and Retail (Convenience and 
Comparison)  SD35: Employment Land  
WCS5 : Managing the Release of Housing 
Land SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of  Homes  
WCS6 : Rural Areas Strategy  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
WCS7 : Effective Provision of 
Infrastructure  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD44: Telecommunicati ons and Utilities Infrastructure  
CP1 
WCS8 : Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
WCS9 : Rural Exception Affordable 
Housing  SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
WCS10 : The Travelling Community – 
Provision for Gypsies and Travellers  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
WCS11 :The Travelling Community – 
Provision for Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople: Site Criteria  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
WCS12 : Biodiversity  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Bio diversity and Geodiversity  Wealden District (Incorporating Part of the South Downs National Park) Core Strategy 
Local Plan (2013 ) 
512                                                               Existing Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
WCS13 : Green Infrastructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
WCS14 : Presumption in Favour of 
Sustainable Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD25: Development Strategy  
 Winchester City Council - Saved policies from Winchester District Local Plan (2006)  
513                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DP2: Master Plan Requirement for Large 
Sites SD5: Design  
DP3: General Design Criteria  SD5: Design  
DP4: Landscape and the Built 
Environment  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD6: Safeguarding Views  
DP5: Design of Amenity Open Space  SD5: Design  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
DP10 : Pollution Generating Development  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
DP11 : Unneighbourly Uses  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
DP12 : Pollution Sensitive Development  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
DP13 : Development on Contaminated 
Land SD55: Contaminated Land  
DP14 : Public Utilities  SD44: Telecommunications and Utilities Infrastructure  
CE2: Local Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
CE17 : Re-use of Non -residential Buildings 
in the Countryside  SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
CE19 : Housing for Essential Rural 
Workers  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  Winchester City Council - Saved policies from Winchester District Local Plan (2006)  
514                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CE20 : Housing for Essential Rural 
Workers (permanent dwellings)  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
CE21 : Removal of Occupancy Conditions  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
CE22 : Dwellings for Other Rural 
Workers  SD32: New  Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
CE23 : Extension and Replacement 
Dwellings  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
CE24 : Conversion and Changes of Use to 
Residential  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
CE25 : Conversion of Larger Buildings in 
Extensive Grounds  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
CE26 : Staff Accommodation  SD32: New Agricultural and Forestry Workers 
Dwellings  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricultural or 
Forestry Buildings  
CE28 : Sustainable Recreation Facilities  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provisio n and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
HE1: Archaeological Site Preservation  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE2: Archaeological Site Assessment  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE4: Conservation Areas – Landscape 
Setting  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE5: Conservation Areas – Development 
Criteria  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE6: Conservation Areas – Detail 
Required  SD15: Conservation Areas  Winchester City Council - Saved policies from Winchester District Local Plan (2006)  
515                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
HE7: Conservation Areas – Demolition of 
Buildings  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE8: Conservation Areas – Retention of 
Features  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE9: Shopfronts – Retention of Existing  SD15: Conservation Areas  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
HE10 : Shopfronts – New Shopfronts  SD15: Conservation Areas  
SD52: Shop Fronts  
HE11 Signage  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE12 : Blinds and Shutters  SD15: Conservation Areas  
HE14 : Alterations to Historic Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
HE17 : Re-use and Conversion of Historic 
Redundant, Agricultural or Industrial 
Buildings  SD12: Historic Environment  
SD13: Listed Buildings  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SD41: Conversion of Redundant Agricult ural or 
Forestry Buildings  
H3: Settlement Policy Boundaries  SD25: Development Strategy  
H10: Mobile Homes (Loss)  SD30: Replacement Dwellings  
SF1: Town Centre Development – New SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SF2: Town Centre Development - Loss SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
SF3: Town Centre Development – Food 
& Drink  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  Winchester City Council - Saved policies from Winchester District Local Plan (2006)  
516                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
SF5: Primary Shopping Area  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
RT1: Important Amenity Areas  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD47: Local Green Spaces  
RT5: Site Allocation for Recreation  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
RT11 : Equestrian Development  SD24: Equestrian Uses  
RT12 : Golf Related Development  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
RT13 : Noisy Sports  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
RT16 : Tourism & Leisure Facilities in the 
Countryside  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
RT17 : Camping  / Caravanning Sites  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
RT18 : Permanent Short -Stay Tourist 
Accommodation in Countryside  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
T2: Development Access  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
T3: Development Layout  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD22: Parking Provision  
T4: Parking Standards  SD22: Parking Provision  Winchester City Council - Saved policies from Winchester District Local Plan (2006)  
517                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
T9: Freight Facilities  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
W4: Park and Ride  SD22: Parking Provision  
W6: Parking Controls & Servicing – New 
Public Car Parks  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
W7: Parking Controls and Servicing – 
Parking Standards  SD22: Parking Provision  
W11: New Bridleway Proposal  SD20: Walking, Cycling and Equestrian Routes  
 Winchester City Council - Local Plan Part 1 - Joint Core Strategy (2013)  
 
518                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
DS1: Development Strategy and Principles  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  
WT1 : Development Strategy for 
Winchester Town  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD12: Historic Environment  
MTRA1 : Development Strategy Market 
Towns and Rural Area  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD4: Landscape Ch aracter  
SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD38: Shops outside Centres  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD42: Infrastructure  
MTRA2 : Market Towns and Larger 
Villages  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD4: Landscape Character  
MTRA3 : Other Settlements in the Market 
Towns and Rural Area  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD4: Landscape Character  
MTRA4: Development in the Countryside  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Land scape Character  
SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  Winchester City Council - Local Plan Part 1 - Joint Core Strategy (2013)  
 
519                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
MTRA5 : Major Commercial and 
Educational Establishments in the 
Countryside  SD25: Development Strategy  
 
CP1: Housing Provision  SD26: Supply of Homes  
CP2: Housing Provision and Mix  SD25: Development Strategy  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
CP3: Affordable Housing Provision on 
Market Led Housing Sites  SD28: Affordable Housing  
CP4: Affordable Housing on Exception 
Sites to Meet Local Needs  SD29: Rural Exception Sites  
CP5:Sites for Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople  SD33: Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
CP6: Local Services and Facilities  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
CP7: Open Space, Sport and Recreation  SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
CP8: Economic Growth and 
Diversification  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
SD40: Farm and Forestry Diversification  
CP9: Retention of Employment Land and 
Premises  SD35: Employment Land  
CP10 : Transport  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
CP11 : Sustainable Low and Zero Carbon 
Built Development  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources  Winchester City Council - Local Plan Part 1 - Joint Core Strategy (2013)  
 
520                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP12 : Renewable and Decentralised 
Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation of 
Historic Buildings  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and  Sustainable Use of Resources  
SD51: Renewable Energy  
CP13 : High Quality Design  SD5: Design  
CP14 : The Effective Use of Land  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD25: Development Strategy  
CP15 : Green Infrastructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
CP16 : Biodiversity  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
CP17 : Flooding, Flood Risk and the Water 
Environment  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
CP18 : Settlement Gaps  SD4: Landscape Character  
CP19 : South Downs National Park  SD1: Sustainable Development  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD25: Development Strategy  
CP20 : Heritage and Landscape Character  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
SD12: Historic Environment  
SD15: Conservation Areas  Winchester City Council - Local Plan Part 1 - Joint Core Strategy (2013)  
 
521                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
CP21 : Infrastructure and Community 
Benefit  SD42: Infrastructure  
SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  Worthing Borough Council - Saved policies from Worthing  Local Plan (2003)  
 
522                                                               Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
RES7: Control of Polluting Development  SD7: Relative Tranquillity  
SD8: Dark Night Skies  
SD54: Pollution and Air Quality  
RES9: Contaminated Land  SD55: Contaminated Land  
BE25: Environment Areas of Special 
Character  SD4: Landscape Character  
SD5: Design  
TR4: Development at Railway Stations  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
TR9: Parking Requirements for 
Development  SD22: Parking Provision  
H16: Domestic Extensions and 
Alteration s SD31: Extensions to existing dwellings, and provision of 
annexes and outbuildings  
H18: Residential Amenity  SD5: Design  
SC8: Day Nurseries and Crèches  SD43: New and Existing Community F acilities  
 
 Worthing Borough Council – Wort hing Joint Core Strategy (2011)  
523 Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
Policy 3:  Providing for a Diverse and 
Sustainable Economy  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
Policy 4 : Protecting Employment 
Opportunities  SD34: Sustaining the Local Economy  
SD35: Employment Land  
Policy 5: The Visitor Economy  SD23: Sustainable Tourism  
Policy 6: Retail  SD37: Development in Town and Village Centres  
Policy 7: Meeting Housing Need  SD26: Supply of Homes  
Policy 8: Getting the Right Mix of Homes  SD26: Supply of Homes  
SD27: Mix of Homes  
SD28: Affordable Housing  
Policy 9 : Existing Housing Stock  SD25: Development Strategy  
Policy 10 : Affordable Housing  SD28: Affordable Housing  
Policy 11 : Protecting and Enhancing 
Recreation and Community Uses  SD43: New and Existing Community Facilities  
SD46:  Provision and Protection of Open Space, Sport 
and Recreational Facilities and Burial G rounds  / 
Cemeteries  
SD47: Local Green Spaces  
Policy 12 : New Infrastructure  SD3: Major Development in the South Downs  National 
Park 
SD42: Infrastructure  
Policy 13 : The Natural Environment and 
Landscape Character  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD3: Major Development in the South Downs National 
Park 
SD4: Landscape Character  
SD9: Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
SD25: Development  Strategy  Worthing Borough Council – Wort hing Joint Core Strategy (2011)  
524 Saved Policy  SD Local Plan Policy  
Policy 14 : Green Infrastructure  SD45: Green Infrastructure  
Policy 15 : Flood Risk and Sustainable 
Water Management  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD17: Protection of the Water Environment  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD49: Flood Risk Management  
SD50: Sustainable Drainage  
Policy 16 : Built Environment and Design  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD5: Design  
SD21: Public Realm, Highway Design and Public Art  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources   
Policy 17 : Sustainable Construction  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
Policy 18 : Sustainable Energy  SD2: Ecosystems Services  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
SD48: Climate Change and Sustainable Use of Resources   
SD51: Renewable Energy  
SD14: Climate Change Mitigation and Adap tation of 
Historic Buildings  
Policy 19 : Sustainable Travel  SD19: Transport and Accessibility  
SD22: Parking Provision  
SD45: Green Infrastructure  
  
525 APPENDIX 3: MARKETING 
REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGE OF USE 
APPLICATIONS  
1. Introduction  
1.1. The purpose of this appendix is to clarify the marketing and economic viability evidence 
required from applicants proposing schemes that result in the loss of visitor 
accommodation and facilities, employment land, local retail facilities, or community 
facilities.  
1.2. Section 1 of this appendix  sets out the policy context for marketing and viability 
requirements. Section 2 explains the minimum action required when actively marketing 
premises and  / or sites, and outlines the marketing evidence which must be provided to 
the Authority when submitti ng an  application for change of use. Section 3 provides 
information on the financial viability evidence required to demonstrate that the premises 
and / or site is no longer suitable for its current type of use. Section 4 specifically applies 
to application s for the loss of community facilities and sets out requirements for 
demonstrating a lack of need for the facility.  
1.3. The types of use for which marketing, viability testing and  / or need testing are required, 
before an application for their change of use ca n be permitted, are set out in Figure  1, 
along with the minimum marketing period expected.  
     FIGURE  1: TYPES OF USE AND MINIMUM MARKETING PE RIODS  
Local Plan 
policy  Land use  Minimum  marketing  
period  
SD23 : Sustainable 
Tourism  Visitor accommodation, visitor 
attractions and recreation facilities  12 months  
SD35(4)(a): 
Employment 
Land Land and premises in, or most 
recently in, B class employment 
use125 within safeguarded principal 
employment sites listed in the policy  18 months  
SD35(4)(b): 
Employment 
Land Land and premises in, or most 
recently in, commercial uses126 on 
safeguarded local employment sites, 
listed in the policy or in 
Neighbourhood Development Plans  18 months  
                                                           
125 Offices other than for financial  / professional services; research and development of products or 
processes; use for industrial process (excluding incineration purposes, chemical treatment or landfill 
or hazardous waste); storage and distribution centres.  
126 Economic development that provides jobs, generates wealth or produces an economic output   
526 SD35(3): 
Employment 
Land Land and premises in, or most 
recently in, B class employ ment use 
outside specific safeguarded sites  12 months  
SD35(3): 
Employment 
Land Land within sites allocated for B class 
employment use  12 months  
SD37: 
Development in 
Town and Village 
Centres  A class uses127 in designated smaller 
village centres  24 months  
SD38: Shops 
Outside Centres  Shops outside centres  18 months  
SD43: New and 
Existing 
Community 
Facilities  Community facilities128 (Policy SD43 
also applies  to development 
proposals that would have an 
unacceptable adverse impact upon, 
an existing community fac ility) 12 months  
  
 
 
2. Marketing information required from applicants  
2.1 A marketing report should be submitted with the planning application. This should set out 
the details of the marketing that has been undertaken and demonstrate that there is no 
market demand for the premises in their current use or any use within the same category 
set out in Figure 1. This exercise should take account of the following points.  
2.2 Vacant or under -used premises or sites should be continuously marketed under their 
existing use, or a use in the same category shown in Figure  1, for a minimum period as 
set out in the table. The marketing period must have ended on a date no more than nine 
months before the date the planning application was submitted. In some cases a longer 
period of marketing may be required in order to provide sufficient evidence that  demand 
is lacking. The advice of the Authority should be sought prior to the commencement of 
any marketing campaign to ascertain the period and extent of marketing required.  
2.3 Where premises are in poor condition or have been partially demolished, the exerc ise 
should be limited to marketing of the site as a potential site for redevelopment to reflect 
the existing use, or for equivalent uses within the relevant category (see Figure 1). 
2.4 The marketing should use a variety of media and outlets to attract potenti al occupiers. 
Dated copies of all sales literature, and in the case of marketing boards, dated 
photographs, will be required in the marketing report in order to demonstrate a sustained 
marketing effort. As a minimum, the following measures should be used:  
                                                           
127 Shops, financial and professional services, restaurants, cafes, drinking establishments and hot food 
takeaways . 
128 Community facilities are defined in the supporti ng text for Policy SD43. Local shops are a type of 
community facility but addressed under Policy SD38.   
527 a) Property details made available through a minimum of one local, professionally 
accredited commercial agent with a specialism in the relevant type of use. The 
property details (particulars) should as a minimum detail:  
i. The type and size of the property / si te;  
ii. Address and location informati on; and 
iii. Leasehold rent and / or freehold sale . 
b) A copy of the dated letter of instruction to the commercial agent and dated copies 
of the agent’s property details should be included in the marketing report  
c) On-site / premises marketing boards, of an appropriate quality, size, scale, location 
and number, in place throughout the period in which the property is being marketed  
d) A targeted mail shot or email to a list of potential purchasers agreed with the 
Authority  
e) Web-based marketing through a prominent location on the appointed commercial 
agent’s website and other relevant search engines, such as Estates Gazette Interactive 
at www.egi.co.uk. Depending on the type of premises being marketed, marketing 
through the we bsite of a national estate agent may also be required  
f) Advertising covering at least the minimum required period as shown in Figure  1, 
within relevant publications, such as the Estates Gazette, local press, appropriate 
trade magazines  / journals and trade w ebsites, and any publications produced by local 
business networks and support agencies  
2.5 The premises and  / or site should be marketed at a price and associated terms that are 
commensurate with market values for the existing use, based on evidence from recen t 
and comparable transactions and deals. To demonstrate that the price and terms are 
appropriate, at least three examples should be provided of completed transactions 
involving a similar site or premises and similar terms within the local area, dated withi n 
the last twelve months, and written evidence from an independent qualified valuer on the 
market values in the local area. All information about price and terms should be provided 
in an accessible format. Where the price changed during the period of the m arketing 
campaign, the reasons for this should be recorded and included in the marketing report.  
2.6 Failure to comply with the requirements above may  indicate that the relevant Local Plan 
policy has not been complied with. In such circumstances the Authority  may invite the 
applicant to revise their asking price in line with an independent valuation, funded by the 
developer, by a professional RICS valuer or similarly accredited professional. The revised 
price will provide a basis to repeat the marketing for th e minimum period set out in Figure 
1.  
2.7 Where premises are marketed for lease, the length of lease offered should not be unduly 
restrictive and should include the potential for a short -term lease in appropriate cases. 
Details of the lease terms offered shou ld be included in the marketing report, along with 
any changes made to the terms offered during the period of the marketing campaign and 
the reasons for this.    
528 2.8 The marketing exercise should reflect the existing use of the premises or business in its 
entire ty, and not to parts of it. For example, the buildings should not be marketed separate 
to the accompanying car park.  
2.9 The marketing agent should keep a log of enquiries throughout the peri od of the 
marketing campaign. This should record the date and nature of the enquiry for example 
the type of business enquiring, how the enquirer found out about the premises, whether 
the enquiry resulted in a site visit, and the reasons given for not progressing an offer on 
the premises. This log should be submitted as part  of the marketing report.  
2.10 Where the flow of enquiries has been limited or is decreasing during the period of 
marketing, the marketing report should explain any measures taken to refresh the 
marketing campaign. It is reasonable that other equivalent uses w ithin the same category 
(see Table 1) may also be explored. T he advice of the Authority should be sought prior 
to the commencement of any marketing campaign to discuss the extent of alternative uses 
that may be appropriate.    
2.11 In summary the marketing state ment should include all details and evidence of the steps 
taken to market the building  / site as detailed above. If the Authority is not satisfied that 
these requirements have been met then it may require additional marketing before the 
proposal can be con sidered acceptable.  
2.12 Following receipt of the marketing report the Authority will review the content and 
compare this to evidence, potentially including but not limited to:  
 Employment Land Review  
 Visitor Accommodation Study  
 Authority Monitoring Report  
 Vacancy / occupancy surveys in the area (if available)  
 Accessing a third party commercial property database (if available ) 
3. Financial viability information required from applicants  
 This appendix relates only to the loss of the uses listed in in Table 1, wh ich are 
commercially run, where the applicant needs to demonstrate that it would be unviable to 
continue with the site in its current use or one that is equivalent. It does not relate to 
demonstrating the viability or otherwise of new types of uses, when t aking into account 
planning obligations such as, for example, affordable housing. The viability of new uses 
should, where necessary, be considered separately. However evidence of existing or 
equivalent alternative uses being unviable will inform the existi ng land value, and may 
therefore be material in considering the viability of any new use.  
 The Authority requires a financial viability appraisal which demonstrates that the retention 
of the site in full or in part for its current use, or one that is equiva lent, is not financially 
viable. The Authority will appoint a third party, at the cost of the applicant, to assess the 
evidence submitted as necessary.  
 The required scope of the financial viability appraisal should be agreed in advance with the 
Authority but may include the following information:  
a) A valuation of the site in its existing use and not the ‘hope value’ of alternative uses;   
529 b) For commercial community facilities, at least the last three years of audited accounts 
for the business;  
c) The total cost o f development or redevelopment of the site for equivalent uses 
within the relevant category set out in Table 1;  
d) Information / evidence to support rents, sales values, capital values and rental yields 
adopted for the appraisal;  
e) Sensitivity testing to support the robustness of the report conclusions against 
changing market conditions;  and 
f) Evidence to illustrate that it would not be economically viable to retain the building 
or site for its existing or any other equivalent use falling within the same cat egory 
as set out in Table 1 above.  
 Wherever feasible, the viability appraisal should be carried out while the site is still in 
operation.  
 The Authority will require evidence that demonstrates that the business or facility has 
been operated positively. Proposals for loss must not be based solely on the needs of the 
current owner  / tenant or their chosen business model. Applicants will need to look at 
the full range of potential uses or ways of operating a business or facility within its existing 
use category  or other use categories that would be suitable in policy terms, in order to 
demonstrate that it is not workable in the long term. This includes the potential of the 
site for additional complementary developments that could make the business more 
viable, f or example, the conversion of public house outbuildings to visitor accommodation.  
 The viability appraisal should, where relevant, include consideration of the potential for 
grant funding from public or charitable bodies to support uses on the site that are  
appropriate in policy terms.  
4. Evidence of need  
4.1. Developers are required to carry out an assessment of the needs of the local community 
for community facilities to show that the existing premises is no longer needed for the 
community use, and whether adequate alternative provision is available in the area to meet 
the needs of local residents, workers and visitors.  
4.2. Any alternative facilities proposed as meeting the need must be accessible, inclusive and 
available without causing unreasonable reduction o r shortfall in the local service provision. 
The presence of another facility within the same category in the vicinity will not in itself 
be enough to meet this requirement; it must be demonstrated that the alternative facility 
caters, or can be reasonably expected to cater, for the same community need as that 
served by the facility whose loss is proposed.  
4.3. If alternative facilities as described above are not proposed, the Authority will also require 
clear evidence that the facility is under -used, in terms of  the number of people using it 
relative to its size and facilities, and also in terms of the frequency and intensity of its use. 
Furthermore, evidence will be required that it has seen a significant decline in its use over 
a sustained period. This will how ever be considered against any removal or diminution of 
facilities or services during this same period which may itself h ave caused the fall in its use.  
  
530 GLOSSARY  
100Mbp s  
100 Mega -bytes per second: A speed rating for High Speed Broadband connection . 
Accessibility  
The level of ease with which destinations can be reached. The accessibility of a development is 
affected by a number of factors including its distance from essential opportunities and services  
(e.g. the distance between a house and the neares t school), the a vailability and quality of public 
transport, walking and / or cycling routes to those destinations,  and whether the design caters 
for people with disabilities.     
Affordable housing  
Housing provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is 
determined based on local incomes and local house prices. See also social rented, affordable rented 
and intermediate housing.  
Affordable Rented Housing  
Housing that must be rented at no more than 80 per cent of the local market rent (including 
service charges, where applicable).  
Agricultural diversification  
A farm business widening out its business model to include activities other than agriculture, to 
provide a long -term sustainable income stream that supplements agricultural income and allows 
farming of the land to remain viable .  
Ancient woodland  
An area that has been wooded continuously for at least 400 years.  
Aquifers  
An underground reservoir or layer of water -bearing rock, from which water runs out as springs 
or is pumped out through wells.  
Archaeology  
Archaeology  is the study of the past through the physical remains left by human activity, be they 
artifacts deliberately created or environmental data produced as a by -product of that activity. 
This is a very bro ad discipline and archaeological sites can range from the find spot of a single 
object to the remains of national and internationally important monuments.  
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)  
An area of high scenic -quality which has statutory protection in order to conserve and enhance 
the natural beauty of its landscape. They are different from National Parks because of their more 
limited opportunities for extensive outdoor recreation.   
531 Biodiv ersity  
The variety of life on Earth – plants, animals and micro -organisms, their habitats and the 
ecosystems within which they live and interact.    
Built characterisation study  
A study of the local character of buildings and streets in the different towns and villages across 
the National Park.  
Carbon footprint  
The net quantity of carbon dioxide and methane emissions produced by a building or other 
entity in a certain time period. Includes both direct emissions (e.g. from the operation of on -site 
heating systems) and indirect emissions (e.g. from the manufacture of the building materials 
which went into construction) . 
Carbon sequestration  
The reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, for exa mple by 
planting additional trees which  will remove carbon dioxide by photosynthesis.     
Carbon storage  
The storage of carbon in a form which stops it entering the atmosphere in the form of  
greenhouse gases. For example, a mature tree may store large amoun ts of carbon which it has 
previously captured  through photosynthesis.  
Character areas  
An area of the landscape which has distinct, recognisable and consistent elements.  
Character zones  
Areas of distinctive character within a conservation area which are sometimes identified within 
the relevan t Conservation Area Appraisal.  
Clean and serviced land  
Land free from any contamination which would prejudice the use of the land for affordable 
housing. Services include electricity, telephone, gas, water, foul and  surface water drainage, cable 
television and other services.  
 
  
532 Climate change  
Change in long -term weather patterns over a substantial period of time. The Earth’s climate is 
currently warm ing, mainly  as a result of the effects of human activity on the atmosphere. This 
affects  weather, flood risk, farming and wildlife, among other factors.   
Community Facilities  / Community  Infrastructure  
Services and facilities used by residents such as health and wellbeing services, sports and leisure 
uses, cultural and religious institutions, pubs and local shops, education and youth facilities and 
open space.  
Community Infrastructure Levy  
Financial con tributions from developers to fund infrastructure. This will largely replace section 
106 agreements.  
Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule  
The document which sets out the rates per square metre at which the SDNPA will charge the 
Community  Infrastructure Levy on new development , as well as various other details of the 
charging system.  
Community Right to Bid  
The registration of a community asset such as a local shop, playing field or pub so that it cannot 
be sold without the community first  being notified. This provides time for a bid to be prepared 
in order to acquire the asset.  
Community Right to Build Order  
Allows communities to bring forward small developments in their area without the need for 
planning permission. The order is subject  to an examination and referendum.  
Community land trust  
A non -profit corporation that develops and stewards affordable housing, community gardens, 
civic buildings, commercial spaces and other community assets on behalf of a community.  
Community -led plans / planning  
Where a community prepares a plan for development within their community Examples include 
Parish Plan, Village Design Statement, Local Landscape Character Assessment or Neighbourhood 
Development Plan. They can be a material planning considera tion while Neighbourhood Plans 
form part of the statutory development plan.  
Conservation area (s)  
Areas designated for special architectural or historic interest which should be preserved or 
enhanced.   
533 Conserve  
To protect something, usually of environmental or cultural importance, from loss or harm. In policy 
terms, it can include the possibility of positive change.  
Criteria -based policies  
Local Plan policies that give a range of criteria, or factors, that need to be met in order for a 
development to be viewed positively.  
Cumulative impacts  
Additional changes caused by a proposed development in conjunction with other similar 
developments or as the combined effect of a set of developments.  
Designated heritage assets  
Listed buildings, conservation areas, historic parks and gardens, historic battlefields or scheduled 
monuments that have been formally designated (given protection).  
Designated Protected Areas  
Areas where residents of shared ownership or shared equity ho using do not have the right to 
buy outright their home. This includes most of the South Downs National Park.  
Design Review Panel  
An advisory group of qualified professionals who meet monthly to review proposed 
developments in the National Park and advise the National Park Authority and applicants on 
design issues.  
Development  
For planning purposes, development is defined as the carrying out of building, engineering, mining 
or other operations in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material change in the use 
of any buildings or other land. The Town and Country Planning  Act 1990 also includes a 
definition of building works and various exclusions from the definition of development.  
Development plan  
A set of adopted documents which, together, are the main consideration in deciding planning 
applications. The Development Plan sets out the Local Planning Authority’s objectives in relation 
to the development and use of land in their area, and their general policies for the  
534 implementation of those objectives. The Development Plan for the National Park includes the 
Local Plan,  Minerals and Waste plans and Neighbourhood Development Plans.  
Development pressure  
The cumulative effect of action by  the development industry arising from a general market 
demand for additional development.  
Dry valley  
A dry valley is a valley cut by water erosion but containing no permanent surface stream, typically 
one occurring in an area of porous walk such as chalk. While most groundwater emergence will 
occur in the base of the valley, spring flow may also occur in the valley sides in particularly wet 
periods.  
Duty to Cooperate  
The duty to co -operate applies to all Local Planning Authorities, National Park Authorities and 
County Councils in England as well as a number of other public bodies including the Environment  
Agency, Highways England and Natural England.  It places a requirement on all such bodies to 
engage constructively and actively on cross boundary matters.  
Ecosystem services  
The benefits we get from the natural world or ‘ecosystems’. Includes products su ch as water, 
food, raw materials, functions such as soil formation, services such as water purification and air 
quality and health, wellbeing and cultural benefits such as access to the outdoors.  
Employment Land Review (ELR)  
A study which assesses the needs for land or floorspace for economic development over the 
plan period, and the ability of existing and future supply to meet the identified needs.  
Enabling Development  
Development that would be unacceptable in planning ter ms but for the fact that it would bring 
public benefits sufficient to justify it being carried out and which could not otherwise be achieved.  
Equestrian  
Connected with the riding of horses . 
Extensive urban survey  
Detailed studies of the historic and archaeological significance of various historic towns and 
larger villages , with  guidelines for future historic buildings  management.  
Fenestration  
The collective term for window features.   
535 Fit for purpose  
In order to be considered fit for purpose the business premises in question need to be of a 
necessary standard for its intended use as defined by the Use Class Order (UCO).   
Flood risk management  
The analysis, assessment and reduction of flood risk, including  for example  land management to 
reduc e the likelihood of flooding, avoiding inappropriate development in flood -plains, and flood 
risk mitigation . 
Flood risk mitigation  
Preparation for floods to reduce the damage they cause, for example through mea sures to 
control  or redirect floodwater, make  properties  flood-proof , and ensure people can be safely 
evacuated.  
Fluvial flooding  
Flooding that results from rivers overflowing their banks.  
Focal points  
Important landmarks, prominent building groups or features within conservation areas.  
Gateways  
Settlements around the South Downs with good bus, ferry or rail links to the wider region and 
beyond, and bus and cycle links into the National Park.  
General Pe rmitted Development Order 2015  
A Statutory Instrument that grants planning permission for certain types of development (such 
development is then referred to as permitted development). Specifies the classes of development 
for which planning permission is g ranted, and specifies the exceptions, limitations, and conditions 
that apply to some of these classes.  
Geodiversity  
Geodiversity is the variety of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils, landforms and natural processes.  
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)  
A system designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyse, manage, and present all types of 
geographical data.  
Green business  
A business that specialises in producing or selling goods or services which differ significantly from 
the average goods or services currently available in their market sector in that  their production,  
536 use and / or disposal  (for goods) or the process involved (for services) has a positive  or neutral  
impact on the natural envi ronment.  
Green infrastructure (GI)  
A network of high -quality green and blue spaces and other environmental features. It needs to 
be planned and delivered at all spatial scales from national to neighbourhood levels. The greatest 
benefits will be gained when it is designed and managed as a mu lti-functional resource capable of 
delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits (ecosystem services) for local 
communities. Green infrastructure includes parks, open spaces, playing fields, woodlands, 
wetlands, grasslands, river an d canal corridors allotments and private gardens.  
Green I nfrastructure Asset   
These are the features which form the green infrastructure network and include woodlands, 
fields, open spaces such as parks and gardens, allotments, hedges, lakes, ponds, playin g fields, 
coastal habitats, as well as linear features such as rivers and other watercourses, footpaths and 
cycleways.  
Green space  
Space that is covered with vegetation, for example grass, trees, wildflowers, vegetables or 
ornamental plants. May include minor ancillary elements of hard landscaping.   
Grey infrastructure (GI)  
Infrastructure built using manufactured materials (in contr ast to green infrastructure), for 
example water treatment plants, railways or telecommunications cables.  
Gypsies and Travellers  
For the purposes of the planning system, Gypsies and Travellers are defined as: ‘Persons of 
nomadic habit of life whatever thei r race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only 
of their own or their family’s or dependents’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased 
to travel temporarily or permanently, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such’.  
Habitat  
The area or environment in which a species or group of species lives.  
Habitat connectivity  
The degree to which the landscape facilitates the movement of animals and other organisms. For 
example, some woodland birds may find it easier to move between two areas of woodland if  
537 they are connected  by a hedge.  In that case,  planting such a hedge would  improve habitat 
connectivity.  
Habitat Regulations  Assessment (HRA)  
An assessment, in this case of the Local Plan, to determine whether proposals are likely to have a  
significant effect on  protected sites of European importance for nature conservation, and if so what the 
implications are for those sites in view of their conservation objectives.  
Heritage assets  
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a deg ree of significance 
meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. Includes both 
designated and undesignated heritage assets (see below).  
Heritage Coast  
Areas of undeveloped coastline which are managed to conserve their na tural beauty and, where 
appropriate, to improve accessibility for visitors.  
Historic battlefields  
Battlefields included in a national register. This is a non -statutory designation but is a material 
issue when determining planning applications.  
Historic environment  
All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people and places through 
time, including all surviving physical remains of past human activity, whether visible, buried or 
submerged, and landscaped and planted or  managed flora.  
Historic Environment Records (HERs)  
These provide comprehensive information and evidence about the historic environment in a 
particular area. They are an essential source of information for managing, caring for and 
understanding the histor ic environment. HERs are maintained by local planning authorities and 
are used for planning and development control, as well as for public benefit and educational use.  
Historic parks and gardens  
Highly -valued designed landscapes that are referenced in a national register of such landscapes. 
This is a non -statutory designation but is a material issue when determining planning applications.  
Housing demand  
The demand for open -market housing, that is either owner -occupied or private market rented.  
Housing need  
Those households that have registered, either through the local housing waiting list or through 
a housing -need questionnaire, that they are in need of ‘affordable’ (non -market) housing. There 
can be additional ‘hidden’ housing need. These are  those households who are in need of a home 
but have not registered either formally on the housing waiting list or through a housing -need 
survey.   
538 Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  
A list of infrastructure needed to support sustainable growth, as set out  in Neighbourhood 
Development Plans and the National Park Authority’s emerging Local Plan. The IDP will inform 
future funding decisions through the Community Infrastructure Levy so it is important to include 
all necessary infrastructure projects on the IDP  list. However, projects identified in the IDP are 
not guaranteed funding because prioritisation and spending decisions are made by the National 
Park Authority and parish councils taking into account many other factors.  
Intermediate Home Ownership  
Homes for sale provided at a cost below market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable 
Housing definition above. These can include shared equity, shared ownership and equity loans.  
International Dark Sk y Reserve  
Public or private land possessing an exceptional or distinguished quality of starry nights and 
nocturnal environment, that is specifically protected for its scientific, natural, educational, 
cultural, heritage and  / or public enjoyment. Reserves consist of a core area meeting minimum 
criteria  for sky quality and natural darkness, and a peripheral area that supports dark sky 
preservation in the core.  
Joint Core Strategy  
A Local Plan document prepared jointly by more than one local planning authority, that sets out 
the scale, type and broad loc ation of key development and overarching planning policies on 
important issues for a given area. The SDNPA has prepared separate Joint Core Strategies with 
East Hampshire, Lewes, Wealden districts, Winchester City and Worthing borough, for the 
whole area o f each of those local authority areas.  
Landscape  
Landscape is defined in the European Landscape Convention (ELC) 2004 as: “an area, as 
perceived by people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and  / 
or human factors”. The ELC refers to the following area types which are all considered to be 
included within the definition of landscape:  
 Natural, rural, urban and urban fringe areas;  
 Land, inland water and marine areas; and  
 Landscapes that might be considered outstanding as  well as everyday or degraded 
landscapes.  
Landmarks  
A prominent and easily recognisable feature in the landscape, often  used as a reference point in 
navigation.  
 
 
  
539 Landscape assessments  
A site specific assessment of the effect of a proposed development on the landscape. More detail 
on landscape assessments is provided in the supporting text to Strategic Policy SD4: Landscape 
Character.  
Landscape character  
What makes an area  unique. It can be defined as a distinct, recognisable and consistent pattern 
of elements, be it natural (soil, landform) and  / or human (for example, settlement and 
development) in the landscape that makes one landscape different from another, rather than  
better or worse.  
Landscape character areas  
An area whose extent is defined by a shared landscape character. There are six  National 
Character Areas - identified by Natural England - wholly or partly with the South Downs National 
Park. The South Downs Landscape Character Assessment identifies 51 local landscape character 
areas within the National Park.   
Landscape character assessment (LCA)  
A technique used to develop a consistent and  comprehensive understanding of what gives 
England’s landscape its character. It uses statistical analysis and application of structured 
landscape assessment techniques. LCAs provide more detailed descriptions and analysis at a 
local level within the frame work of the 159 National Character Areas.  
Landscape -scale  
An approach to wildlife conservation based on the unit of the landscape character  area or 
equivalent, and looking at habitat connectivity across a wide area, as opposed to focussing on 
individual protected sites.    
Listed buildings  
Buildings formally designated as being of special architectural or historic interest.  
Local connection  
A test that is met by households that can demonstrate a genuine link to a defined local area, 
either through a residential (current or recent past), employment or close family connection.  
Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEP)  
Voluntary partnerships between local authorities  and businesses set up in 2011 by the 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills  to help determine local economic priorities and 
lead economic grow th and job creation within the local area.   
540 Local Green Space (s)  
A designation introduced by the NPPF (para.76). The NPPF states that the designation should 
only be used: where the green space is in reasonably close proximity to the community it serves, 
where the green area is demonstrably special to a local community and holds a particular local 
significance, for example because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including 
as a playing field), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife , and where the green area concerned is 
local in character and is not an extensive tract of land.  
Local Housing Allowance  
Housing benefit paid to private sector tenants.  
Local Landscape Character Assessments  
Documents produced by community groups, to express what local people perceive as special 
qualities of their environment and identify objectives for maintaining and enhancing the landscape 
and the issues that affect local distinctiveness. Where endorsed by the Local Planning Authority, 
they can be a material consideration in planning decisions.   
Local Plan documents  
Documents containing the plan for the future development of the local area, drawn up by the 
local planning authority in consultation with the c ommunity. In law this is described as the 
development plan documents adopted under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. 
Current core strategies or other planning policies, which under the regulations would be 
considered to be development plan doc uments, form part of the Local Plan. The term includes 
old policies which have been saved under the 2004 Act.  
Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF)  
The Department for Transport has awarded £3.81M to Hampshire County Council, the New 
Forest National Park Authority and South Downs National Park Authority - together with the 
neighbouring highways authorities of Brighton & Hove, East Sussex, West Sussex, Surrey and 
Wiltshire – for initiatives to reduce the impact of traffic on the two National Parks and to 
encourage the use of more sustainable transport by visitors and residents.  
Major development  
The SDNPA determines what constitutes  major development by considering whether a 
development , by reason of its scale, character or nature, has the potential to have a serious 
adverse impact on the natural beauty, wildlife or cultural heritage of, or recreational 
opportunities provided by, the National Park. Furth er details are set out in Core Policy SD3: 
Major Development. This differs from the definition of major development in the Town and   
541 Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015, which is 
focussed on type and scale of development . 
Marine Conservation Zone  
Designated areas within English and Welsh territorial  waters and UK offshore waters, that 
protect a range of nationally important marine wildlife, habitats, geology and geomorphology.  
Market housing  
Housing which has no occupancy restriction or legal tie and that can be bought or rented by 
anyone w ho can afford to do so (including  the majority of existing housing within the National 
Park).  
Material consideration  
A matter that should be taken into account in deciding a planning application or on an app eal 
against a planning decision; includes Development Plan policies, Government policy, previous 
planning decisions, and numerous factors such as design, traffic, nature conservation and effect 
on privacy.  
Manège 
An arena f or riding horses , used in particular for training. Typically fenced and surfaced with 
sand, PVC or rubber.  Can also be spelt ‘ménage’.  
Mycology  
The study of fungi; or t he fungi found in a certain place.  
Natural beauty  
This term is not exhaustively defined  in the legislation. It is also a very subjective characteristic 
of a landscape and ultimately involves a value judgement. In deciding whether an area has natural 
beauty, Natural England must therefore make a judgement as to whether people are likely to 
perceive a landscape as having sufficient natural beauty. In order to make these judgements 
(some of which are subjective) in a transparent and consistent way, Guidance from Natural 
England, Guidance for assessing landscapes for designat ion as National Park or Area of  
Outstan ding Natural Beauty in England  
http://www.naturalengland.org.uk/Images/B1DesignationGuidanceMar11_tcm6 -26242.pdf  , sets 
out which criteria Natural England intends to use.  
Non-traditional farm building  
A farm building constructed after 1914.  
Micro business  
A business which employs fewer  than 5 people.   
542 National Nature Reserves (NNRs)  
Represent many of the finest wildlife and geological sites in the country. The first NNRs emerged 
in the post -war years alongside the early National Parks, and have continued to grow since then. 
NNRs were initially established to protect sensitive features  and to provide ‘outdoor 
laboratories’ for research but their purpose has widened since then. As well as managing some 
of the most pristine habitats, our rarest species and our most significant geology, most NNRs 
now offer great opportunities to the public  as well as schools and specialist audiences to 
experience England’s natural heritage.  
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  
The 2012 document that sets out the top level of Government planning policy for England.  
National Nature Reserves (NNR)  
Nature conservation sites, managed by Natural England or bodies approved by it, to protect 
some of England’s most important habitats, species and geology, and provide ‘outdoor 
laboratories’ for research. Most also have public access with free entry.  
Nation al Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG)  
A set of detailed and regularly updated Government advice on how the National Plann ing Policy 
Framework should be interpreted.  
Natural capital  
The stock of natural resources (including geology, soils, air, water and all  living organisms), as 
considered using a framework derived from economics. In the same framework, ecosystem 
services are considered to be flows.  
Neighbourhood Development Plan (s)  
A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular  neighbourhood 
area (made under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004).  
Non-retail town centre uses  
Leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, 
restaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars and  pubs, night -clubs, casinos, health and fitness 
centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism 
development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities).  
Objectively -assessed housing need  
The scale and mix of housing and range of tenures that is likely to be needed in the housing 
market area over the Plan period. The National Planning Policy Guidance indicates that there is 
no one method or dataset which will provide a definitive assessment . The draft Guidance 
indicates that the starting point should be the latest household Government projections, and 
wherever possible assessment should take account of the latest demographic evidence including 
ONS population estimates. The draft Guidance set s a number of specific tests which should be 
considered in establishing an objective assessment of need.   
543 Palimpsest  
A physical trace, usually faint or vestigial, left on an historic asset by a past feature or relationship.  
Parish Plans  
A plan produced by  a community group, generally including an action plan to deal with a range 
of issues of interest to that community. Parish Plans do not in themselves carry any weight in 
the p lanning decision -making process.  
Partnership Management Plan  
A five year strategy for the management of the National Park, for all those with an interest in or 
influence on the area, prepared by the National Park Authority in close partnership with others.  
Perceptual aesthetic  
In the context of national parks this  is a concept dealing with the understanding and appreciation 
of the natural and landscape beauty of the area by visitors, residents and others using the area.  
Peri-urban Area  
An area outside an urban area but whose character  is heavily affected by its proximity to that 
urban area.  
Preserve  
To save, to protect or to keep from decay. A term used in primary legislation in the context of 
listed buildings and conservation areas. Also see ‘Conserve’ for the frequently encountered 
policy interface with this more inclusive term.  
Primary Production  
The conversion, mainly by plants and algae, of carbon dioxide and water into organic compounds 
that can be used by other life forms.     
Primary shopping area  
A defined area where retail is concentrated, generally comprising the primary frontage and any 
adjoining and closely related secondary frontage.  
Primary and secondary frontages  
Rows of units within a town or village centre. Primary frontages are likely to include a high 
proportion of  retail units while secondary frontages provide greater opportunit ies for a diversity 
of units such as restaurants, estate agents and other businesses.   
544 Priority habitats  
Habitats identified  as being the most threatened and requiring conservation action, t hrough the 
UK Biodiversity Action Plan, county level Biodiversity Action Plans, or by the SDNPA.  
Priority species   
Species identified  as being the most threatened and requiring conservation action, through the 
UK Biodiversity Action Plan, Local Biodiversity Partnership level Biodiversity Action Plans, or by 
the SDNPA.  
Protected species  
Species protected by European or national legislation . 
Public Realm  
Places where people can gain unrestricted access (at least during daylight hours) for the purp ose 
of passing through, meeting, leisure and any other public activities.   
Public Rights of Way   
Paths and tracks over which all members of the public have a right of passage. The four types of 
public right of way are footpaths (for walking), bridleways (for walking, horse riding and cycling), 
Restricted Byways (for walking, horse riding, cycling and non-motorised vehicles) and Byways 
Open to All Traffic.    
Ramsar sites  
Sites of nature conservation importance recognised under the Ramsar Convention (formally, the 
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance, especially as Waterfowl Habitat), which 
is an international treaty for the conservation and sustainable utilis ation of wetlands, to stem the 
encroachment on and loss of wetlands, recognising the fundamental ecological functions of 
wetlands and their economic, cultural, scientific and recreational value.  
Registered Parks and Gardens  
Parks and gardens identified by Historic England assessed to be of particular historic significance. 
Planning authorities must consider the impact of any proposed development on the 
special character of these sites.  
Registered Providers  
Organisations regi stered with the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA) to provide and 
manage affordable housing, most commonly a housing association or a local authority   
545 Relative Tranquillity  
Tranquillity when compared to other locations within the National Park.  
Right to Acquire  
A scheme allowing tenants to buy outright their social or affordable rented home provided by a 
Registered Provider. For tenants in settlements with a population of less than 3,000 population 
this right is not available.  
Right to Buy  
A scheme allowing tenants to buy outright their social or affordable rented home provided by 
the local authority.  
Rural exception sites  
A site for affordable housing to meet an identified local need that would not secure planning 
permission for open -market housing, for example agricultural land next to but not within a local 
settlement area.  
Safeguard  
Designate a site for its current use (potentially with a view to a future intended use), to prevent 
development occurring on the site which would be contrary  to that use.  
Sandford Principle  
A principle established in law that if it appears that there is a conflict between the two Purposes 
of the National Park, greater weight should be attached to the first Purpose (to conserve and 
enhance the natural beauty,  wildlife and cultural heritage of the area).  
Scheduled monument  
A monument referenced in a schedule compiled by the Secretary of State which is: any building, 
structure or work, whether above or below the surface of the land, and any cave or excavation,  
any site comprising the remains of any such building, structure or work or of any cave or 
excavation, or any site comprising, or comprising the remains of, any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or 
other movable structure or part thereof which neither constitutes nor forms part of a 
monument as defined above.  
Section 106  / section 278 payments  
The traditional system of financial obligations paid by developers to fund infrastructure, limited 
by legislation as of 2015.  
Secret s of the High Woods  
A Heritage Lottery Funded project that was hosted by the National Park Authority with support 
from Chichester District Council and English Heritage.  It ran for three years until the end of   
546 March 2017.  The Secrets of the High Woods project captured LiDAR data, which has revealed 
a host of human stories hidden beneath the ancient woods of West Sussex.  
Setting of a heritage asset  
The surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and may change 
as the asset and its surroundi ngs evolve. Elements of a setting may make a positive or negative 
contribution to the significance of an asset, may affect the ability to appreciate that significance 
or may be neutral.  
Secured by Design  
The UK Police flagship initiative supporting the principles of “designing out crime” 
www.securedbydesign.com .  
Settlement  
For Local Plan purposes, the settlements in the National Park are those listed in the Settlement 
Facilities Assessment (2015). Not all these settlements have settlement boundaries, since many of 
them are considered unsuitable for infill development. Settlements without boundaries are 
treated as part of the open countryside for planning purpo ses, but this does not mean they are 
not settlements.  
Settlement pattern  
The layout of streets, buildings and plots within settlements, and of settlements in relation to 
each other.  
Settlement Boundary  
A spatial planning tool used to direct development into settlements and allocated extensions to 
them, and restrict it in the wider countryside, by mapping a boundary between the two.  
Shared Equity  
Homes where the occupier buys a home paid in part from a conventional mortgage and part 
through a short -term loan from the provider and  / or Government.  
Shared ownership  
Homes where the occupier purchases with a mortgage part of a home and pays rent on the 
remainder. These are primarily provided by Registered Providers  
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)  
A selection of the country's very best wildlife and geological sites. There are over 4,100 Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) in England, covering around seven per cent of the land area. 
Over half of these sites, by area, are internationally impo rtant for their wildlife, and designated 
as Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection Areas (SPAs) or Ramsar sites. Many 
SSSIs are also National Nature Reserves (NNRs) or Local Nature Reserves (LNRs).   
547 Small business  
A business that employs  less than 10 people.  
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) are strictly protected sites designated under the EC 
Habitats Directive. Article 3 of the Habitats Directive requires the establishment of a European 
network of important high -quality conservation sites that will make a significant contribution to 
conserving the 189 habitat types and 788 species identified in Annexes I and II of the Directive 
(as amended). The listed habitat types and species are those considered to be most in need of 
conservation at a European level (excluding birds). Of the Annex I habitat types, 78 are believed 
to occur in the UK. Of the Annex II species, 43 are native to, and normally resident in, the UK.  
Smart Economic Growth  
Economic growth t hat is consistent with an improving quality of life and environment by virtue 
of focussing development on accessible urban locations.  
Social rented housing  
Owned by local authorities and private registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the 
Housin g and Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline target rents are determined through 
the national rent regime. It may also be owned by other persons and provided under equivalent 
rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with  the Homes and 
Communities Agency.  
Special Qualities   
All the national parks in England, Wales and Scotland have an aim and purpose to promote 
understanding and enjoyment of the 'special qualities' of their area.  It is the combination of these 
special qualities that led to these areas being designated to be protected as national parks.  The 
special qualities of the South Downs National Park are set out in figure 1.2 of the Local Plan.  
Spatial Strategy  
The overall framework for guiding development acros s the South Downs National Park, 
determining in what broad locations and settlements different kinds of development will be 
encouraged or restricted.  
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs)  
An area which has been given special protection under the European Union’s Habitats Directive. 
SACs provide increased protection to a variety of wild animals, plants and habitats and are a vital 
part of global efforts to conserve the world’s biodiversity.  
Special Protection Areas (SPAs)  
An area of land, water or sea whi ch has been identified as being of international importance for 
the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds found 
within the European Union. SPAs are European designated sites, classified under the European 
Wild Birds Directive which affords them enhanced protection.   
548 Staircasing  
Purchases by the householder of additional shares in shared ownership  / equity dwellings.  
Standard Occupancy Housing  
Homes (C3 use class) that are not limited by occupation to any particular group of people, for 
example, by age or disability.  
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI)  
A Statement of Community Involvement  (SCI) sets out a local planning authority’s  policy to 
identify how and when local communities and stakeholders will  be involved in the preparation 
of the documents to be included in the development plan . It also governs the development 
management process for all pl anning applications within the area . 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)  
A study which establishes realistic assumptions about the availability, suitability and the likely 
economic viability of land to meet the identified need for housing over the plan period.  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)  
A study which identifies the scale and mix of housing and the range of tenures that the local 
population is likely to need over the plan period  
Statutory bodies  
A government appointed body set up to give advice and be consulted for comment upon 
development plans and planning applications affect ing matters of public interest. Examples of 
statutory bodies include  English Heritage, Natural England and  Environment Agency.  
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) directive  
A European directive requiring public plans and programmes to undergo an assessment of the 
likely significant effects on the environment of the plan and reasonable alternatives. It also 
requires public consultation on the assessment, and monitoring of the significant environmental 
effects of the plan’s implementation.  
Strategic  Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)  
A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) is a study carried out aby a local planning authority 
to assess flood risk in the local plan area and the risks to and from surrounding areas.   It is part 
of the evidence base that supp orts a local plan. There are two levels of SFRA.   All local planning 
authorities need to carry out a level 1 assessment at least, and it may be necessary to expand 
the scope of this assessment to a more detailed level 2 assessment.   Both levels of study ha ve 
been completed to support the South Downs Local Plan.    
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD)  
Documents which add further detail to the policies in the Local Plan. They can be used to provide 
further guidance for development on specific sites, or on p articular issues, such as 
design.   Supplementary planning documents are capable of being a material consideration in 
planning decisions but are not part of the development plan.   
549 Supply chains  
A system of organisations, people, activities, information and resources involved in moving a 
product or service from supplier to customer. Supply chain activities involve the transformation 
of natural resources, raw materials and components into a finished product that is delivered to 
the end customer.  
Sustainable Dr ainage Systems (SUDS)  
Drainage systems designed to control surface water run off close to where it falls and mimic 
natural drainage as closely as possible.  
Sustainability Appraisal  
A systematic process, required by law, of evaluating the predicted social,  economic and 
environmental effects of an emerging planning document, when judged against reasonable 
alternatives.  
Sustainable Development  
Development which meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their  own needs. The Government’s view of what sustainable development 
in England means in practice for the planning system is expressed in paragraph 18 -219 of the 
NPPF, including strong protections for the landscape, scenic beauty, wildlife and cultural herita ge 
of National Parks.   
Telecommunications  
Telecommunications infrastructure includes development proposals related to the supply and 
management of broadband, mobile services and telephone land lines.  
Temporary stopping places  
Also known as ‘emergency stopping places’ – sites for Gypsies and Travellers, less formal and 
less well serviced than transit sites and generally intended for shorter stays. They might, for 
example, be loops of by -passed roadway, old chipping depots, poor agricultural land or small 
urban sites where development is planned but not immediate. Water supply and rubbish disposal 
might be the only services provided.  
Tenet  
An opinion, belief or principle held to be true by a person or organisation.  
The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012  
Government regulations on local planning that apply in England and came into force on 06 April 
2012.  
Town centre  
Area defined on the Local Plan policies  map, including the primary shopping area and adjacent 
areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses. Includes local centres but excludes 
small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood significance.   
550 Tranquillity  
Areas undisturbed by the presence of noise and visual intrusion (taken from CPRE website).  
Transit sites  
Formal sites for Gypsies and Travellers provided on a permanent basis, with basic amenities and 
services including boundary fencing, hard standings, water supply, toilet and washing facilities, 
waste disposal and electricity supply.  
Travel plans  
Plans to minimise the impacts of travel from a development proposal by reducing car usage and 
by encouraging the use of sustainable modes such as walking, cycling, public transport and car 
sharing.  
Travelling showpeople  
Members of a group organised for the purpos es of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or 
not travelling together as such). This includes such persons who on grounds of their own, or 
their family’s or dependents’, more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or 
old age have ce ased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes gypsies and travellers.  
Undesignated heritage assets  
Heritage assets that have been identified by the local planning authority but not yet designated. 
This includes locally listed buildings.  
Utiliti es  
Utility infrastructure includes development proposals related to the supply and management of 
water, waste water, gas and electricity.  
Validation List  
A list of information required by a local planning authority in order to ‘validate’ a planning 
applic ation. This validation list forms two components firstly, the national requirements, 
including the application form, fee and certificates and secondly, specific local validation 
requirements known as the ‘Local List’. South Downs National Park adopted its validation 
requirements in February 2013.  
Viewshed Characterisation Study  
A study which maps what is visible from various viewpoints.    
Village Design Statement (s) (VDS)  
A VDS outlines the character of a particular village or town against which planning applications 
can be assessed.  
Volunteer Ranger Service (VRS)  
The South Downs Volunteer Ranger Service (VRS) is a voluntary organisation with over 500 
members that works in  partnership with the National Park Authority, looking after and helping  
551 to conserve the special qualities of the South Downs.   The group seeks to assist the National 
Park Authority and its partners in improving and promoting the landscape, wildlife, publi c access 
and heritage of the South Downs National Park.   Historically, the main activities of the VRS have 
been practical conservation and access improvement work. However, the VRS now also 
undertakes a wide variety of other work, for example, exploring th e heritage of the National 
Park, working alongside SDNPA staff at public events and a variety of office based projects. This 
diversification of the work of the VRS is set to continue.   The help provided by such an 
enthusiastic and dedicated group of people  has made it possible to support and deliver a huge 
range of projects that could not otherwise have been achieved.  
Water neutrality  
No net additional water resource required over the course of the Local Plan to meet the needs 
of new development.  
 