 
South East Lincolnshire  
Local Plan 2011 -2036  
 
Adopted  
 March  
 201  
9 
      
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Contents  
Foreword  4 
1. Introduction  5 
1.2. The preparation of this Local Plan.  6 
1.3. Sustainability Appraisal and Habitats Regulations Assessment  7 
2. Context  9 
2.2. Duty to Co-operate  9 
2.3. Neighbourhood Planning  9 
2.4. Spatial Portrait  10 
2.5. Our Vision for South East Lincolnshire  16 
2.6. Strategic Priorities  17 
3. Promoting Sustainable Communities in South East Lincolnshire  19 
3.2. Spatial Strategy  19 
3.3. Development Management  24 
3.4. Design of New Development  28 
3.5. Approach to Flood Risk  31 
3.6. Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs  35 
3.7. Developer Contributions  37 
4. Promoting Economic Prosperity and Employment Opportunities  43 
4.2. Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land Portfolio  43 
4.3. Prestige Employment Sites  51 
4.4. Promoting a Stronger Visitor Economy  54 
5. Quality Housing for All  57 
5.2. Meeting Assessed Housing Requirements  57 
5.3. Distribution of New Housing  60 
5.4. Reserve Sites  67 
5.5. South West Quadrant (Sou006) Sustainable Urban Extension  69 
5.6. South of North Forty Foot Drain (Wes002) Sustainable Urban Extension  71 
5.7. Vernatts Su stainable Urban Extension  72 
5.8. Holbeach West Sustainable Urban Extension  77 
5.9. Providing a Mix of Housing  82 
5.10. Affordable Housing  84 
5.11. Rural Exception Sites  88 
5.12. Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  89 
5.13. Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Sub -Division of Dwellings  92 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.14. Replacem ent Dwellings in the Countryside  95 
5.15. The Reuse of Buildings in the Countryside for Residential Use  97 
6. Vibrant Town Centres and Accessible Shops and Services  99 
6.2. The Retail Hierarchy  99 
6.3. Supporting the Vitality and Viability of Boston and Spalding Town Centres  103 
6.4. Primary Shopping Frontages  106 
6.5. Additional Retail Provision  107 
7. A Distinctive, Greener, Cleaner, Healthier Environment  111 
7.2. The Natural Environment  111 
7.3. The Historic Environment  117 
7.4. Pollution  124 
7.5. Climate Change and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  127 
7.6. Community, Health and Well -being  131 
8. Efficient and Effective Transport  136 
8.2. Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network  137 
8.3. Delivering the Boston Distributor Road  141 
8.4. Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy  143 
8.5. Vehicle and Cycle Parking  146 
9. Monitoring and Review  150 
Glossary  151 
10. Appendix 1: So uth East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Planning Committee  162 
11. Appendix 2: Saved Local Plan Policy Replacement List  163 
12. Appendix 3: References  173 
13. Appendix 4: Expected housing completions  177 
14. Appendix 5: Allocations – Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation
 184 
15. Appendix 6: Parking Standards  231 
16. Appendix 7: Local Plan Implementation  233 
17. Appendix 8: Developer Contributions for Education Facilities  248 
17.1.  Introduction  248 
17.2.  Requirement  249 
17.3.  When will developer contributions be sought?  249 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
17.4.  Calculation of contributions  249 
17.5.  Delivery mechanism  251 
18. Appendix 9: Developer Contributions for Health care Facilities  252 
18.1.  Introduction  252 
18.2.  Requirement  253 
18.3.  When will developer contributions be sought?  253 
18.4.  Approach to providing health care facilities  253 
18.5.  Delivery mechanism  254 
19. Appendix 10: Indicative Plans/Diagrams  256 
19.1.  Prestige Employment Sites  256 
19.2.  Sustainable Urban Extensions  261 
19.3.  Proposed Highways  265 
List of Figures  
Figure 1: Relationship of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan and other planning docum ents      6 
Figure 2: Local Plan Timetable               7 
Figure 3: South East Lincolnshire Key Diagram           11 
Figure 4: Boston Borough Housing Trajectory 2011 -2036          59 
Figure 5: South Holland District Housing Trajectory 2011 -2036         60 
List of Tables  
Table 1: Strategic Policies             10 
Table 2: South East Lincolnshire Strategic Priorities          18 
Table 3: Pitch and plot targets for gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople in South East Lincolnshire (1st 
April 2011 to 31st March 2036)             92 
Table 4: Nature Conservation Sites within the Plan Area and within 15km of the Local Plan area boundary  112 
Table 5: Heritage Assets within South East Lincolnshire        117 
Table 6: Registered Parks and Gardens, Conservation Areas, Scheduled Monuments and Listed Buildings 
(Grade I and II*) on the Heritage at Risk Register (2015)        118 
Table 7: Education infrastructure requirement assumptions       250 
Table 8: Land Take for New Schools          251 
 
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Foreword  
We are delighted to introduce the adopted South East Lincolnshire Local Plan, which 
will help to shape the growth of Boston Borough and South Holland District for future 
generations.  
The Local Plan has to ensure that our needs for homes, jobs, shops and 
infrastructure will be met, without harming the things that make South East 
Lincolnshire special - its wealth of historic buildings, its wildlife, its attractive market 
towns and villages and large areas of open countryside.  
It is the culmination of a great  deal of work and public participation, and we are very 
grateful to everyone who has helped in its preparation, and who took the time to let 
us have their thoughts on what it should include.  
Councillor Roger Gambba -Jones  Councillor Claire Rylott  
Chair  Vice-Chair  
South East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee  South East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee  
 
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
1. Introduction  
1.1.1  This adopted Local Plan  has been produced by the South East Lincolnshire Joint 
Strategic Planning Committee (the Joint Committee). The Joint Committee is a 
partnership of Boston Borough, South Holland District and Lincolnshire County 
Councils who have worked  together to create a  single Local Plan for South East 
Lincolnshire (the name for the areas of South Holland District Council [South 
Holland] and Boston Borough Council [Boston Borough] ). See Appendix 1: ‘South 
East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Planning Committee’ for  more inf ormation.  
1.1.2  The Local Plan will guide development and the use of land in South East 
Lincolnshire from 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2036, and will help to shape how the 
area will change over this period. The Local Plan must be based upon adequate, 
up-to-date and relevant evidence about the area’s characteristics and future 
prospects, and must reflect the vision and aspirations of the local community. It will 
need to deal effectively with the issues facing the area, and has many roles, 
including:  
 identifying those areas of land that need to be developed for new homes, 
shops, or employment uses in order to meet the area’s needs;  
 identifying those areas of land which must be protected from development – 
perhaps because of their historic or environmental importance;  
 ensuring that infrastructure and local facilities are provided at the same time as 
new homes, shops or employment uses; and  
 setting out policies against which planning applications can be judged.  
 
1.1.3  Before  this Local Plan was adopted, the Development Plan fo r South East 
Lincolnshire consist ed of the ‘saved policies’ of the Boston Borough Local Plan and 
the So uth Holland District Local Plan  (see Appendix 2 : ‘Saved Local Plan Policy 
Replacement List’)  and the adopted policies of the Minerals and Waste Plan1. 
1.1.4  This Local Plan , together with the Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste Plan now forms 
the statutory Development Plan for the area  (see Figure 1) . Other documents are 
being prepared in accordance with th e Local Development Scheme or any 
successor.  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Relationship of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan and other planning 
documents  
1.2. The preparation of this  Local Plan . 
1.2.1  The Local Plan  sets out an overall vision of how South East Lincolnshire and the 
settlements within it should develop, and the strategic objectives that will ensure 
key spatial issues are addressed. This is followed by planning policies, arranged 
around six themes, and information about how, when and with whose resources the 
Local Plan will be delivered. The document also includes information about how 
progress in delivering the strategy will be managed and monitored, and a separate 
Policies Map and its ‘Inset Maps’ that  illustrate the locations and sites to which 
policies refer.  
1.2.2  This Local Plan deals with all land use and development issues affecting South 
East Lincolnshire, except for minerals and waste - these are covered in the 
Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste Local P lan1.  
1.2.3  Publication of this Local  Plan follows five earlier consultations (see Figure 2 below). 
The representations received in these  consultations , the outcomes of the 
Examination In Public , recently completed evidence , and the findings of a 
Sustainability  Appraisal2, Habitats Regulations Assessment3, Whole Plan Viability 
Assessment4 and Infrastructure Delivery Plan5 have informed the preparati on of this 
document. Appendix 3: ‘References’,  lists the studies that have underpinned policy 
development.    South East Lincolnshire Development Plan  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste  
Local Plan  
Developer 
Contributions SPD  – 
Detailed advice  Other SPDs - To be 
determined in review of the 
Local Development Scheme  Neighbourhood Plans  
Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Strateg y and Policies DPD  
 
 
 
 
 
 
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 2: Local Plan Timetable  
1.3. Sustainability Appraisal and Habitats Regulations 
Assessment  
1.3.1  An integrated Sustainability Appraisal and Strateg ic Environmental Assessment2 
has been carried out at key stages in the preparation of this Local Plan. Full details 
can be found in the accompanying Sustainability Appraisal report2. The Appraisal of 
the Local Plan has been an iterative process and it has played an important role in 
developing and refining the contents of this Local Plan. Feedback from the 
appraisal process has helped shape the policies and site allocations included in this 
document.  
1.3.2  A Habitats Regulations Assessment3 (HRA) has also been undertaken to ensure 
that there are no significant adverse effects of the Local Plan on Natura 2000 sites. 
The HRA3 has discounted all impacts except for a risk to the Wash SPA and 
Gibraltar Point SPA (which form part of the overarching Wash and North Norfolk 
Coast European Marine Site) from recreational disturbance from new residential 
development. As a consequence, t he HRA3 has made a number of 
recommendations for project -level assessment and mitigation provision, which has 
been incorporated into relevant policies in this Local Plan.  
1.3.3  For major residential developments within 10km of The Wash and North Norfolk 
Coast E uropean Marine Site, a project -level Habitats Regulations Assessment  will 
be required. All major housing proposals, including the sustainable urban 
extensions at Boston (site s Sou006  and Wes002 ), Spalding (sites Pin024/Pin045) 
and Holbeach West (site Hob04 8) should be designed and delivered with suitable 
avoidance and mitigation measures, as indicated by the project -level Habitats 
Regulations Assessment, including access to Suitable  Alternative Natural 
Greenspace (SANGs).  Stakeholder
/visioning 
exercise: 
January – 
April 2012  Combined Preferred 
Options and 
Sustainability Appraisal 
Report: public 
consultation May -June 
20136 
Draft Local 
Plan: public  
consultation 
Jan-Feb 
20167 Local Plan: 
Publication 
Version 
consultation 
April-May 
2017  Submission 
to the 
Secretary of 
State 23 
June 2017  Independent 
examination:   
October 
2017 – April 
2018  Receipt of 
Inspector’s 
report  
Winter 2019  Adoption by 
Joint 
Committee  
Spring 2019  Draft Local 
Plan: 
preferred 
sites 
consultation 
July-Aug 
20168 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
1.3.4  The potential for cumulative effect s will be monitored through the Annual Monitoring 
Report.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2. Context  
2.1.1  The policies and proposals in this document have been prepared having regard to 
the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)9, supplemented by the National 
Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG )10, the Government’s East Inshore and East 
Offshore Marine Plan11 and individual policies on specific topics, such as traveller 
sites, sustainable drainage, and starter homes. The Local Plan must be consistent 
with these Government policies but, by and la rge, it does not repeat them - instead, 
it seeks to build on them and provide a South East Lincolnshire interpretation of 
them. At a more local level, the Local Plan also has to be consistent with 
Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste Local Plan Core Strategy an d Development 
Management Policies document1 and the Site Locations document12. 
2.2. Duty to Co -operate  
2.2.1  The 2011 Localism Act introduced the ‘duty to co -operate’, which requires local 
planning authorities to consider joint approaches to plan -making, and to engage in 
partnership working on strategic issues that go beyond their area. To achieve this, 
the Joint Committee must work with neighbouring local planning authorities and 
other bodies relevant to South East Lincolnshire. These are the Environment 
Agency,  Historic England, Natural England, the Civil Aviation Authority, the Homes 
and Communities Agency, local clinical commissioning groups, the National Health 
Service Commissioning Board, the Office of Rail Regulation, the local highway 
authority, and the Ma rine Management Organisation .  
2.2.2  In addition to the above, the Joint Committee has had regard to the Greater 
Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership, the Greater Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Local Enterprise Partnership and the Lincolnshire Local Nature  
Partnership in preparing this plan. A full statement of the actions13 taken by the 
Committee under duty to co -operate were submitted to the Examination in Public 
and the Duty to Co -operate actions will be maintained in implementing the Local 
Plan as appro priate.  
2.3. Neighbourhood Planning  
2.3.1  The Localism Act 2011 gives local communities the power to help decide where 
development should go and the type and design of that development, by preparing 
neighbourhood plans for their areas. The Act places a duty on the Lo cal Authorities 
to support such work.  
2.3.2  Once adopted, neighbourhood plans become part of the statutory development plan 
for the area. Planning applications should be determined in accordance with the 
development plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise.  
2.3.3  Town and parish councils and ‘neighbourhood forums’ in South East Lincolnshire 
may set out their own planning policies and site allocations in neighbourhood plans. 
However, their neighbourhood plans will need to be in general conformity with the  
strategic policies of this Local Plan. These are:  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
Strategic Policy  
1: Spatial Strategy  
4: Approach to Flood Risk  
5: Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs  
6: Developer Contributions  
7: Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land Portfolio  
10: Meeting Assessed Housing Requirements  
11: Distribution of New Housing  
12: Reserve Sit es 
24: Retail Hierarchy  
28: The Natural Environment  
29: The Historic Environment  
31: Climate Change and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
32: Community, Health and Well -being  
33: Delivering a more Sustainable Transport Network  
Table 1: Strategic Policies  
2.4. Spatial Portrait  
2.4.1  South East Lincolnshire covers approximately 1,100 squ are kilometres and lies to 
the west and south -west of the Wash estuary. Comprising Boston Borough and 
South Holland District, the area is in the south -eastern corner of the East Midlands 
Region, bordering directly onto the counties of Cambridgeshire and Norfolk.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
Figure 3: South East Lincolnshire Key Diagram  
2.4.2  The Local Plan area is sparsely populated with approximately 158,100 residents14. 
However, South East Lincolnshire has seen one of the largest increases in 
population since the 2001 Census. The population of Boston Borough has 
increased by 19.3% (to 66,500) since 2001, and in the same period South Holland 
has seen an increase of 18.1% (to 90,400)15. As the population growth for 
Lincolnshire has been 13.1%15, the growth for the Local Plan area is significant, 
particularly given i ts relatively marginalised location away from the conurbations of 
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
the East Midlands. Furthermore, the Local Plan area attracts some 14,000 seasonal 
workers in agriculture and horticulture annually.  
2.4.3  In South East Lincolnshire there are some 70 recognise d settlements. The two 
largest centres of population are Boston and Spalding with a pproximately 33,000 
and 29,000 residents respectively14. In South Holland, the towns of Holbe ach, 
Crowland, Donington, Long Sutton and Sutton Bridge are freestanding centres. 
Holbeach, with a population of over 8,000, is the largest14. In Boston Borough the 
outlying settlements are smaller with Kirton, Swineshead, Butterwick, Old Leake, 
Wrangle and Sutterton being the largest. However, each provides services and 
local employment opportunities for residents, including from the surrounding rural 
areas.  
2.4.4  South East Lincolnshire has a total of 73,800 economically active residents16. 
73.3% of residents aged 16 -64 are in employment, which is just below the regional 
and national averages16. Unemployment rates in the area remain relatively low and 
have been steadily decreasing between 2012 and 2016. However, average 
earnings in South East Lincolnshire are considerably lower than those elsewhere in 
the region or UK, although average earnings  for employee s working in South 
Holland are higher than for those in Boston Borough.  
2.4.5  Agriculture is a key employment sector in South East Linc olnshire and the majority 
of businesses in the area are classed as ‘rural’, which reflects the dominance of 
agricu lture in Boston Borough and South Holland. Furthermore, the region’s 
horticultural business is the second -most important in the UK with an estimated 
annual value of £470 million (2010). Food processing is also important to the area’s 
economy with an above average number of people employed in the manufacturing 
sector16. The Port of Boston is one of Boston Borough’s major employers and 
continues to do well, benefiting from ample available space and storage areas.  
2.4.6  In terms of occupation, South East Lincolnshir e has a high proportion of people 
employed in operative and elementary occupations and a low number with 
managerial, professional and associate professional jobs when compared to the 
wider East Midlands and Great Britain17. The area is therefore yet to ful fil its 
potential in generating high value -added ‘knowledge econ omy’ jobs. However, 
South East Lincolnshire’s workforce is also comparatively poorly qualified when 
considering the average for the East Midlands and Great Britain17. This is 
particularly appa rent in Boston Borough where up -skilling local residents remain s a 
priority for those within the education and business community.  
2.4.7  In South East Lincolnshire, the take -up of employment land is slow, although recent 
development within the Kirton Distributi on Park and at Wardentree Lane, Spalding 
is a positive sign. The recently approved scheme for the expansion of the University 
of Lincoln Campus at the Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone is an important step in 
trying to help attract more value -added knowledge e conomy jobs to the area in the 
long-term. The number of businesses starting -up in the area has increased year on 
year since 2011 by 20% overall, many are small -scale but play an important role in 
supporting the local economy18. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2.4.8  In general, South East Linco lnshire is well provided with shopping facilities19. The 
quantity and quality, in terms of accessibility and the range of retailers and retail 
formats, is broadly appropriate to meet the needs of local people. It has a healthy 
market share of convenience g oods expenditure but some comparison goods 
expenditure leaks to the south and east19. 
2.4.9  Boston town centre is the defined retail centre for Boston Borough whilst Spalding 
town centre performs a similar role in South Holland. Holbeach, Long Sutton, 
Crowland, Donington , Kirton and Sutton Bridge provide residents with a range of 
shops and services to meet everyday needs. In 2015, vacancy rates for retail units 
in the area’s town centres remain relatively high. Despite this, footfall through 
Boston town centre ha s been increasing in recent years, and both Boston and 
Spalding are popular on market days.  
2.4.10  The Index of Multiple Deprivation 2015 ranked Bo ston Borough and South Holland 
District the 66th and 134th most deprived out of the 326 English Local Authorities20. 
The most deprived areas are concentrated in the centre and north -western 
(Fenside) area of Boston town and in Sutton Bridge, South Holland20. There are a 
variety of problems affecting both areas, including: low income; poor health; 
involuntary exclusion f rom employment; and poor educational attainment and skills. 
More generally, many residents face barriers to housing because of unaffordability, 
which can lead to poor living environments for some. Many residents living within 
the rural area are also relian t on the car to provide access to shops and services, 
particularly with public transport being more limited in these areas.  
2.4.11  South East Lincolnshire has approximately 67,000 dwellings (28,340 in Boston 
Borough and 38,660 in South Holland) occupied by aroun d 64,600 households15. 
The type of housing in the area reflects its rural nature, with a higher proportion of 
properties being detached than the national average15. The majority of South East 
Lincolnshire’s housing stock is owner occupied with private rent ed accommodation 
as the second most popular form of tenure15. The number of social rented 
properties in Boston Borough is above the national average, but in South Holland 
the figure is below15. 
2.4.12  House prices in the area remain well below those in Lincolnshi re as well as the rest 
of England. This is despite the fact that average house prices in Boston Borough 
and South Holland increased by 159% and 154% respectively between 2000 and 
201021. The shortage of affordable housing is a significant issue for the are a. South 
East Lincolnshire lies within two housing market areas ; there is a requirement for 
263 affordable dwellings per annum in Boston Borough22 and 282  in South 
Holland23,24 to 2036. However, the delivery of affordable homes in recent years has 
been muc h lower than this requirement; just 22 and 91 affordable dwellings were 
completed in Boston Borough and South Holland in 2015/16.  
2.4.13  South East Lincolnshire is located at the south -eastern limit of coastal Lincolnshire 
which is recognised as being poorly conn ected - especially by the highway network 
- to the rest of the region. Just three Principal ‘A’ Roads connect the area and these 
are heavily used by a considerable volume of HGVs and farm vehicles, and other South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
slow moving vehicles such as caravans accessing the Lincolnshire and Norfolk 
coasts in the summer.  
2.4.14  Passenger transport to places outside the area is mainly by bus or rail. However, 
rail provision in South East Lincolnshire is relatively limited in both coverage and 
service level, and passenger usage of  Boston and Spalding’s rail stations has 
declined in recent years25. Currently, rail services to Notting ham, Lincoln, 
Peterborough and beyond operate at hourly intervals or longer. Bus patronage in 
Lincolnshire as a whole has also decreased over the last f ew years. In South East 
Lincolnshire, the primary inter -urban bus network provides separate links to Boston 
from Lincoln and Skegness, and to Spalding from King’s Lynn (via Holbeach) and 
Peterborough (via Crowland)26. This network is supported by an on-demand bus 
service (CallConnect) that operates in response to pre -booked requests without a 
fixed timetable. Other commercial bus services link the towns of Boston and 
Spalding directly and provide links to the rural -hinterland settlements of the two 
towns. Three ‘Into Town’ routes in Boston provide regular services linking 
residential neighbourhoods to the town centre on a 30 -minute cycle throughout the 
day. In Spalding, two ‘Into Town’ routes provide a similar service.  
2.4.15  Car ownership in South East Linco lnshire is above the county and national average,  
reflecting the rural nature of the area, limited rail provision and lack of access to 
services in some areas15. It is therefore unsurprising that the car or van is the 
primary form of transport for resident s travelling to work15. In South Holland, 45% of 
people travel to work by car, which is significantly higher than the national (35%) 
and Lincolnshire (40%) averages15. Boston Borough has a rate that is marginally 
below the county average but marginally abo ve the national15. Bicycle use in 
Boston Borough is relatively high, as levels are nearly double that of Lincolnshire 
and four times the national rate. In South Holland, bicycle use is comparable to the 
rest of Lincolnshire15.  
2.4.16  Although the landscape of So uth East Lincolnshire has a very flat and rural 
character, it is shaped and dominated by agricultural and horticultural activity. This 
means that extensive views and large open skies are common vistas, where 
vertical structures like churches (such as the ‘ Boston Stump’), pylons and wind 
turbines draw the eye, defining man’s historical and modern day influence on the 
area. Field hedgerows and wooded areas are limited to lining roads or around 
settlements. The open and flat landscape of the area also means th at it is sensitive 
to development.  
2.4.17  A huge part of the area has been reclaimed through a vast network of drainage 
systems and coastal defences that have created some of the richest and most 
extensive agricultural and horticultural resources in the country. The flat character 
of the land and its proximity to the Wash estuary mean s that the main watercourses 
- such as the River Witham, River Welland, Riv er Nene and connected drainage 
channels - have tidal influences which require everyday management through th e 
operation of pumping stations and sluices. Climate change, along with the 
associated predicted effects on sea -level rise, brings the threat of extensive 
flooding that could affect whole settlements. This is predicted to be common in 100 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
years’ time as a consequence of extreme high tides and storm -surges causing 
major breaches in coastal and/or tidal defences. Even a minor flood event has the 
potential to inundate valuable farmland with saline water and negate productivity for 
many years.  
2.4.18  South East Linco lnshire’s nationally and locally -designated wildlife sites provide 
different levels of protection for a growing range of protected and priority habitats 
and species. The Wash is a natural habitat of international importance and has 
Ramsar, Special Protecti on Area (SPA), and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) 
designation  as well as also being protected as a Site of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI) and National Nature Reserve (NNR).  Besides the Wash, the area is home 
to: 2 SSS I’s, 3 Local Nature Reserves, 80 Local Wildlife Sites and 2 RSPB 
reserves.  
2.4.19  The area’s interlinked waterways are part of the rich ecological network supporting 
the biodiversity of the area. Historically, these watercourses were the main 
transport corridors for trade with inland Lincolns hire and beyond. Today, this role is 
more limited but they are a resource with a largely unrealised potential for 
recreation and tourism. The Fens Waterways Project that is underway seeks to link 
Lincoln and Ely with an inland waterway and should have tour ism benefits for the 
area, as well as helping to connect habitats.  
2.4.20  There are 2 Air Quality Management Area’s (AQMA) within Boston to monitor levels 
of nitrogen dioxide27. When assessed in 2016, it was concluded that consideration 
can be given to the revoca tion of the Bargate Bridge AQMA, although it was 
recommended that this be postponed until the impact of a new distributor road and 
proposed residential development in the area can be properly assessed27. There is 
still an air quality issue in the Haven Bri dge AQMA27. 
2.4.21  South East Lincolnshire has a long and varied history. Some of its archaeological 
remains date back to Roman times when salt manufacture was an important 
industry, particularly in the south of the area. Agriculture also has ancient roots and 
managing tidal inundation to protect farmland is evident in banks and ditches dating 
from Anglo -Saxon times. Boston has been a major centre as a port and commercial 
area since the Middle Ages and later played a significant role in the Pilgrim Fathers’ 
journe y to the new world and the founding of the USA. Today, the area has 24 
Conservation Areas (13 of which are in South Holland), over 1 ,000 listed buildings, 
43 Scheduled Ancient Monuments (SAMs) and 2 Registered Parks and Gardens. 
These assets are highly val ued for the important contribution they make to local 
distinctiveness and identity. The town of Boston has three conservation areas and 
its built heritage is regarded as being of national signific ance by Historic England. 
Both Boston town and Spalding reta in a strong commercial function within their 
historic  cores that attracts visitors generated by the tourist  economies of 
Lincolnshire and Norfolk, adjoining to the east. There are many pressures on the 
historic environment and the percentage of Conservatio n Areas, SAMs and Grade I 
and II* listed buildings deemed to be ‘at risk’ in South East Lincolnshire is above the 
national average28. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2.4.22  For a sparsely -populated, predominantly rural area, South East Lincolnshire, 
surprisingly, is of great importance in the n ational context; its contribution to food 
production and food security is significant, while its ability to conserve scarce 
resources and develop sustainable energy solutions will contribute to meeting the 
challenge of climate change.  
2.5. Our Vision for South East Lincolnshire  
2.5.1  The level of growth expected to occur in South East Lincolnshire over the Local 
Plan period needs to be delivered in a sustainable manner. A vision has therefore 
been prepared to guide the sustainable development of the area. The followi ng 
vision is locally distinctive and aspirational, but is also realistic and deliverable.  
Our Vision  
By 2036 growth will be concentrated in South East Lincolnshire’s most sustainable 
settlements, taking into account the sensitivity of the predominantly rural, flat, open 
landscape and the risk of flooding. The majority of development will be focussed in 
Boston and Spalding, but there will also be an appropriate level of growth in some 
of the area’s smaller towns and villages to ensure that they remain res ilient and 
sustainable.  
The delivery of new sustainably -designed homes (both market and affordable), as 
well as additional employment opportunities, will meet the needs of all the 
population. This will be supported by the necessary facilities, services and  
infrastructure that create healthy, mixed and balanced communities. Through 
growth, health inequalities and community deprivation will have been reduced.  
The delivery of all new and/or improved infrastructure to support growth, including 
strategic highway  improvements and measures to reduce the causes and impacts 
of flooding, will be phased to ensure that new development is both sustainable and 
deliverable.  
South East Lincolnshire will be better connected by sustainable modes of transport, 
which will help ensure access to key services and facilities and places of 
employment is more accessible to all, as well as helping to reduce carbon 
emissions.  
New development will be of a high standard of design and will help South East 
Lincolnshire mitigate and adapt to  climate change. The use of renewable energy 
technologies and sustainable drainage systems will also help minimise carbon 
emissions and flood risk respectively.  
South East Lincolnshire’s important heritage and natural assets, landscapes and 
townscapes will  have been protected, conserved, and enhanced where 
appropriate, to ensure that their inherent social, economic and environmental 
qualities are retained and that opportunities for sustainable tourism can be realised.   
The economic base of the area will ha ve been strengthened: the growth of existing 
businesses in food production, processing and distribution will be supported; our South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
high-quality agricultural land will be protected; and opportunities to diversify the 
economic base within the settlements, and th rough appropriate development in the 
countryside, will have been promoted in a sustainable way. This, alongside 
improved educational attainment, will help to provide residents with access to 
higher skilled, better paid jobs close to where they live.  
 
2.6. Strategic Priorities  
2.6.1  The following strategic priorities for South East Lincolnshire are the main principles 
that will be followed to deliver the Local Plan’s vision. The vision and strategic 
priorities are the starting point for developing the detailed polici es and site -specific 
proposals outlined in this document. Once adopted, they will also be used to help 
monitor the success of policy implementation.   
Strategic 
Priority  Content  
Sustainable Development  
1. To deliver sustainable development in South East Lincolnshire that seeks to 
meet the social and economic needs of the area, whilst protecting and 
enhancing its environment for the enjoyment of future generations.  
2. To ensure that the scale, distribution and type of new development is 
sustainably located to take account of flood risk across South East 
Lincolnshire.  
3. To ensure that development contributes to the provision of necessary 
physical, social and green infrastructure to deliver planned levels of growth at 
the right time and to mitigate i ts impacts on existing communities and the 
environment.  
Economy  
4. To provide the right conditions and sufficient land in appropriate locations to 
help diversify and strengthen the economic base of South East Lincolnshire to 
meet the needs of existing businesses, to attract new businesses and sources 
of employment, and to maximise the potential historic and environmental 
assets can have for sustainable tourism.  
5. To protect a mutually -supportive hierarchy of vibrant self -contained town 
centres and sec ure their enhancement by promoting an appropriate mix and 
scale of retail, leisure and other town centre uses and by maximising 
opportunities for regeneration.   
Housing  
6. To provide enough choice of land for housing to ensure that the housing stock 
better meets local housing needs and aspirations, including for older people, 
first time buyers and those in need of affordable and starter housing.  
Environment  
7. To conserve and enhance South East Lincolnshire’s natural and historic 
environment and to promote greater access and understanding of assets 
through new development.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
8. To minimise the impact of and adapt to climate change by making more 
sustainable use of land and resources, reducing exposure to flood risk, 
promoting sustainable development  and reducing human exposure to 
environmental risks.  
9. To promote the more efficient use of land, prioritise the re -use of previously -
developed land and to minimise the loss of South East Lincolnshire’s high -
quality agricultural land by developing in sust ainable locations, at appropriate 
densities.  
10. To provide equal opportunities for everyone who lives, visits, works and 
invests in South East Lincolnshire by helping to create more sustainable 
communities, reduce locational disadvantage and upgrade a ra nge of 
community facilities recognising that these all contribute to the fulfilment, 
health and well -being of residents and visitors alike.  
Transport  
11. To improve accessibility for all to jobs, services and facilities by sustainable 
and public transport, to make travel as easy and affordable as possible, both 
within the area and along key links to and from South East Lincolnshire.  
12. To improve South East Lincolnshire’s highway infrastructure, to tackle 
congestion, improve road safety and make  journeys as easy as possible 
particularly for those living in rural areas and to enhance efficiencies for 
business.  
Table 2: South East Lincolnshire Strategic Priorities  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3. Promoting Sustainable Communities in South East 
Lincolnshire  
3.1.1  The following suite of policies set out the approach to delivering sustainable 
development across South East Lincolnshire to 2036.  In doing so, these policies 
set out where new growth is expected to go, the infrastructure required in support 
and how such development will be delivered over the Local Plan period, ensuring 
that positive improvements are sought in the quality of the built, natural and historic 
environment, as well as to resident s’ quality of life.  
3.2. Spatial Strategy  
3.2.1  South East Lincolnshire’s settlements have evolve d over time and can be expected 
to evolve, in a sustainable manner, to help meet the development needs of the 
area. The spatia l strategy identified by Policy  1 is a ranking of those settlements 
deemed to be most sustainable in descending order.  
3.2.2  The spatia l strategy has been defined following consideration of a number of factors 
(see the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment29 and the Housing 
Papers30), including the presence of available and deliverable sites, infrastructure 
capacity and needs, pr oximity to local shops, services and community facilities, 
access to public transport and in particular, flood risk. Large parts of South East 
Lincolnshire, and particularly Boston Borough, are at high risk of flooding. A 
sequential approach to flood risk for the Local Plan area has been applied to inform 
the process31. 
3.2.3  The ability of residents to access employment opportunities close to home, and the 
ability of a location to sustain local businesses is an important factor to ensure that 
housing and employm ent growth are closely linked.  
3.2.4  Defining settlement boundaries provides a degree of certainty to the community and 
to developers about where the most sustainable locations for new development will 
be promoted, and specifically, where the provisions of Poli cy 1, below, will apply. 
This policy should be considered in conjunction with the Policies Map: an Inset Map 
is provided for each settlement identified below.   
Policy 1: Spatial Strategy  
A.   Areas where development is to be directed  
1.   Sub-Regional Centres  
Boston (including parts of Fishtoft and Wyberton Parishes)*  
Spalding  
Within the settlement boundaries of Boston and Spalding (as shown on the 
Inset Maps)  development will be permitted that supports their roles as Sub -
Regional Centres.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2.   Main Service Centres  
Crowland  Pinchbeck  
Donington  Sutterton*  
Holbeach  Sutton Bridge  
Kirton  (incl. parts of Frampton Parish )*  Swineshead*  
Long Sutton   
Within the settlement boundaries of the Main Service Centres (as shown on 
the Inset Maps) development will be permitted that supports their role as a 
service centre for the settlement itself, helps sustain existing facilities or 
helps meet the service needs of other local communities.  
B.   Areas of limited development opportunity  
1.   Minor Se rvice Centres  
Bicker *  Gedney Hill  Surfleet  
Butterwick*  Gosberton  Sutton St. James  
Cowbit  Moulton  Tydd St Mary  
Deeping St Nicholas  Moulton Chapel  Weston  
Fishtoft*  Old Leake*  Whaplode  
Fleet Hargate  Quadring  Wigtoft*  
  Wrangle*  
Within the settlement boundaries of the Minor Service Centres (as shown on 
the Inset Maps) development will be permitted that supports their role as a 
service centre for the settlement itself, helps sustain existing facilities or 
helps meet the service needs of other local comm unities. Development will 
normally be limited to Allocated and Committed sites and infill.  
C.   Areas of development restraint  
1.   Other Service Centres and Settlements  
Algarkirk*  Haltoft End*  Moulton Seas End  
Amber Hill*  Holbeach Drove  Nene Terrace  
Benington*  Holbeach Hurn  Northgate, West Pinchbeck  
Fleet Church End  Holbeach St Johns  Saracens Head  
Fosdyke*  Holbeach St Marks  Shepeau Stow  
Frampton Church End*  Holland Fen*  Sutton St Edmund  
Frampton West*  Hubbert’s Bridge*  Swineshead Bridge*  
Freiston*  Kirton End*  Throckenholt  
Gedney Black Lion End  Kirton Holme*  Tongue End  
Gedney Church End  Langrick  Bridge*  Tydd Gote  
Gedney Dawsmere  Leake Commonside*  Weston Hills  
Gedney Drove End  Leverton*  Whaplode Drove  
Gedney Dyke  Little Sutton  Whaplode St Catherine  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Gosberton Risegate /Clough  Lutton  Wrangle Common*  
  Wyberton Church End*  
Within the settlement boundaries of the Other Service Centres and 
Settlements  (as shown on the Inset Maps) development will be permitted 
that supports their role as a  service centre for the settlement itself, helps 
sustain existing facilities or helps meet the service needs of other local 
communities. Development will normally be limited to Committed sites and 
infill.  
* Indicates a settlement within Boston Borough. Settl ements without an 
asterisk are within South Holland District.  
D.   Countryside  
The rest of the Local Plan area outside the defined settlement boundaries of 
the Sub -Regional Centres, Main Service Centres, Minor Service Centre and 
Other Service Centres and Settlements is designated as Countryside.  
In the Countryside development will be permitted that is necessary to such a 
location and/or where it can be demonstrated that it meets the sustainable 
development needs of the area in terms of economic, commu nity or 
environmental benefits.  
Reasoned Justification  
Sub-Regional Centres  
3.2.5  The Sub -Regional Centres of Boston and Spalding are clearly the largest urban 
areas and centres for services for the Local Plan area and beyond. They need to 
continue to accommoda te the level of services and economic opportunities for the 
benefit of communities over a widespread area. Both towns also have significant 
infrastructure needs in respect of major improvements to highways and the levels of 
growth identified under Policies  11-15 reflect  the need to fund this highway 
infrastructure.  
3.2.6  Boston is the second largest town in Lincolnshire with a historic core containing 
buildings and a street pattern that is of national significance (see Policy 29: The 
Historic Environment).  It has  a vibrant retail centre: national retailers are located 
within the historic core and the retail centre of Pescod Square, while a twice weekly 
market attracts traders and customers from a wide area. Access to a full range of 
education opportunities is avai lable including further education at Boston College. 
Pilgrim Hospital is a regionally -significant resource as regards health provision. As 
a port Boston has a long -established history of trade which has evolved into other 
employment opportunities ( see Poli cy 7: Improving  South East Lincolnshire’s 
Employment Land Portfolio).  More modern business areas have developed within 
the western section of the urban area.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.2.7  The Boston urban area also offers the vast majority of housing stock and choice 
within the Borough  and this also presents one of the most significant challenges the 
Local Plan has had to address: - that is, meeting housing needs in an area where 
flood risk is a significant threat. Whilst the Local Plan takes a precautionary 
approach to flood risk it is  recognised that the Boston urban area will continue to be 
an area of choice for most residents, and therefore flood mitigation is a major 
consideration and cost in the delivery of new development. The Boston Barrier is 
expected to be of huge significance to the viability of new development in Boston, 
the role of the town as a Sub -Regional Centre and to reducing flood risk overall.  
3.2.8  Spalding is also a historic settlement but its historic core is of a smaller scale to 
Boston. Spalding has also seen major grow th take place onwards from the latter 
part of the twentieth century with more modern housing, retail and business 
environments extending the footprint of the urban area, mainly to the north and 
west. The development of the A16 through to Peterborough as we ll as rail 
connections has brought Spalding within the scope of the south -east of the country 
and employment opportunities well beyond South Holland. This has partly fuelled 
the greater rates of residential development in Spalding (and South Holland) in 
recent times, when compared to Boston Borough - and created housing affordability 
issues. Spalding also serves the wider area as regards further education 
opportunities and health care.  
Main Service Centres  
3.2.9  The Main Service Centres in general consist of thos e settlements seen to perform 
significant service roles for quite wide areas of Boston Borough or South Holland. 
South Holland's larger area and rural hinterland means that more Main Service 
Centres have established over time. The Local Plan area has provi ded the 
opportunity to identify a larger group of Main Service Centres between Boston and 
Spalding; Kirton (in Boston Borough) is of a similar scale and function to most of the 
Main Service Centres in South Holland, but Swineshead and Sutterton have also 
been identified as it is considered that they could evolve and perform more of a 
supporting role to surrounding communities. Their inclusion, along with the more 
established Kirton and Donington, should encourage service infrastructure growth 
and therefore make these areas more self -contained. Both have comparatively 
good sustainability assessments32 and also have past development rates which are 
comparable to the other Main Service Centres.  
3.2.10  The inclusion of Pinchbeck as a Main Service Centre can also contri bute to 
maintaining and improving service infrastructure outside Spalding. But the main 
justification for its inclusion as a Main Service Centre is that there are significant 
levels of development within the parish, the boundary of which adjoins the urban 
edge of Spalding. Whilst the settlement boundary for Pinchbeck will define the 
settlement it is clearly a location of significant existing service provision.  
3.2.11  Holbeach is of a very different scale to the other Main Service Centres and has a 
historic core an d a range of services of a much greater concentration and South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
magnitude, including further -education opportunities. Coastal flood risk is also a 
significant issue for the settlement especially given its need to meet the demand for 
housing. The proximity of the  town to the A17 also means that future traffic impacts 
are a significant consideration (see Policy 33: Delivering a More Sustainable 
Transport Network)  in bringing forward new residential development, as well as 
significant new employment land (Site HO002 ). 
Minor Service Centres  
3.2.12  The settlements defined as Minor Service Centres are more numerous and diverse. 
All have relatively comparable levels of sustainability32 but some are identified 
because of their close proximity to larger service centres. There is also recognition 
that a number of these settlements are located within the area between Boston and 
Spalding along with the Main Service Centres. This strengthens the case for them 
to meet the housing needs of the Local Plan area through allocated sites and also 
helps to build an extended range of shared services such as schools and health 
provision. Within the Minor Service Centres development is likely to be limit ed to 
any allocations made in this P lan, existing commitments (i.e. sites under 
development or with planning permission), change s of use and infill development .  
Other Service Centres and Settlements  
3.2.13  A large group of varied settlements are included in the Other Service Centres and 
Settlements category. Many, particularly in South Holland, have established over a 
long time as groups of settlements serving relatively remote rural areas. In general, 
many of the settlements have had greater levels of self -susta inability in the past 
and it is recognised that incremental development is unlikely to trigger a revival. 
However, such settlements can still provide a community focus and will remain a 
location of choice for many local residents.  
3.2.14  The settlement boundaries33 of the Other Service Centres and Settlements allow 
limited opportunities for residential development largely because the character, 
appearance and form of the settlements are mainly small in scale and close to the 
surrounding designated Countryside. Typ ically, only small open frontages separate 
the main body of such settlements from properties detached from their designated 
settlement boundaries. A significant number of these settlements are linear in form; 
it is seen as a particularly important function  of the settlement boundary to stop 
further incremental linear extensions33. The scale of development opportunities that 
might arise were a less restrictive approach to be taken would threaten the spatial 
strategy of the Local Plan to provide for housing i n the settlements of greater need 
and which offer sustainable bases for development of a larger scale.  
Countryside  
3.2.15  The Countryside of South East Lincolnshire is a precious resource, mainly in its role 
for agriculture but also for recreation. There are type s of development that require a 
Countryside location either because it is the location of an existing building or use South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
of land. Where changes to such buildings or land uses require planning permission 
Policy 1 and other more detailed Local Plan policies wil l apply. Agriculture and 
forestry are clearly uses which must function in the Countryside but other uses 
which may diversify from agriculture and forestry, e.g. recreation and tourism, can 
meet the broad sustainable objectives of the Local Plan. Similarly,  other assets 
such as waterways and access to the coastal areas may offer opportunities to 
expand the opportunities the area can offer visitors (See Policy 9: Promoting a 
Stronger Visitor Economy).  
3.2.16  Some land uses may also require a Countryside location bec ause of their 
functionality, such as the plant and equipment of public utility providers or in the 
provision of flood mitigation infrastructure.  
3.2.17  Housing needs may also, by exception, be justified in the Countryside; for example, 
for Gypsy, Traveller and Tr avelling Showpeople accommodation (Policy 20: 
Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople)  or to meet the 
specific housing needs of a settlement (see Policy 19 : Rural Exceptions Sites).  
Monitoring  
The amount of services lost and/or gain ed within each settlement boundary  
Number  of planning permissions approved for non -countryside uses outside settlement boundaries  
3.3. Development Management  
3.3.1  Policy 2  provides a framework for an operational policy to be used in assessing the 
sustainable devel opment attributes of all development proposals. In essence, it is a 
compendium of the sustainable development considerations contained in other 
policies in the Local Plan and is provided as an overarching ‘summary’ policy to 
help decision makers, and appli cants alike, focus on the type of factors that will be 
assessed in considering development proposals. All types of planning applications 
requiring a decision will be subject to the considerations of this policy.  
3.3.2  The policy is intended to be relevant to any type of proposal whether large or small. 
New development should be appropriate to the site, achieve a high quality of design 
and efficient use of land and buildings, and should respond creatively to the 
characte r and distinctiveness of the surrounding area. All new development, 
including residential and commercial proposals, should also reflect the area’s 
distinctive development form and patterns of building, spaces, and means of 
enclosure, townscape and landscap e, and incorporate in the design those features 
which are important to the history and form of the area. Sites allocated for 
residential and employment related development in this Local Plan have been 
assessed to provide guidance with regard to constraints  and infrastructure 
requirements. These constraints and requirements can be found in Appendix 5 : 
‘Allocations – Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation ’ and, whilst, 
these may change over the time frame of the Local Plan they are considered  to be 
a useful starting point in considering what might be relevant in the development of 
these allocated sites.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Policy 2: Development Management  
Proposals requiring planning permission fo r development will be permitted 
provided that sustainable developme nt considerations are met, specifically in 
relation to:  
1. size, scale , layout, density and impact on the amenity, trees, character 
and appearance of the area and the relationship to existing development 
and land uses;  
2. quality of design and orientation;  
3. maximising the use of sustainable materials and resources;  
4. access and vehicle generation levels;  
5. the capacity of existing community services and infrastructure;  
6. impact upon neighbouring land uses by reason of noise, odour, 
disturbance or visual intrusion;  
7. sustainable drainage and flood risk;  
8. impact or enhancement for areas of natural habitats and historica l 
buildings and heritage assets;  and 
9. impact on the potential loss of sand and gravel mineral resources.  
Reasoned Justification  
3.3.3  Many occupiers of existing buildings may wish to create extra space by adding an 
extension. This is often as an alternative to moving to a larger property. It is, 
however, important that any extension is carefully designed to respect and relate to 
the original building and integrates sensitively with the character and appearance of 
the surrounding area.  
3.3.4  New development should reflect the principles of good design set out in the NPPF9. 
The orientation, layout, siting and landscaping of new buildings should maximise 
energy eff iciency, utilising natural shelter and opportunities for passive solar gain. 
Issues of design and orientation will also be considered against Policy 3:  Design of 
New Development.  
3.3.5  Criterion 3 seeks to ensure that development would not be wasteful in its us e of 
energy or in i ts depletion of natural resources (e.g. groundwater supplies). Policy 3 
provides more detailed guidance with regard to waste minimisation, utilising 
renewable energy, reducing water consumption and the sustainable use of existing 
materia ls on site (e.g. reuse of excavated materials for landscaping or raising 
ground levels ).  Criterion 9 of the policy also has implications for the good use of 
natural resources in that the Plan Area has two Sand and Gravel Safeguarding 
Areas identified in t he Lincolnshire Minerals and Waste Local Plan (June 2016). South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
One area is identified on the Policies Map north west of Boston Borough and the 
other area is on the Crowland Inset Map.       
3.3.6  One of the principle strategies of planning for growth that promotes an d ensures the 
well-being of the environment is to provide for development in or adjacent to 
existing settlements or development areas. Such areas, particularly the urban 
areas, usually have the necessary services and infrastructure to support additional 
development. The Local Planning Authorities will encourage higher -density 
development in these locations to maximise accessibility. Keeping development 
areas relatively compact can also reduce the number and length of motorised 
journeys, especially by car, t o and from everyday destinations. This contributes to 
the well -being of the environment by cutting down on the use of non -renewable 
resources (such as petrol) and, in turn, reduces the emission of harmful gases into 
the atmosphere. Developments should also  maximise accessibility to local services 
and facilities by providing for enhanced public transport services and improved 
integration between different modes of travel, as well as opportunities for easier 
pedestrian and cyclist movement.  
3.3.7  It is necessary to  ensure that development does not have an adverse impact upon 
physical o r social infrastructure such as  local roads, schools or health care. Where 
this is expected to happen, new or improved facilities should be provided. In some 
cases infrastructure provi ders will make the provision, but where the need results 
directly from a proposed development, developers will be expected to ensure that 
development makes a fair contribution towards its cost. In suitable cases, provision 
will be required on -site, but whe re this is not practicable, reasonable and equitable, 
developer contributions may be accepted in lieu of provision (see Policies 5 and 6 
for more detail). Development proposals which fail to make appropriate provision for 
infrastructure will not be permitt ed. Prospective developers should therefore consult 
with the Local Planning Authorities at an early stage to ascertain infrastructure 
requirements. These can then be reflected in the purchase price of land or property, 
prior to committing to purchase land.  
3.3.8  In determining applications, the Local Planning Authorities must ensure that new 
development takes into account and protect s the amenities and operations of 
neighbouring properties and other lawful uses. When formulating proposals, 
consideration should be  given to the potential for pollution from a proposed use. 
Guidance should be sought from the relevant council’s Environmental Health 
Department on acceptable noise levels, standards of air quality, and other 
measures to avoid adverse environmental impacts  as well as features that need to 
be incorporated in the design process. Where possible, proposals should strive to 
exceed statutory standards and show how they contribute to sustainable 
development. The Environment Agency should be consulted in relation t o water 
quality, waste disposal and conta minated land issues (see Policy  30: Pollution ). 
3.3.9  Flood risk is a material planning consideration. As set out in national policy9, 
inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding should be avoided by 
directing development away from areas at highest risk, but where development is 
necessary, making it safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere. The Local South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Planning Authorities will seek to bring about an overall reduction in flood risk 
through development; proposa ls will be assessed against the Sequential Test, and 
if necessary the Exception Test as stated in national policy9. In many 
circumstances, applications will need to be supported by a Flood Risk Assessment 
appropriate to the development proposal and its pro posed location. The South East 
Lincolnshire Strategic Flood Risk Assessment34 provides further guidance.  
3.3.10  The necessary mitigation identified by the Flood Risk Assessment should be funded 
by the developer, and must be implemented prior to the development t o ensure the 
flood risk is properly managed and so that the development remains safe 
throughout its lifetime. These measures will complement or improve existing 
defences where appropriate. Where there will be an unacceptable risk of flooding to 
the propose d development or it would unacceptably increase the risk to others the 
development will not be permitted. Policy 4:  Approach to Flood Risk provides a 
Local Plan area -wide approach on mitigation for flood risk, and in the consideration 
of site -specific flo od risk assessments opportunities may arise for flood risk 
mitigation beyond the site itself or from improvements at the strategic level.  
3.3.11  The primary purpose of ‘sustainable drainage systems’ (SuDS) is to minimise the 
impact of urban development on the wat er environment, reduce flood risk and 
provide habitats for wildlife. Opportunities for incorporating a range of SuDS in all 
new development must be taken wherever possible. There are many different 
SuDS features available to suit the constraints of a site which could come in the 
form of green roofs or by providing new wildlife habitats such as ponds, wetlands 
and swales. Hard -engineered elements are often used in high -density, commercial 
and industrial developments, including permeable paving, canals, treat ment 
channels, attenuation storage and soakaways. However the discharge of surface 
water to soakaways or other infiltration devices must be considered first, before 
alternative methods are investigated. SuDS should be designed into the landscape 
of all new  development and should be included as part of a wider approach across 
South East Lincolnshire to improve water quality and provide flood mitigation. 
Maintenance will also be required, appropriate to the type of development and 
location proposed.  
3.3.12  Developme nt proposals should also protect, and where possible enhance 
biodiversity, geodiversity and green infrastructure (see Policy 28: The Natural 
Environment).  Similarly, proposals will need to protect, and where possible enhance 
the historic environment such a s Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings and 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments (see Policy 29: The Historic Environment).  
Development proposals which are likely to have a detrimental impact upon areas of 
natural habitats and/or historical buildings and heritage assets shall not be 
permitted.  
Monitoring  
Number  of planning applications refused on flood risk grounds  
Number o f planning applications refused owing to inappropriate design  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.4. Design of New Development  
3.4.1  The NPPF9 stresses that ‘good design is a key aspect of sustainable development, 
is indivisible from good planning, and should contribute positively to making places 
better for people.’ As such, Policy 3 identifies  issues that should be considered 
when preparing sc hemes and Planning Statements (if required), so that 
development sits comfortably with, and adds positively to, its historically -designated 
or undesignated townscape or landscape surroundings.  
3.4.2  Good design has a role in achieving sustainable development and  adapting to, or 
mitigating, climate change. It will support sustainable development because it will 
reuse and adapt existing buildings to new uses, as well as designing new buildings 
and housing that can meet the changing needs of the occupants over their  lifetime. 
This will reduce the amount of resources required for development.  
Policy 3: Design of New Development  
All development will create distinctive places through the use of high quality 
and inclusive design and layout and, where appropriate, make in novative use 
of local traditional styles and materials. Design which is inappropriate to the 
local area, or which fails to maximise opportunities for improving the 
character and quality of an area, will not be acceptable.  
Development proposals will demons trate how the following issues, where 
they are relevan t to the proposal , will be secured:  
1. creating a sense of place by complementing and enhancing designated 
and non designated heritage assets; historic street patterns; respecting 
the density, scale, visu al closure, landmarks, views, massing of 
neighbouring buildings and the surrounding area;  
2. distinguishing between private and public space;  
3. the landscape character of the location;  
4. accessibility by a choice of travel modes including the provision of public 
transport, public rights of way and cycle ways;  
5. the provision of facilities for the storage of refuse/recycling bins, storage 
and/or parking of bicycles and layout of car parking;  
6. the lighting of public places;  
7. ensuring public spaces are accessible to all ; 
8. crime prevention and community safety;  
9. the orientation of buildings on the site to enable the best use of 
decentralised and renewable low -carbon energy technologies for the 
lifetime of the development;  
10. the appropriate treatment of facades to public plac es, including shop South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
frontages to avoid visual intrusion by advertising, other signage, security 
shutters, meter boxes and other service and communication 
infrastructure;  
11. residential amenity;  
12. the mitigation of flood risk through flood -resistant and flood -resilient 
design and sustainable drainage systems (SuDS);  
13. the use of locally sourced building materials, minimising the use of water 
and minimising land take, to protect best and most versatile soils;  
14. the incorporation of existing hedgerows and trees and the  provision of 
appropriate new landscaping to enhance biodiversity, green 
infrastructure, flood risk mitigation and urban cooling;  
15. the appropriate use or reuse of historic buildings . 
Reasoned Justification  
3.4.3  The purpose of the policy is to provide a list of  issues to be considered when 
development schemes are being prepared, rather than prescribing a particular 
design approach, consistent with the NPPF9. Design is a cross cutting issue so may 
be covered by other policies elsewhere in this Local Plan. Not all  of the issues listed 
will be relevant in all cases. The issues can be grou ped into: Place, 
Accessibility/T ransport, Amenity and Flooding.  
Place  
3.4.4  Good design will seek to provide a development that sits well in its surroundings by 
respecting the character of the place within which it is located and carefully 
incorporates infrastructure. Sites will be influenced by the size, shape, density and 
materials of adjacent buildings and their historic or archaeological importance. In 
addition the appropriate use of historic buildings helps preserve them for future 
generations and also contributes to the maintenance of the historic setting of 
places. The character of the landscape in rural locations can influence the  size, 
shape and orientation of buildings as a resul t of its ability to absorb development, 
indicated by the description and the sensitivities of the landscape in the landscape 
character assessments.  In addition new buildings will meet the requirements of 
their users, be that residential or commercial occu piers, by providing suitable places 
to store refuse, cycles and park car s. In conjunction with Policy 36 : Vehicle and 
Cycle Parking, which requires some electric hook up points for vehicles, this will 
help the sustainability of the development by supportin g recycling, encouraging the 
use of cycles to reduce traffic congestion and support the initial stages of the 
evolution of transport away from the internal combustion engine, which, along with 
cycling, will benefit air pollution.   South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.4.5  New buildings can be des igned and orientated so that micro generation plant can 
be incorporated for its maximum benefit. Development will incorporate, protect or 
extend existing habitats or land forms so that buildings are shaded from the 
extremes of weather to minimise energy co nsumption for heating or cooling.  
Improvements to biodiversity can be achieved on the building, by, for example, the 
use of bird nest or bat roost boxes, green roofs or walls. These features along with 
the incorporation, protection or extension of existin g habitats in the landscape will 
maintain or improve wildlife resilience. Green walls and roofs also add to the 
thermal mass of the building. Shading buildings with plants or providing larger roof 
overhangs to shade windows, sizing windows according to the ir aspect and 
providing appropriate insulation allow buildings to be more resilient to extremes of 
temperature.  
Accessibility / transport.  
3.4.6  The design of new buildings and spaces should take the principle of encouraging 
physical activity in line with Planni ng Healthy Weight Environments35. A 
development should incorporate existing public rights of way and cycleways and 
where practicable extend them, to encourage residents to walk or cycle to places of 
work, school, local shops and services as well as open sp ace. Such facilities should 
be accessible to all, including those with disabilities, older people and those with 
pushchairs, as well as other users with more specific needs, such as those with 
dementia or the visually impaired. Care should also be taken in  designing undefined 
multi -use spaces where pedestrians, cyclists, public transport and taxis mingle as 
these can also be confusing for such groups.  
Amenity  
3.4.7  The use or operation of sites also needs to respect neighbouring uses. Lighting 
should be designed  to illuminate the desired building or space without spilling out 
beyond the boundary as this contributes to overnight light pollution  and causes 
disturbance to both the human population and nocturnal wildlife . Spaces and 
footways should have suitable sigh t lines and together with boundaries should seek 
to create a safe environment that discourages criminal activity and fosters 
community safety. The public impact of development can be undermined by the 
inappropriate design, siting and lighting of signs, the  design and incorporation of 
security shutters into bu ildings and the position of met er boxes on the public faces 
of buildings. In addition poorly positioned service and infrastructure cabinets and 
sub stations produce an unsightly impact on the locality, which undermines the 
overall benefit that the development may achieve.  These issues along with the 
interaction of neighbouring uses with the Pollution Policy contribute to protecting 
residential amenity.  
Flooding  
3.4.8  A development will make buildings and pla ces more resilient to flooding by, for 
example, raising the floor level, and adapting the internal materials, electrical South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
circuits and plumbing to cope better with any flood event. These issues may be 
successfully incorporated in buildings that follow tradi tional or contemporary design 
in accordance with Building Regulations. In addition, owing to flood risk new 
activities may need to be deterred in certain areas based on their intrinsic hazard 
from water. The hazard may result from a combination of the acti vity type, its 
duration and the potential for failure of flood -control measures.  
Monitoring  
Number of planning applications refused owing to inappropriate design  
3.5. Approach to Flood Risk  
3.5.1  Much of the land within the Local Plan area is at significant risk of  flooding and this 
will increase with climate cha nge.  It is important that the P lan provides a robust 
response to this issue and at the same time facilitates appropriate development to 
continue in a way that is resilient to the potential consequences of f looding.   
Policy  4: Approach to Flood Risk  
Development proposed within an area at risk of flooding (Flood Zones 2 and 3 
of the Environment Agency’s flood map or at risk during a breach or 
overtopping scenario as shown on the flood hazard and depths maps i n the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment) will be permitted, where:  
1. It can be demonstrated that there are no other sites available at a lower 
risk of flooding (i.e. that the sequential test is passed).  The sequential test 
will be based on a Borough or Distri ct wide search area of alternative sites 
within the defined settlement boundaries, unless local circumstances 
relating to the catchment area for the development justify a reduced 
search area, i.e. there is a specific need for the development in that 
locati on. The sequential test is not required for sites allocated in the Local 
Plan, minor development1 or change of use (except for a change of use to 
a caravan, camping or chalet site, or to a mobile hom e or park home site ). 
2. It can be demonstrated that essenti al infrastructure in FZ3a & FZ3b, highly 
vulnerable development in FZ2 and more vulnerable development in FZ3 
provide wider sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh 
flood risk.  
3. The application is supported with a site -specific flood risk ass essment, 
covering risk from all sources of flooding including the impacts of climate 
change and which:  
a. demonstrate that the vulnerability of the proposed use is compatible 
1.1.1                                              
1 As defined in the National Planning Practice Guidance, paragraph 046 (Reference ID:7 -046-201403 06)  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
with the flood zone;  
b. identify the relevant predicted flood risk (breach/overtopping ) level, 
and mitigation measures that demonstrate how the development will 
be made safe and that occupants will be protected from flooding from 
any source;  
c. propose appropriate flood resistance and resilience measures 
(following the guidance outlined in the  Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment), maximising the use of passive resistance measures 
(measures that do not require human intervention to be deployed), to 
ensure the development maintains an appropriate level of safety for 
its lifetime;  
d. include appropriate flood warning and evacuation procedures where 
necessary (referring to the County’s evacuation routes plan), which 
have been undertaken in consultation with the authority’s emergency 
planning staff;  
e. incorporates the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuD S) (unless it 
is demonstrated that this is not technically feasible) and confirms how 
these will be maintained/managed for the lifetime of development 
(surface water connections to the public sewerage network will only 
be permitted in exceptional circumsta nces where it is demonstrated 
that there are no feasible alternatives);  
f. demonstrates that the proposal will not increase risk elsewhere and 
that opportunities through layout, form of development and gree n 
infrastructure have  been considered as a way of pr oviding flood 
betterment and reducing flood risk overall;    
g. demonstrates that adequate foul water treatment and disposal 
already exists or can be provided i n time to serve the development;  
h. ensures suitable access is safeguarded for the maintenance of water  
resources, drainage and flood risk management infrastructure.  
Development in all flood zones, and development over 1 hectare in size in 
Flood Zone 1, will need to demonstrate that surface water from the 
development can be managed and will not increase the  risk of flooding to 
third parties.  
Change of use of existing buildings will be supported providing they do not 
pose an increase in risk to people.  Change of use that would result in self - 
contained ground floor residential accommoda tion in areas of hazar d rating 
‘danger for some’, ‘ danger for most’ and ‘ danger for all’ will not be 
supported.  In these areas unrestricted access to a habitable room above the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
flood level and an emergency evacuation plan will be required.   
Caravans, mobile homes and park hom es intended for permanent residential 
use will not be permitted in areas at risk of flooding.  Caravan, chalet, log 
cabin, camping and touring sites at risk of fluvia l flooding where there is a 
‘danger for mos t’ and ‘ danger for all’ will not be permitted.  Occupancy of 
caravan, chalet, log cabin, camping and touring sites at risk of tidal flooding 
will not be permitted to open between 1st November in any one year and the 
14th March in the succeeding year .   
No development will be permitted within a 50m buff er from the toe of the 
raised Witham Haven Banks (flood defences) , as show n on the indicative  Plan 
contained in Appendix 10 , to allow access for construction and maintenance .  
Flood risk management infrastructure shall be provided at the strategic level, 
where deve lopment opportunities allow, to  reduce the hazard and 
probability of flooding.   
Reasoned Justification  
3.5.2  The South East Lincolnshire Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)34 provides 
an overview of how flood risk has been considered in shaping the proposals of the 
Local Plan; including the spatial strategy and the assessment of housing and 
employment sites. The SFRA34 provides detailed information about all types of 
flooding and risks based upon potential flood depths, velocity and categories of 
‘danger’ over the lifetime of the development. In certain circumstances, e.g. where a 
flood -mitigation proposal might also be  of a more strategic benefit it may also be 
appropriate to seek planning obligations to support the benefits sought.  
3.5.3  Sites s elected for development in the P lan have been considered using the 
mapping outputs contained in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.   A range of 
options was considered and the sequential test was undertaken alongside the 
sustainability appraisal.  As the area covered by the flood zones is extensive in the 
Local Plan area, it was not possible, consistent with wider sustainability object ives, 
for all development to be located in zones with a lower probability of flooding.  Many 
of the areas of land at lowest risk of flooding are in isolated areas, unrelated to 
settlements.  Satisfying housing need in the most sustainable existing communit ies 
has therefore necessitated the need for a different approach to the distribution of 
growth to meet housing need.   
3.5.4  The proportion of growth allocated to settlements has therefore been distributed 
according to the sustainability of the settlement balanc ed against the risk of 
flooding.  The sequential test was then undertaken within the settlement 
boundaries, as opposed to a district wide search, which is advocated in National 
Planning Guidance. Sites allocated in the Local Plan are deemed to have passed 
the sequential test and no further evidence in respect of this will need to be 
submitted at planning application stage.  However, site specific flood risk South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
assessments, will still need to demonstrate that the proposed development on 
allocated sites will be safe for its lifetime. This will include proposing mitigation 
measures to deal with the potential consequence of flooding, should flood defence 
infrastructure fail.  
3.5.5  The provisions of the Local Plan will ensure that housing need within settlements is 
met.  However, going forward the steer of national policy will need to be applied and 
future speculative and windfall proposals will be required to use a Borough or 
District wide search area when undertaking the sequential test.  This will ensure 
that developmen t is directed to areas at the lowest risk of flooding and that 
development in the highest risk areas only proceeds by exception (i.e. meeting the 
Exceptions Test).  Policy 5 facilitates this approach and provides a framework 
against which future developmen t will be considered.  Further guidance on all 
aspects of development and flood risk can be found in the South East Lincolnshire 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment34.However, where development is proposed to 
satisfy an identified need it may be appropriate to  reduce the search area to a 
particular catchment.  
3.5.6  The Local Plan area has a number of agencies with responsibilities for assessing 
and managing flood risk: - Lincolnshire County Council as Lead Local Flood 
Authority (and Highways Authority), the Environmen t Agency, Internal Drainage 
Boards, and Anglian Water as well as the Local Authorities. In addition to their 
individual responsibilities, these agencies work in various partnerships in order to 
bring about betterment to flood risk whether by policy or by i nnovation and 
infrastructure.  
3.5.7  Mitigation may also be incorporated in SuDS which are likely to be required 
irrespective of the flood risk. All major developments will be expected to incorporate 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDs) as standard. SuDS can vary substantially in 
terms of what is required, from rain water harvesting to water retention and 
treatment (e.g. through reed beds). Some SuDS may be an adequate response to 
surface water flood issues. Surface water connections to the public sewerage 
network should only be made in exceptional circumstances where it can be shown 
where there are no feasible alternatives.   
3.5.8  The Boston Combined Strategy seeks to reduce the risk of tidal flooding to the town 
over the next 100 years.  The Strategy includes the constr uction of a strategic -level 
flood mitigation defence, known as the Boston Barrier, which is expected to be 
completed by 2020.  It will be of significant benefit to the urban area of Boston, 
reducing the likelihood of flooding and improving confidence to in vest in the town.  
An integral part of the strategy includes the raising of the Witham Haven Banks.  
Future bank raising is likely to include the need for wider crest widths (for safer 
access/working) and flatter side slopes (for increased stability) and h ence will 
require a wider overall footprint.  It is therefore necessary to safeguard an area of 
50m from the toe of the existing defence in order to facilitate these works.   This will 
enable access for plant and machinery required to construct the works, a lthough 
the final footprint of the completed works will be less than 50m.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Monitoring  
Provision of new strategic flood mitigation infrastructure  
Number  of planning permissions granted contrary to E nvironment Agency advice on the grounds of 
flooding or water quality  
Number  of residential planning permissions granted in  ‘danger for some ’, ‘danger for most ’ and 
‘danger for  all’ hazard zones  
Number  of development proposals within 50m buffer from the toe of the Haven banks  
3.6. Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs  
3.6.1  In the preparation of a Local Plan it is a requirement to provide an Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP)5 and a Whole Plan Viability Assessment4. At a strategic level, 
these documents provide an overview of existing infrastructure capacity  and needs 
arising from the Local Plan proposals, and an assessment of the viability of those 
proposals. Policy 5 sets out a strategic policy framework by which developers, 
service providers and the community are advised how physical infrastructure and 
service needs will be considered and met .    
Policy 5: Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs  
Planning permission will be granted for new development provided that 
developers can demonstrate that there is, or will be sufficient physical 
infrastruct ure and service needs capacity to support and meet the needs of 
the proposed development. A planning condition and/or legal agreement 
may be required to help secure the arising needs.  
The growth proposed by the Local Plan is likely to require an increase i n the 
capacity of education provision which will need to be met in the following 
locations and settlements;  
 New secondary schools for Boston (to the west of the urban area) and for 
Spalding on the site, measuring 8.5Ha, identified south of housing site 
Mon008 on the Spalding Inset Map;   
 Extended secondary school capacity for Old Leake, Holbeach, Long Sutton 
and Donington;  
 New primary school provision for Boston serving SUE site Sou006 [Policy 
13] and for Spalding serving the Vernatts SUE [Policy 15] and other 
committed housing developments and for Holbeach;  
 Extended primary school provision within; Boston, Spald ing, Crowland, 
Donington, Holbeach, Long Sutton, Pinchbeck, Swineshead, Sutterton, 
Deeping St Nicholas, Gosberton, Quadring, Surfleet and Weston.  
Where development might take place over a period of time the provision of 
physical infrastructure and services  will be phased. A master planning 
approach will be taken to aid the delivery of sites as appropriate. A piecemeal 
approach to applying for planning permission on a large site e.g. the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Sustainable Urban Extensions (SUE’s) or the underdevelopment of a site that 
seeks to undermine the need to meet the policy requirements of the Local 
Plan will not be permitted.  
Reasoned Justification  
3.6.2  The broad categories of physical infrastructure and service needs to be considered 
may change over time or in terms of how th ey might be delivered. In the short and 
medium -term, the Infrastructure Delivery Plan5 has considered the needs of a wide 
range of infrastructure and services such as:  
 Water and drainage: supply and treatment, and flood -management 
infrastructure;  
 Energy: e lectricity and gas;  
 Communications: broadband;  
 Green infrastructure, leisure and community facilities;   
 Education;  
 Health care;  
 Transport: highways, cycling, pedestrian and public transport, and car/cycle 
parking.  
There are various active partnerships within the County and mostly le d by the 
Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership taking forward work on 
infrastructure (e.g. water management and also infrastructure provision). A proposal 
within the SELLP Infrastructure Delivery Plan is to augment this partnership working 
with a Utilities Forum to consider, in particular, arising energy needs and 
infrastructure provision. It is expected that the Utilities Forum will need to be held on 
an annual basis or more often as appropriate.  
3.6.3  The Infrastructure Delivery Plan5 identifies some service needs as critical (e.g. 
water and energy supply and flood risk management), some are deemed as 
essential (e.g. schools and health care) and some are desirable. Depending upon 
the specific site proposals the importance  of infrastructure between the essential 
and desirable categories may change. For example, on some sites open space 
provision may be required to meet the considerations of the Habitats Regulations 
Assessment3. In all cases, the Local Plan is the starting p oint for site -specific 
involvement with infrastructure providers who can then build the identified needs 
into their delivery plans as appropriate. A master planning approach will be used to 
bring together key partners where infrastructure delivery is parti cularly complex or 
the site is considered to be strategic in terms of the Local Plan or settlement. A 
comprehensive approach to a site’s development will be taken at the outset so that, 
even with large sites whose development will take a number of years, t he needs of 
the community will be met and the policy requirements of the Local Plan can be met 
in full.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.6.4  It is the case that some forms of development, e.g. large housing schemes will 
generate needs for increased capacity or specific improvements in infrast ructure for 
all or most of the above categories to make them acceptable. Other types of 
development, such as employment uses, may have specific energy needs to be 
met. Flood risk and the need for specific flood -management infrastructure will be 
considered by Policies 2: Development Management and 4: Approach to Flood 
Risk. In deli vering the infrastructure and service needs arising from new 
development Policy 6: Developer Contributions will be key, as will the use of 
planning conditions. Policies 32: Comm unity, Health and Well -being, 33 : Delivering 
a More S ustainable Transport Network, 34: Delivering The Boston Distributor Road 
and 35 : Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy will  also be significant in 
determining the infrastructure needs arising from d evelopment proposals with 
regard to community needs in a settlement (e.g. healthcare and education) and for 
the need for transport infrastructure (e.g. for cycling or new road schemes).  
3.6.5  The Infrastructure Delivery Plan5 identifies the need for new or exten ded education 
provision as proposals come forward as planning applications. Two new secondary 
schools have been identified as being required in Boston and in Spalding. In the 
case of Boston a search for sites to serve the new sustainable urban extensions o n 
the western side is being undertaken. In Spalding (see Inset Map 2), a site has 
been identified adjoining the western extent of the urban area; its early delivery will 
be sought to alleviate pressures on the existing schools in the town. Both would 
also alleviate the necessity to travel to the centre or the eastern side of the towns 
for secondary school education.  
3.6.6  Extensions to secondary schools elsewhere will be sought, as developmen t comes 
forward, in; Old Leake,  Holbeach, Long Sutton and Donington. The  need for a new 
primary school has been identified for Boston (serving site Sou006), for Spalding 
and Holbeach but specific sites have yet to be finalised. Extensions to most existing 
primary schools will be sought as development proposals come forward for  the 
particular settlement.  
Monitoring  
Number  of infrastructure -related planning conditions discharged  
Number  of infrastructure -related obligations within a Section 106 agreement delivered  
Number of schools delivered  
3.7. Developer Contributions  
3.7.1  Ensuring t here is sufficient infrastructure to support future development is vital to 
achieving sustainable growth in South East Lincolnshire. Infrastructure includes all 
types identified in paragraph 3.6 .2 above; as new developments give rise to the 
need for many n ew or improved services and infrastructure, it is reasonable to 
require developers to contribute towards meeting this provision, where consistent 
with this policy and national legislation. This should be informed by the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)5 which has been prepared alongside this Local 
Plan and which will be regularly updated (see paragraph 3.6.5  above ).  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.7.2  In South East Lincolnshire, the introduction of a Community Infrastructure Levy 
(CIL) is unlikely in the short -medium term; Policy 6 provide s further guidance on 
how developer contributions will operate in South East Lincolnshire in the absence 
of a CIL.  
Policy 6: Developer Contributions  
Developments of 11 or more dwellings, or which have a combined gross 
floorspace  of more than 1,000 sqm, or non -residential development of 
1,000sqm gross floorspace or more will be expected to mitigate their impacts 
upon infrastructure, services and the environment to ensure that such 
developments are acceptable in planning terms. The  Local Planning 
Authorities will not accept any proposals that artificially reduce capacity or 
floorspace to circumvent the proper operation of this policy.   
Developer contributions will only be sought when they meet th e tests set out 
in paragraph 56  of the NPPF9, or any successor.  
Developers will either make direct provision or will contribute towards the 
provision of local and strategic infrastructure  and services  required by the 
development, either alone or cumulatively with other developments.  
Contributions will be determined having regard to:  
 the identified needs generated by the proposed development;  
 the viability of the proposed development; and  
 the priorities attached to meeting individual local and strategic 
infrastructure and service requ irements.  
Contributions will be secured through section 106 (legal) agreements. 
Developer contributions will also be subject to the criteria set out in the 
Community Infrastructure Regulations (2010) 122 and 123 (or any 
successors) which require any financ ial contribution or contributions in kind 
towards infrastructure to meet a number of criteria.  
Developer contributions relating to the provision of:  
 affordable housing will be made in accordance with Local Plan Policy 18: 
Affordable Housing;  
 transport infr astructure will be made in accordance with Local Plan Policy 
33: Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network, and where 
appropriate:   
o Policy 13: South -West Quadrant Sustainable Urban Extension;  
o Policy 14: South of the North Forty Foot Sustainable Urba n Extension;  
o Policy 15: Vernatts Sustainable Urban Extension;  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
o Policy 16: Holbeach West Sustainable Urban Extension;  
o Policy 34: Delivering the Boston Distributor Road; and  
o Policy 35: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy;  
 education facilities will be made in accordance with the re quirements set 
out in Appendix 8 : Developer Contributions for Education Facilities;  
 health facilities will be made in accordance with the re quirements set out 
in Appendix 9 : Developer Contributions for Health Facilities; and  
 sport facilities, recreational open space and other green infrastructure 
will be made in accordance with Local Plan Policy 32: Community, Health 
and Well -being.  
In addition, the provision of developer contributions should be in accordance 
with the relevant requirements of:  
 The proposed Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD) and each Local Planning Authority’s Developer 
Contributions Prioritisation Framework (or successor);  
 the South East Lincolnshire Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)5, and  
 a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) charging schedule, if considered 
appropriate in the long -term.  
Reasoned Justification  
3.7.3  Planning obligations assist in mitigating the impact of unacceptable development to 
make it acceptable in planning terms. They can be used to provide essential site -
specific infrastructure to mitigate the imp act of the development, such as  necessary 
road improvements, but can also secure developer contributions to support growth, 
including but not limited to affordable housin g and other tariff -style contrib utions. 
Other policies in this P lan set out more specific requirements on mat ters such as 
flood risk (Policy  4), affordable housing (Policy  18), open space and communi ty 
facilities (Policy  32) and transport (Policies  33, 34 and 3 5). Where known, 
infrastructure required as part of the development of the Sustainable Urban 
Extensions in Boston, Spalding and Hol beach are set out in Policies 13  to 16 
respectively.  
3.7.4  Developer contributions will take into account specific -site circ umstances and the 
type (residential and non residential development) and mix of development 
proposed. Infrastructure may be required on site, but when infrastructure cannot be 
provided within, or is not appropriate to be located on, the development site it self, 
developers will be expected to contribute to the cost of providing the infrastructure 
necessary to support that development.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.7.5  Where it is proposed to phase developments, sub -divide sites or where recent sub -
division has taken place, or where there is  a reasonable prospect of adjoining land 
being developed in tandem, the whole site will be considered for the purpose of 
determining whether the scheme meets the site and/or floorspace thresholds 
identified by Policy 6.  
3.7.6  Where infrastructure requires mainte nance, and that responsibility is to be passed 
to the relevant Council, County Council or Parish Council, a maintenance sum may 
also be sought for infrastructure provided, for a period of up to 10 years. Where 
applicants choose to retain responsibility for  a facility or obtain the services of a 
maintenance management company, then they will be bound to ensure proper 
maintenance of this through the s106 agreement. A detailed maintenance plan is 
likely to be required to be submitted to the relevant Local Plan ning Authority with 
the planning application to show maintenance responsibilities for all aspects of the 
infrastructure and how it will be maintained.  
3.7.7  Contributions will be in addition to any normally required by a developer to any 
utility company, interna l drainage board or other statutory authority or organisation.  
3.7.8  Developers are encouraged to liaise with infrastructure providers as early as 
possible when developing proposals to ensure infrastructure services are provided 
effectively. In accordance with t he NPPF9, this includes the need to address the 
strategic cross -boundary impacts of development, particularly with regard to 
cumulative impacts on the transport network.  
3.7.9  The Local Planning Authorities do not intend introducing a Community 
Infrastructure Le vy (CIL) in the short -medium term. As such, Policy 6 links  the 
requirement for proposals to contribute to supporting strategic infrastructure, as well 
as to non -strategic infrastructure as long as it is consistent with the requirements of 
national legislat ion and this policy. However, should a CIL be introduced in the long -
term it will be made clear which infrastructure will be sought through each 
mechanism to ensure there is no ‘double dipping’.  
3.7.10  Contributions will be in the form of planning obligations sec ured in line with national 
legislation and policy9,10. Legal agreements, known as section 106 agreements, will 
be used to secure such contributions, and will also include provision for legal fees.  
3.7.11  The policy implications of this Local Plan, including those  matters to be sought by 
developer contributions, have been subject to a Whole Plan Viability Assessment4 
to ensure that the cost would not adversely impact upon the viability of development 
in South East Lincolnshire. As such, it is expected that the cost s of developer 
contributions are factored in when land is purchased. In exceptional circumstances, 
where applicants state that financial viability prevents the delivery of some or all 
developer contributions, a financial appraisal should be submitted. Pref erably this 
should form part of the pre -application negotiations but must be submitted with a 
planning application. Each Local Planning Authority’s independent valuer will 
consider the assessment. All costs associated with the assessments will be met by 
the developer.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3.7.12  The Local Planning Authorities will re -negotiate planning obligations where 
necessary consistent with national policy10. Appropriate developer evidence on 
viability should be submitted to provide the basis of such negotiations.  
3.7.13  Where a major d evelopment requires its own (on -site and/or off -site) infrastructure, 
and the proposal is subject to Environmental Impact Assessment and/or project 
level Habitats Regulations Assessment3, the Local Planning Authorities will require 
the developer to conside r the likely effects of the development and all its supporting 
infrastructure as a whole, so that potential in -combination effects can be fully 
assessed before any decisions are taken.  
3.7.14  Where a developer can demonstrate that the viability of a development a ffects the 
provision of developer contributions, the Local Planning Authorities will balance the 
adverse impact of permitting the scheme on the delivery of such provision, with any 
identified planning benefits of the scheme. In this regard, careful conside ration will 
need to be given to prioritising the provision of one or more items of infrastructure 
and/or service at the expense of others.  
3.7.15  As a major interested party in the consideration of developer contributions, 
Lincolnshire County Council (LCC) would expect to identify all the necessary S106 
demands from an individual scheme through the consultation processes on 
individual planning applications.   LCC recognises the potential impact of viability 
assessments on the ability to deliver all such demands and  has an internal 
prioritisation process to enable , where necessary , choices to be made as to what 
contributions are prioritised.   Provided that LCC are party to the viability 
negotiations these choices can be assessed accordingly and alternative funding 
sources pursued as required.   LCC would envisage that the use of M emoranda of 
Understanding , as have been developed on other schemes between key parties 
including the District L ocal Planning Authority  and landowners or developers, would 
provide a mechanism f or identifying and agreeing the most appropriate delivery 
mechanism for phases of particular schemes.  
3.7.16  The Councils will continue to consider, when determining planning applications, the 
restrictions of the Community Infrastructure Regulations on the use o f planning 
obligations (section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, as amended) 
and highways agreements (section 278 of the Highways Act 1980). The S palding 
Western Relief Road and B oston Distributer Road have long been regarded as 
requiring delivery in distinct sections – each an 'infrastructure project' in the words 
of regulation 123. Therefore, each project would have a pool of developments from 
which to secure contributions. This is reflected in the pr oposed Local Plan SUE 
policies for the two towns and will be considered through the relevant planning 
applications and in the wording of relevant agreements.  
3.7.17  More detail on how developer contributions will be implemented will be outlined in 
the Developer C ontributions SPD. This will include the infrastructure priorities for 
each Local Planning Authority area (and settlements within each area), within a 
Developer Contributions Prioritisation Framework. This approach will ensure that South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
contributions are only so ught for infrastructure that is expected to be adversely 
impacted upon, aiding the delivery of viable schemes.  
Monitoring  
Number of s106 agreements complet ed per annum  
Level of developer contributions funding secured per annum  
Number  of schemes where site –specific viability assessment leads to developer contributions not 
being sought  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
4. Promoting Economic Prosperity and Employment 
Opportunities  
4.1.1  South East Lincolnshire is located within both the Greater Lincolnshire Local 
Enterprise Pa rtnership (GLLEP) and the Greater Cambridge and Peterborough 
Local Enterprise Partnership which are committed to delivering sustainable 
economic growth in their areas over the Local Plan period. The GLLEP in particular 
has set ambitious targets in respect of key growth sectors; the aspiration is for agri -
food, logistics, education, research and development, and the visitor economy to 
increase their economic value over the Local Plan period. Additionally the aim is to 
diversify the local economy and jobs mar ket to attract more highly -skilled and high -
value employment to the area37. This Local Plan has a fundamental role to play in 
the delivery of these aspirations . Appendix 5 : ‘Allocations – Infrastructure 
requirements, constraints and mitigation ’ of the Loca l Plan provides an assessment 
of constraints and infrastructure that may need to be met on the allocated 
employment sites. Whilst these considerations may change over the plan period 
they are a useful starting point in preparing development proposals.     
4.2. Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land 
Portfolio  
4.2.1  The Employment Land Technical Paper (ELTP), 201638 identifies that up to 10,300 
B-class jobs could be required in the Local Plan period, including for business, 
transport/storage, manufacturing a nd agri -food industries. The Spatial Strategy 
Background Paper, 201636 indicates that about 17,600 jobs could be required 
overall, including from the growth sectors of health, education, low carbon 
industries and leisure. It also identifies that more jobs are expected to be required in 
South Holland (13,800 jobs) compared to Boston Borough (3,800 jobs)36. Of these, 
about 10,300 B Class jobs could be required38. 
4.2.2  Economic growth will be focussed in the higher -tier settlements; growth will 
therefore take place in the most sustainable locations, ensuring that better access 
between housing, jobs and services is promoted. Policy 7 directs  the majority of 
new employment  land and therefore jobs, to the Main and Local Employment Areas 
within the Sub -Regional Centres of Boston and Spalding and the Main Service 
Centres (Crowland, Holbeach, Kirton, Long Sutton, Sutterton and Sutton Bridge). 
More land is identified in South Ho lland to reflect the higher level of job growth 
expected to be delivered over the Local Plan period36. 
Policy 7: Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land 
Portfolio  
The South East Lincolnshire authorities will, in principle, support proposals 
which assist in the delivery of economic prosperity and some 17,600 jobs  in 
the area , 3,800 in Boston Borough and 1 3,800 in South Holland District . Of 
these about 10,300 jobs fal l into Class B.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Main Employment Areas  
The Policies Map identifies Main Employment Areas, as listed below, which 
are reserved for main employment in Classes B1, B2 and B8. On Mixed -use 
development sites, which incorporate main employment uses under Class B  
as specified for each site, together with other identified appropriate 
employment -generating uses, non -Class -B uses will only be supported where 
the applicant can demonstrate they are ancillary to the effective functioning 
of the Mixed -Use Area identified  #.  A master plan will be required for 
prestige sites identified*.  
Mixed -use developments, which incorporate main employment uses 
together with other identified appropriate employment -generating uses, will 
be supported in Mixed -Use Areas identified #.  
Reference  Main Employment 
Area  Gross Site 
Area (Ha)  B Class 
Employment 
Provision (Ha)  Employment 
Class  
BO001  Boston Endeavour 
Park  13.3  4.3 B1 
BO006  Riverside Industrial 
Estate, Boston  89.7  18.0  B1, B2, B8  
BO008 Q2: The Quadrant, 
Boston*#  63.3  2.5 B1, A2,  A3, 
A4 
CRO01  Crease Drove Business 
Park, Crowland  6.09  1.9 B1, B2, B8  
CRO0 7 Thorney Road, 
Crowland  1.7 1.7 B1, B2, B8  
HO002  Holbeach Food 
Enterprise Zone*#  17.0  16.0  B1, B2, B8, 
D1 
KI001 Kirton Distribution 
Park*#  21.9  15.4  B1, B2, B8, 
sui generis  
LO002  Bridge Road Industrial 
Estate, Long Sutton  2.10  0.4 B1, B2, B8  
LO009  Bridge Road, Long 
Sutton*  4.8 4.8 B1, B2, B8  
SP001  Wardentree Lane, 
Spalding  182.9  34.6  B1, B2, B8  
SP002  Lincs Gateway, 
Spalding*#  22.2  16.2  B1, B2, B8, 
A3, A4, C1  
SP012  Clay Lake, Spalding*  36.9  18.3  B1, B2, B8  
SU001  Sutterton Enterprise 
Park  6.28  2.6 B2 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
SB002  Wingland, Sutton 
Bridge  24.4  2.3 B1, B2, B8  
 TOTAL   139  
Local Employment Areas  
The Policies Map identifies Local Employment Areas, as listed below, which 
are reserved for Class B1, B2 and B8 development. Any non -B uses will only 
be supported where the applicant can show that it is ancillary to the effective 
functioning of the Local Employment Area.  
Reference  Local Employment 
Area  Gross Site 
Area (Ha)  B Class 
Employment 
Provision (Ha)  Employment 
Class  
SU003  Love Lane, Sutterton  1.63  0.2 B1, B2, B8  
SB005  Railway Lane Industrial 
Estate, Sutton Bridge  0.60  0.2 B1, B2, B8  
 TOTAL   0.4  
Restricted Use Employment Sites  
To encourage investment in port -related and power generation -related 
industries, the Policies Map identifies Restricted Use Employment Sites, as 
listed below, which are reserved for employment uses directly associated 
with either Boston or Sutton Bridge Po rts or Spalding or Wingland Power 
Stations.  
Reference  Restricted Use 
Site Gross Site 
Area (Ha)  B Class 
Employment 
Provision (Ha)  Employment Class  
BO009  The Port Estate, 
Boston  29.8  - B1, B2, B8 – port 
related  
SP037  Spalding Power 
Station  5.5 - - 
SP038  Spalding Power 
Station B  14.6  11.0  B1, B2, B8 – power 
generation  
SB003  Sutton Bridge 
Port  24.6  9.6 B1, B2, B8 – port 
related  
SB00 7 Wingland Power 
Station  8.0 - - 
SB014  Wingland Power 
Station B  14.4  14.2  B1, B2, B8 – power 
generation  
 TOTAL   34.8   South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Established Employment Sites  
The following Established Employment Sites, as identified on the Policies 
Map, perform an important role in the local economy and will be protected 
for new B1, B2 or B8 development and/or redevelopment in Class B1, B2 or 
B8, p rovided the proposed development is of a scale that respects the 
character of the area and/or neighbouring land uses. Any non -B development 
will only be supported where the applicant can show that it is ancillary to the 
effective functioning of the Establi shed Employment Site.  
Reference  Established Employment Sites  Location  
BO002  Boston Trade Park  Boston  
BO003  Nelson Way Industrial Estate  Boston  
BO004  Broadfield Lane Industrial Estate  Boston  
BO005  Redstone Industrial Estate  Boston  
BO011  Metsawood/Fogarty’s  Boston  
BO012  Tulip Ltd  Boston  
BO015  Station Street  Boston  
BO0 56 Rolec Services Ltd  Boston  
BI001  JDM Food Group  Bicker  
BI003  Transflor Ltd  Bicker  
BU001  Produce World  Butterwick  
BU002  Pearson Packaging  Butterwick  
CR003  Horseshoe Yard  Crowland  
DO001  Millfield Road Industrial Estate  Donington  
DO002  Mill Lane  Donington  
DO003  High Street  Donington  
DO007  Station Approach  Donington  
FL001  Intergreen  Fleet Hargate  
FL004  Hallgate north  Fleet Hargate  
FL006  Hallgate south  Fleet Hargate  
FR001  Freiston Enterprise Park  Freiston  
GO002  Morris Machinery  Gosberton  
GO003  Prince Build  Gosberton  
HO001  Fleet Road Industrial Estate  Holbeach  
KI002 Manor Road  Kirton  
KI015 Wash Road  Kirton  
LO001  Hundreds Lane  Long  Sutton  
LO003  Canebuzo  Long  Sutton  
LO005  Hallgate Timber  Long  Sutton  
LO006  Lime Walk  Long  Sutton  
LO016  Seagate Road South  Long  Sutton  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
OL001  M Baker & Son   Old Leake  
OL002  Charles Wright & Sons  Old Leake  
QU005  Turners  Quadring  
SP003  Fulney Lane North  Spalding  
SP030  Marsh Road  Spalding  
SR001  Gosberton Road  Surfleet  
SR002  Seas End Road  Surfleet  
SU004  Spalding Road Industrial Estate  Sutterton  
SB001  West Bank Industrial Estate  Sutton Bridge  
SB004  Railway Lane east  Sutton Bridge  
SW001  North End Business Park  Swineshead  
SW002  Station Road Industrial Estate  Swineshead  
SW003  Mason Bros  Swineshead  
WH001  Whaplode Industrial Estate  Whaplode  
WE001  Flamingo Flowers  Weston  
Other Employment Sites  
New employment development/businesses or the extension of an existing  
business outside the above allocated employment sites will be supported 
provided that the proposal involves the re -use of previously -developed land 
or the conversion/re -use of redundant buildings. Where it can be 
demonstrated that no suitable building cap able of conversion/re -use is 
available or the re -use of previously -developed land is not available or is 
unsuitable, proposals on non allocated sites may be acceptable provided:  
a. the development does not conflict with neighbouring land uses;  
b. there is no sig nificant adverse impact upon the character and appearance 
of the area;  
c. the design is responsive to the local context;  
d. there will be no significant adverse impact on the local highway network;  
e. there will be no significant adverse impact upon the viability of delivering 
any allocated employment site;  
f. proposals maximising opportunities for modal shift away from the private 
car are demonstrated; and  
g. there is an identified need for the business location outside of identified 
employment areas on the Policies Map . 
Loss of Employment Sites and Buildings to Non Employment Uses  
Conversion and redevelopment of, or change of use from, existing non 
allocated employment sites to non -employment uses will be considered on South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
their merits taking account of:  
1. whether the loss of  land or buildings would adversely affect the economic 
growth and employment opportunities in the area the site or building 
would likely serve;  
2. whether it is demonstrated that the site is inappropriate or un viable for 
any employment use to continue and no longer capable of providing an 
acceptable location for employment purposes; and  
3. whether the applicant has provided clear documentary evidence that the 
property and/or land has been appropriately but proportionately 
marketed without a successful conclusion for a period of not less than 12 
months on terms that reflect the lawful use and condition of the 
premises.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.2.3  The ELTP38 identifies that 10,300 jobs could result in a requirement for at least 82 
hectares of new employment (B Class) land to be developed over the Local Plan 
period. This includes all land that is provided for B1: Business, B2: General 
Industrial and B8: Storag e or Distribution as defined by the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).  
4.2.4  Policy  7 has  identified 126.9ha of employment land: 89.3ha for B -Class 
development (29.4ha have consent) at the strategic Main Employment Areas as 
well as  the Local Employment Areas, plus a further 37.6ha of employment land as 
part of the Mixed -Use Areas (26.4ha have consent) to help address the demand for 
non B -Class jobs36. The sites selected are based on evidence contained within the 
Strategic Employment  Land Availability Assessment (SELAA)39, which includes the 
best available information relating to development constraints, such as access, 
market attractiveness, land availability and deliverability.  
4.2.5  This Local Plan is allocating more than 82 hectares of  employment land in order to:  
 provide choice across South East Lincolnshire, seen as particularly important to 
help attract investment from new businesses that currently are not present in 
the area;  
 enable business growth (and subsequent job growth) not to  be constrained by a 
lack of available sites;  
 provide flexibility, recognising the different delivery rates across different 
business sectors;  
 recognise that some non -allocated existing employment sites will be lost to 
other uses (such as residential);  
 reflect the length of time required to deliver infrastructure to open -up strategic 
sites (including three sites with planning permission in Spalding);  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 reflect the fact that only estimates can be made of site area, floor space and job 
numbers; and  
 ensure the S ustainable Urban Extensions and housing allocations across the 
higher tier settlements become thriving communities, supported by appropriate 
employment provision.  
4.2.6  Even so, it is unlikely that all of the 126.9ha will be developed for employment use 
(the SEL AA39 indicates that about 100ha is a realistic estimate); most employment 
sites require landscaping buffers as screening from neighbouring uses and/or to 
help minimise noise, while the allocated  greenfield sites, such as BO008: Q2: The 
Quadrant, Boston and  LO009: Bridge Road, Long Sutton will also require a 
significant land take for infrastructure (e.g. roads, car parking and sustainable 
drainage) to help create quality business environments. The location of t he 
employment development at BO 008 will be agreed through a master plan for the 
site. 
4.2.7  The four Mixed -Use Areas are designated to incorporate employment -generating 
uses, such as for education and leisure; in most cases the m ix of uses identified by 
Policy  7 reflects that identified in the planning p ermission for the site, such as the 
development being constructed at KI001: Kirton Distribution Park. Elsewhere the 
mix of uses reflects the expected approach to be taken for the site through a master 
plan. However, promoting mixed -use development means th at there is considerable 
overlap with the visitor economy policies, retail and town centre policies (see 
Policies  9, 24, 25  and 2 7). Therefore, in order to protect the town centres and to 
promote sustainable development, proposals within these allocations for any use 
not identified by Policy 7 will be refused, unless clearly ancillary to the uses 
identified.  
4.2.8  The identification of five high profile ‘prestige’ sites will act as drivers for different 
parts of the economy, helping to diversify the economic base  and attract high -
skilled and high -value employment to South East Lincolnshire. These sites will 
require a well -designed sch eme that responds to each site’s  context that  takes 
account of nearby residential properties, and delivers the necessary sustainabil ity, 
transport, accessibility and infrastructure requirements. A master plan is therefore 
required for each location; the Local Planning Authorities will work with landowners, 
developers and stakeholders to ensure a master plan is prepared.  
4.2.9  The Restricted Use Employment Sites are either already operational or have 
planning permission on the site areas identified, apart from Sutton Bridge Port 
which is proposed for extension.   They  will contribute an additional 34ha of land for 
specific, related uses only (a ll have consent). To ensure the unique role of SB003: 
Sutton Bridge Port is maintained, uses that support its ongoing port operation, such 
as manufacturing, logistics, distribution and waste management will be supported. 
The Port of Boston also has capacit y to expand within its boundaries should the 
need arise. Power -generating uses will also be supported at SP038: Spalding 
Power Station 2 and SB014: Wingland Power Station B.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
4.2.10  Established Employment Sites perform an important role in the local economy, and 
therefore are in need of protection for employment (B -Class) purposes. Some are 
traditional industrial estates within a settlement boundary, others are businesses of 
considerable scale, within or well -related to the edge of higher -tier settlements. 
Policy  7 sets out a flexible approach to help ensure that businesses can continue to 
operate or expand with confidence should business needs require additional or 
different provision.  
4.2.11  National planning policy9 supports the conversion of existing buildings and wel l-
designed new buildings in the Countryside for economic development. Therefore, 
the provision and expansion of Other Employment Sites, including those in the 
Countryside, will be supported where it can be demonstrated to be sustainable and 
consistent with  the requirements of Policy 7. However, the desire to promote rural 
employment must be balanced with the need to protect the existing character of the 
Countryside.  
4.2.12  Policy 7 aims  to ensure that growth happens in the right places (both from the 
market’s pers pective and to meet sustainability objectives) and will ensure that 
resources can be focused on delivering a small number of quality, attractive 
business locations. Together with other policies in this Local Plan, this approach 
helps ensure that the right infrastructure and conditions can be delivered to give 
businesses the confidence to invest in the area.  
4.2.13  The development of most sites will be market -led, mostly focussed around a ‘design 
and build’ approach to delivery. However, Lincolnshire County Counci l is co -
ordinating the delivery of KI001: Kirton Distribution Park, while HO002: Holbeach 
Food Enterprise Zone will be delivered by a partnership of the GLLEP, Lincolnshire 
County Council and South Holland District Council. Specifically, a Local 
Developmen t Order (LDO) is being prepared by South Holland District Council for 
HO002. Once in place, it will facilitate and speed up the development of businesses 
locating there, by enabling certain developments to proceed without the need for 
planning permission.  
Spalding Rail -Freight Interchange  
4.2.14  The Local Plan: Draft for Public Consultation (including site options for 
development), January 2016, contained a policy proposing the safeguarding of 
112ha of land south of Spalding for the development of a Spalding Rail -Freight 
Interchange (RFI).  
4.2.15  This proposal had been informed by a significant amount of work (including public 
consultation) which was undertaken to identify a South Holland District Council -
approved preferred site for a RFI in 2010. This site was subsequen tly promoted in 
the Local Plan: Combined Options and Sustainability Appraisal Report (May 2013) 
on the basis that it recognised the locational requirements for this type of facility, 
and the detailed findings of the 2009 consultant’s report titled ‘Rail -Freight 
Interchange Facilities for South Holland District’ . The Spalding RFI was promoted in 
the emerging Local Plan because of a known developer interest in the project. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Unfortunately, the developer in question was unable to reconfirm its interest - and 
therefore evidence deliverability of the project - in time for the preparation of the 
Preferred Sites for Development document in 2016. Consequently, it has not been 
possible to continue to promote the proposal and its identified site through the Local 
Plan.  
4.2.16  Notwithstanding this situation, the Joint Committee remains supportive of the 
principle of developing a Spalding RFI on the previously -identified site.  
Monitoring  
Enterprises by industry  
Land in B1, B2 and B8 use per annum  
Total amount of additional (net  and gross) employment floor space by type  
Available allocated employment land with and without planning permission  
Loss of employment land by type  
4.3. Prestige Employment Sites  
4.3.1  Policy 7 : ‘Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land Portfolio’  of the 
Local Plan identifies six prestige sites and the potential employment and other uses 
expected to be delivered. Policy 8 provides the overall requirements that apply to all 
the Prestige sites and further detailed parameters that must be considered i n 
bringing forward development on each site.  
Policy 8 : Prestige Employment Sites  
The Prestige S ites identified in Policy 7 and on the Policies Map will each 
require a masterplan. The following genera l principles will apply to the 
Prestige S ites: 
1. Delivery of a mix of employment opportunities that include the target 
sectors of agri -food, logistics, education, research and development, and 
the visitor economy as appropriate to each site;  
2. Well -designed schemes that deliver high quality development;  
3. Good access  to the strategic highway network;  
4. Good connections into the local public transport, pedestrian and cycle 
network;  
5. The incorporation of landscaping schemes that contribute to a high 
quality development and where appropriate, mitigate the impacts of the  
Prestige S ite with neighbouring develo pments and the open countryside;  
6. Ensure any flood risk issues are considered in line with Policy 4.  
The masterplans and any subsequent planning applications will need to take 
account of the following key parameters for ea ch site.  
Q2: The Quadrant, Boston  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 The site forms part of the Sustainable Urban Extension (Sou006) to Boston 
(see Policy 13).  
 Development will comprise B1, A1, A2 and A3 uses associated with the 
community hub and marina hub as set out in Policy 13.  
 Access a nd internal road infrastructure will be delivered as part of an 
agreed comprehensive development of Sou006.  
 Provide a scheme that delivers utilities, water & foul water, surface water 
drainage & flood mitigation upgrades with reference to Policies 4 and 13 . 
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside that is adjacent to the site.  
 Ensure a Heritage Impact Assessment is undertaken to identify any 
mitigation associated with the employment elements of the si te with 
respect to the scheduled ancient monument to the north east of the site.  
Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone  
 The site will be subject to the production of a Local Development Order 
that will facilitate delivery of the site.  
 Development will comprise B1, B2, B8 and D1 uses.  
 Main access to be provided through improvements to the Peppermint 
Junction onto the A17 from the A151 and additional roundabout on the 
A151 to service the site.  
 Additional internal road infrastructure is required to service new 
developm ent off the main access point to the site.  
 Provide a scheme that delivers utilities, water & foul water, surface water 
drainage & flood mitigation upgrades.  
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside t hat is adjacent to the site.  
Kirton Distribution Park  
 Development will comprise B1, B2 and B8 uses with some ancillary sui -
generis use permitted.  
 Access to be provided by existing infrastructure via the junction to the 
A16 and the spine road that is prese nt on the site.  
 Additional internal infrastructure is required to service new development 
off the existing spine road within the site.  
 Flood risk mitigation measures are already in place for the site but 
additional flood risk assessments will be required with individual South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
applications.  
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside that is  adjacent to the site.  
Bridge Road, Long Sutton  
 Development will comprise B1, B2 and B8 uses.  
 Access to be provided from Bridge Road.  
 Additional internal road infrastructure is required to service new 
development.  
 Provide a scheme that delivers utilities, water & foul water, surface water 
drainage & flood mitigation upgrades.  
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside that is adjacent to the site.  
Lincs Gateway, Spalding  
 Development will comprise B1, B2  and B8 uses with some ancillary A3 and 
A4 uses permitted.  
 Access to be provided at two points off the B1173 and Barrier Bank from 
the A16/ A1175.  
 Additional internal road infrastructure is required to service new 
development off the two access points to t he site.  
 Provide a scheme that delivers utilities, water & foul water, surface water 
drainage & flood mitigation upgrades.  
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside that is adjacent to the site.  
Clay Lake, Spalding  
 Development will comprise B1, B2 and B8 uses.  
 Access to be provided from the A16.  
 Additional internal road infrastructure is required to service new 
development off the main access to the site.  
 Provide a scheme that delivers utilities, water  & foul water, surface water 
drainage & flood mitigation upgrades.  
 Deliver a landscaping scheme that ensures the site respects the character 
of the open countryside that is adjacent to the site.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reasoned Justification  
4.3.2  Further information is provided by the indicative layouts in Appendix 10 which 
illustrate in broad terms the expected layout of each site in terms of uses and the 
main constraints that need to be taken of account in bringing forward each site. The 
sites have a varied status at the point of adoption of the Local Plan with some 
benefiting from planning permission and a degree of development already in place; 
whilst others have no specific proposals worked up as yet.  The site at Holbeach 
(Food Enterprise Zone) is subject to a Local Development  Order process.  
Monitoring  
For each site:  
Completion of masterplan  
Total amount of additional (net and gross) employment floor space by type  
Available employment land with and without planning permission  
4.4. Promoting a Stronger Visitor Economy  
4.4.1  Tourism is an important part of South East Lincolnshire’s economy, generating 
£136.7million in 201240. The visitor economy offer reflects the area’s character and 
environment, with visitors being attracted to the nationally -important Wash Estuary, 
including the RSPB nature reserves at Frampton Marsh  and Freiston Shore , the 
range of historic markets towns and villages, including Boston and Spalding, as well 
as purpose -built visitor attractions, such as the  Springfield Shopping and Festival 
Gardens, which attracts over 2.3 million visitors a year, supporting 500 jobs41. The 
Greater Lincolnshire Strategic Economic Plan (2014)37 seeks to capitalise on South 
East Lincolnshire’s inherent assets and promote tourism development which 
complements and enhances them.  
Policy 9: Promoting a Stronger Visitor Economy  
Proposals for tourism and vis itor development which utilise and enrich the 
natural and built environment and existing attractions of South East 
Lincolnshire to the benefit of the local economy, visitors and local 
communities will be supported within the boundaries of settlements 
ident ified in Policy 1. 
Outside these settlements, small -scale development to support the visitor 
economy, including farm diversification, equine development and fishing 
lakes, will be supported provided that proposals:  
1. do not conflict with neighbouring land us es; 
2. are in keeping with the character of the locality; and  
3. demonstrate a functional link with an existing rural attraction or farm 
enterprise.  
Larger developments will only be supported outside settlement boundaries in South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
exceptional circumstances, for instan ce to proportionally support or enhance 
the enjoyment of an established visitor attraction where this cannot 
reasonably be achieved from a town or village location.  
Springfields Shopping and Festival Gardens  
Development within the Springfields Shopping and  Festival Gardens, as 
defined on the Policies Map, will be supported in principle for:  
1. facilities directly related to the functioning of the shopping centre, 
consistent with Policies 24 and 27; 
2. development at the Events and Conference Centre that seeks to improve 
the range of services available; or  
3. proposals which would enhance the scale, quality and biodiversity value 
of the Festival Gardens.  
Other ancillary development linked to the above uses will also be supported.  
Reasoned Justification  
4.4.2  Tourism is imp ortant to South East Lincolnshire’s economy, and has the potential to 
grow. Policy 9 therefore focuses on South East Lincolnshire’s unique assets to 
ensure that a clearly differentiated tourism offer is established, to enable the area to 
compete better as a tourist destination. Development, such as that related to the 
Fens Waterways Project, which concerns  key assets will be supported, while 
respecting the sensitivity of some of the areas where such development may take 
place.  
4.4.3  Tourist facilities can offer b enefits to local communities directly through 
employment, and indirectly, such as by supporting local food producers, local 
shops, pubs and restaurants. Locating most new visitor -related development, such 
as the proposed marina and related development at Q 2: The Quadrant in Boston, 
within t he se ttlements identified by Policy 1  will enable the potential wider 
community benefits to be realised whilst minimising the spread of development into 
the countryside. However, s ome small -scale tourist facilities such a s fishing lakes, 
equine development and caravan sites, small scale offices or other small scale rural 
development, may be more appropriately located outside a settlement boundary 
provided that there is a clear link to an established rural enterprise and th e quality 
of the design ensures no adverse impacts upon landscape, heritage or biodiversity. 
Large scale development will only be appropriate in those circumstances where 
there is a specific locational and functional need.  
4.4.4  Existing buildings should be util ised wherever possible, although replacement 
buildings will be considered where this would result in a more sustainable 
development. Preference will be given to proposals which can be easily assimilated 
into the landscape, and where there are public transp ort opportunities and the traffic South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
impact on roads can be minimised. Planning conditions or legal agreements will be 
used to restrict caravans/chalets to holiday accommodation use.  
4.4.5  The Springfield Shopping and Festival Gardens has a wide catchment stretching 
into the East Midlands and Norfolk. Due to the strategic importance of the site, and 
the wider implications of development in an out -of-centre location, it is considered 
appropriate for this Local Plan to identify the strategic considerations fo r the site.  
4.4.6  The principal use of the site as a retail outlet centre will be protected; any retail 
development should be consistent with this policy and Policies 24: The Retail 
Hierarchy and 27: Additional Retail Provision . The Events and Conference Centre 
within it also provides a focus for business tourism; events, conferences and 
exhibitions are vital to the economy, bringing visitors to Spalding and South East 
Lincolnshire year round. Proposals that add to the offer and attract a more 
extensive customer base will be supported.  
4.4.7  The Festival Gardens is an important natural resource and visitor attraction in its 
own right. Proposals to enhance the gardens, particularly in terms of improving their 
biodiversity value will be supported. Given their importance t o the visitor economy, 
the loss of any part of the gardens will be resisted.   
Monitoring  
Expenditure in the visitor economy per annum  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5. Quality  Housing for All  
5.1.1  South East Lincolnshire is a popular place to live, having a range of housing in rural 
and urban settings. New housing is required to help address current and future 
housing needs, support the local economy, deliver infrastructure and ensure the 
sustainabi lity of the Local Plan area.  
5.1.2  The quality of the housing ‘offer’ – the range of housing and the attractiveness of 
housing environments available in both the existing stock and new development – 
is an important factor determining future prosperity. Attracti ng and retaining skilled 
and qualified people to live in South East Lincolnshire will help bring in commercial 
investment and jobs growth, as businesses take advantage of a pool of local skilled 
labour. It will benefit the town centres and help drive -up th e quality of local facilities, 
as there will be more demand for shops, cultural and leisure facilities, and good 
quality schools.  
5.1.3  This Local Plan aims to establish a more balanced market and create a better 
range and mix of housing opportunities in a rang e of locations. The South East 
Lincolnshire authorities will work proactively with owners and developers of these 
sites to ensure that they become places of choice for people to live, and that they 
contribute to a change in the image of South East Lincolns hire’s housing market.  
5.2. Meeting Assessed Housing Requirement s  
5.2.1  The Local Plan area is made up of two identified Housing Market Areas (HMAs); 
Boston Borough22 and Peterborough Sub -Region23,24 which includes South Holland. 
It is recognised that, whilst there  are strong relationships between the two HMAs 
particularly in respect of travel to work and housing options, large parts of South 
Holland are also strongly influenced by employment and housing choices to the 
south. Boston Borough has similar relationships  of employment, housing choice 
and service provision with parts of East Lindsey but in housing market terms these 
are largely with regard to the rural areas north of the Borough and, undoubtedly, the 
Boston urban area is the dominant presence as regards em ployment opportunity 
and housing choice. Further detail with respect to the approach to deriving the 
objectively assessed need for Boston Borough and South Holland is available in the 
Spatial Strategy Background Paper36. 
5.2.2  A purely practical reason for defin ing and working to two separate Housing Market 
Areas and housing provision targets is that both Councils remain separate local 
planning authorities for development management purposes. Therefore, where 
issues of under -delivery may occur that affect the 5 -year housing land supply, each 
Local Planning Authority will have responsibility for determining how to respond for 
its own area.  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Policy  10: Meeting Assessed Housing Requirements  
Provision will be made for a net increase of at least 19,425 dwellings in So uth 
East Lincolnshire. By Local Authority area over the Local Plan period (2011 -
2036) this is:  
Boston Borough: 7,744 at 310 per annum  
South Holland:  11,681 at 467 per annum  
Reasoned Justification  
5.2.3  Both Boston Borough and South Holland have seen significant growth in population 
since the 2011 Census15 largely driven by economic migrants taking up 
employment opportunities in the food growing and processing industry. This growth 
has impacted upon the housing need generated across the Local Plan area . Both 
HMAs have a higher housing need to be met than they have had in the past either 
through the Lincolnshire Structure Plan42 or East Midlands Regional Plan43. 
5.2.4  In terms of delivery, both Boston Borough and South Holland have a track record of 
meeting ho using targets through completions over the long -term. Therefore, whilst 
completion rates h ave been significantly down  for periods within the last five years 
and more there is evidence that with more favourable economic conditions and an 
established, long -term, plan -led system, the higher housing need figures are not 
unachievable. The Assessed Housing Requirement is derived from the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) Update Report for the two HMA’s (March 
2017) with an uplift of 5% applied to increas e the potential supply of affordable 
housing.  The SHMA (March 2017) reports relatively low rates of vacant dwellings 
for the two HMA’s (Boston Borough at 1.6% and South Holland at 1.9%). However, 
bringing such properties back into use will be supported in  appropriate 
circumstances.  The per annum figures in Policy 10 are indicative and are a result of 
the overall totals divided by the 25 -year Local Plan period. The monitoring of 
completions and ongoing commitments through new planning permissions will 
provi de a more detailed account of delivery, especially for the purposes of 
assessing 5 -year housing land supplies.  
5.2.5  In recognising the under -delivery of housing completions over the last five years the 
Local Plan sets out expected trajectories for housing devel opment for five -yearly 
intervals starting in 2016 -17. This start date is chosen as many of the larger sites, 
such as the strategic urban extensions and sites requiring major infrastructure 
investment, are unlikely to start to contribute to completions unti l several years after 
the Local Plan is adopted. The hou sing trajectories below reflect  housing 
commitments (planning permissions minus an assumed lapse rate) the housing 
allocations identified in the Local Plan, and windfall allowances. The detailed 
calcu lations (and the assumptions which underpin them) which make up the 
trajectories are set out in Appendix 4 : ‘Expected Housing Completions’  to the Plan.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.2.6  In the first six years of the Local Plan period (2011/12 to 2016/17), 1,860 dwellings 
should have been b uilt in Boston Borough (310x6) and 2,802 in South Holland 
District (467x6). In fact, housing completions amounted to 971 in Boston Borough 
and 1,498 in South Holland, leaving a shortfall of 889 dwellings in Boston Borough 
and 1,304 in South Holland Distric t. There are two well -established approaches for 
dealing with past shortfalls, which are known as the ‘Sedgefield’ and ‘Liverpool’ 
methods (the ‘Sedgefield’ method seeks to meet any shortfall over the following five 
years, whereas the ‘Liverpool’ method sp reads it over all the remaining years of the 
plan period). The Local Plan’s housing provisions (both commitments and 
allocations) rely heavily on Sustainable Urban Extensions, which will help to deliver 
important new infrastructure.  As a consequence of th eir scale and complexity, 
these Sustainable Urban Extensions are not expected to deliver new dwellings until 
later in the Local Plan period. Thus, the provisions of the Local Plan are significantly 
‘back -loaded’ and the shortfalls from the Local Plan’s fir st six years will therefore be 
met over all the remaining years of the Plan period (i.e. the ‘Liverpool’ method will 
be used).  
5.2.7  Other policies in this section provide approaches on how particular housing needs; 
market, affordable and by property type and te nure might be met in the Local Plan 
area.   
 
Figure 4: Boston Borough Housing Trajectory 2011 -2036  0100200300400500600700800900
2011/12
2012/13
2013/14
2014/15
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30
2030/31
2031/32
2032/33
2033/34
2034/35
2035/36South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -2036
Boston Borough Housing Trajectory
Number of new
homes
delivered/expected to
be delivered  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
 Figure 5: South Holland District Housing Trajectory 2011 -2036  
Monitoring  
Number  of housing completions per annum for the Plan area and by Local Planning Authority  
Assessment of Five Year Housing Land Supply  
5.3. Distribution of New Housing  
5.3.1  The housing needs identified for each settlement and the allocated housing sites 
shown on the Pol icies Map: Inset Maps have been identified to deliver the overall 
housing needs stated in Policy 10 : Meeting Assessed Housing Requirements . The 
Spatial Strategy Background Paper36 and the Housing Papers30 explain how the 
overall numbers have been derived f or the settlements and how sites have been 
assessed and selected in response to emerging evidence and public consultation 
comments. The housing numbers in Policy 11 : Distribution of New Housing  are 
gross numbers and include any outstanding planning permiss ions for dwellings, and 
any homes built since 1 April 2011. This means, for example, that if a settlement 
had a requirement for 500 dwellings, but planning permission had been granted for 
250 dwellings, there would be a need for 250 additional new dwelling s.  
5.3.2  The allocated sites identified on the Inset Maps are those that are considered to 
best meet the requirement for each settlement. The allocated sites in the Local Plan 
and existing planning permissions will be relied upon to meet the assesse d housing 
needs for Boston Borough and South Holland (2011 -2036) identified in Policy 10. It 
should be noted that this will include the needs to be met for both market and 
affordable housing. Viability is addressed by other policies in the Local Plan.  
5.3.3  Policy 11 : Distribution of New Housing  is supported by, and complementary to 
Policy 1 : Spatial Strategy. Housing allocations and overall housing growth for each 
settlement are considered to be proportional to existing infrastructure capacity, or 01002003004005006007008009001000
2011/12
2012/13
2013/14
2014/15
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30
2030/31
2031/32
2032/33
2033/34
2034/35
2035/36South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -2036
South Holland District Housing Trajectory
Number of new
homes
delivered/expected to
be delivered
Number of new
homes requiredSouth East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
are in locati ons capable of improvement (see Policy 5: Meeting Physical 
Infrastructure and Service Needs ). Additionally, the best available information 
relating to housing need, development constraints, such as flood risk and access in 
particular areas, land availabili ty and deliverability have all been taken into account. 
This is evidenced in the settlement -specific Housing Papers30 and the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment29. 
5.3.4  The Boston Borough Strategic Housing Market Assessment22, 24 has assessed the 
housing needs for the whole market area, the Boston urban area and also for the 
rural area (north and south of the urban area). The housing site allocations are 
broadly proportionate to these three area assessments.   The Peterborough Sub -
Region Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update Report (October 2015) does 
not provide assessments for sub -areas within South Holland District.  
5.3.5  It is acknowledged that incremental growth in housing supply will also come about 
through infill and ‘speculat ive’ applications both within the settlements identified in 
Policy 11 and also within the Other Service Centres and Settlements. Policy 1: 
Spatial Strategy is the main supporting policy through which to assess infill 
development opportunities (with referen ce to the relevant Inset Map). Within the 
defined settlement boundaries there will be numerous opportunities for infill and 
larger -scale housing development that will be available to the local builder, self -
builder, custom -builder and larger house -building  companies. It is not practical to 
identify or anticipate all such opportunities; however, the positive tone of the Local 
Plan encourages such development provided that the material considerations of the 
Local Plan and particular sites can be met. Housing need may also be met through 
Policy 19: Rural Exception Sites, where appropriate.  
Policy 11: Distribution of New Housing  
New housing site allocations will be made in the following settlements to 
meet  approximately,  the following housing numbers:  
A   Sub-Regional Centres  
Boston (incl. Parts of Fishtoft and Wyberton Parishes)*  6111  
Spalding  5510  
B   Main Service Centres  
Crowland  524 Long Sutton  608 
Donington  472 Pinchbeck   252 
Holbeach   2202  Sutterton*  308 
Kirton (incl. Parts of  514 Sutton Bridge  273 
Frampton Parish)*         Swineshead * 411 
C Minor Service Centres  
Bicker *  50 Moulton Chapel  130 
Butterwick *  70 Old Leake * 100 
Cowbit   120 Quadring  130 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Deeping St Nicholas  80 Surfleet  180 
Fishtoft * 50 Sutton St James  70 
Fleet Hargate   70 Tydd St Mary  40 
Gedney Hill  120 Weston  310 
Gosberton  270 Whaplode  130 
Moulton       190 Wigtoft*  30 
  Wrangle * 100 
* Indicates a settlement in Boston Borough. Settlements with no asterisk are 
within South Holland District.  
Housing numbers are inclusive of extant planning permissions 
(commitments) and dwellings built since April 2011 and up to 31st March 
2017.  
 
Site Reference  Site Name  Site 
Area 
(Ha)  Site 
Capacity  
Boston  
Cen001  Land north of Whitehorse Lane  0.48  60 
Fen001  Land west of Fenside Road  1.83  55 
Fen002  Land north of Langrick Road  1.16  35 
Fen006  Land east of Fenside Road  8.00  240 
Fis001  Land east of Lindis Road  7.46  180 
Fis002  Land north -east of Fishtoft Road  0.41  12 
Fis003  Land east of White House Lane  3.01  90 
Fis017a  Land south of Wainfleet Road  9.62  200 
Fis033  Land west of Toot Lane  7.39  222 
Fis038  Land west of Church Green Road  1.76  53 
Nor006  Land west of Horncastle Road  2.38  71 
Pil002  Land south of Main Ridge East  0.32  13 
Pil006  Boston Delivery Office, South End  0.48  19 
Sou006  Land south of Chain Bridge Road (SUE)  63.31  1,515  
Wes001  Land west of Freshney Way  0.37  11 
Wes002  Land south of North Forty Foot Bank 
(SUE)  45.92  1,138  
Wyb013  Land south of Swineshead Road  2.84  85 
Wyb033  Land north of Tytton Lane East  8.33  250 
Wyb041  291-293 London Road, Boston  1.38  41 
TOTAL   166.45  4,290  
Spalding  
Mon005  Land south of Horseshoe Road  2.93  88 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Mon008  Land north of Bourne Road  14.47  434 
Pin024  Land north of the Vernatts Drain (SUE 
with Pin 045)  11.67  350 
Pin025  Land east of Spalding Road  0.37  11 
Pin045  Land west of Spalding Road (SUE with 
Pin024)   22.53  676 
Pin050  Spalding Lifestyle, Spalding Road  1.68  50 
Stm004  Land east of Spalding Common  4.66  140 
Stm010  Land west of Spalding Common  2.09  63 
Stm028  The Elders  3.60  108 
TOTAL   64.0  1,920  
Crowland  
Cro011  Land north of Barbers Drove North  1.54  31 
Cro036  18 Low Road  1.48  30 
Cro043  Land east of Crease Drove  1.54  31 
Cro044  Rear of 11 Barbers Drove North  1.47  29 
Cro046  Former South View Community 
Primary School  0.68  14 
Cro050  Land to the east of Normanton Road  3.48  70 
TOTAL   10.19  205 
Donington  
Don001  Land south of Town Dam Lane  2.65  53 
Don006  Land east of Town Dam Lane  5.49  110 
Don008  Land west of Maltings Lane  3.61  72 
Don018  Land north of Quadring Road  2.62  52 
Don030  Land east of Town Dam Lane  0.61  12 
TOTAL   14.98  299 
Holbeach  
Hob004  Land east of Balmoral Way  5.85  109 
Hob010  Land west of Fen Road  0.79  10 
Hob032  Land off Battlefields Lane  6.27  185 
Hob048  Land east of the A151 (SUE)  42.2  750 
TOTAL   55.11  1,054  
Kirton  
Kir016  31-33 London Road  1.25 40 
Kir034  Land east of Woodside Road  2.05  41 
Kir041  Land to the west of London Road  5.1 102 
TOTAL   8.4 183 
Long Sutton  
Los008  Land east of Lime Walk  1.72  34 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Los015  Land east of Seagate Road  10.74  215 
Los026  Land east of Lime Walk  2.29  46 
Los046  Land east of Station Road  0.7 14 
TOTAL   15.45  309 
Pinchbeck  
Pin002  Land north of Market Way  1.32  26 
Pin019  Land east of Surfleet Road  1.69  34 
Pin065  Birchgrove Garden Centre, Surfleet 
Road  2.44  49 
TOTAL   5.45  109 
Sutterton  
Sut009/Sut028  Land south of Spalding Road/west of 
Station Road  13.14  263 
TOTAL   13.14  263 
Sutton Bridge  
Sub027  Land south of Bridge Road  10.25  210 
TOTAL   10.25  210 
Swineshead  
Swi015  Land west of Station Road  5.81  116 
Swi018  Land  at North End  1.74  35 
Swi037  Land west of High Street  2.94  59 
TOTAL   10.49  210 
Bicker  
Bic004  Land east of Donington Road  1.35  27 
Bic015  Land west of Drury Lane  0.51  10 
Bic017  Land east of St Swithins Close  0.91  18 
TOTAL   2.77  55 
Butterwick  
But002  Land east of Sea Lane  1.05  21 
But004  Land east of Benington Road  1.03  21 
But020  Land north of Peter Paine Close  0.77  23 
TOTAL   2.85  65 
Cowbit  
Cow004  Land west of Backgate  1.63  33 
Cow009  Land west of Backgate  1.03  21 
TOTAL    2.66  54 
Deeping St 
Nicholas  
- - - - 
TOTAL  - - - South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Fishtoft  
Fis046  Land east of Gaysfield Road  2.69  45 
TOTAL   2.69  45 
Fleet Hargate  
Fle003  Land south of Fleet Road  1.88  38 
TOTAL   1.88  38 
Gedney Hill  
Geh003  Land west of Hillgate  3.34  67 
Geh004  Land north of Mill Lane  0.82  16 
Geh015  Land east of West Drove South  1.44  29 
TOTAL   5.60  112 
Gosberton  
Gos001  Land east of York Gardens  3.80  76 
Gos003  Land west of Quadring Road  4.05  81 
Gos006  Land north of Westhorpe Road  0.50  10 
Gos023  Bowgate Lane  3.49  70 
TOTAL   11.84  237 
Moulton                 
Mou016  Land east of Broad Lane  0.86  17 
Mou023  Land east of Church Lane  0.51  10 
Mou035  Former Gardman Premises, High 
Street,  2.58  52 
TOTAL   3.95  79 
Moulton Chapel  
Mou029  Land south of Roman Road  2.86  46 
Mou042  Land north of Roman Road  3.90  78 
TOTAL   6.76  124 
Old Leake  
- - - - 
TOTAL   - - 
Quadring  
Qua002  Land south -west of Main Road  0.69  14 
Qua003  Land north -east of Main Road  4.15  83 
Qua004  Land east of Cresswell Drive  0.88  18 
TOTAL   5.72  115 
Surfleet  
Sur003  Land north of Station Road  1.23  20 
Sur006  Land south of Park Lane  1.30  26 
Sur016  Land west of Coalbeach Lane South  2.18  44 
TOTAL   4.71  90 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Sutton St James  
Suj007  Land south of Chapel Gate  0.53  11 
Suj012  Land south of Chapel Gate  2.10  42 
TOTAL   2.63  53 
Tydd St Mary  
Tyd014  Land at Lowgate  1.54  31 
TOTAL   1.54  31 
Weston  
Wsn003  Land north of High Road  6.11  135 
Wsn022  Land east of Small Drove  3.88  60 
Wsn029  Land off High Road  2.83  57 
TOTAL   12.82  252 
Whaplode  
Wha002  Land east of Stockwell Gate  1.95  39 
Wha019  Land south of Cobgate  1.37  27 
TOTAL   3.32  66 
Wigtoft  
Wig014  Land west of Asperton Road  0.94  19 
TOTAL   0.94  19 
Wrangle  
Wra013  Land west of Tooley Lane/north of 
Main Road  2.25  45 
TOTAL   2.25  45 
 
Reasoned Justification  
5.3.6  With regard to the housing site allocations for the Boston urban area and Spalding, 
regard has been given to what impact the growth will have on local strategic 
transport infrastructure, whether major new infrastructure will be required and if it is 
capabl e of delivery in the Local Plan period. To some extent new transport 
improvements to the local strategic highway will also come about through the 
Holbeach housing site allocations, such as site Hob048. Policy 33: Delivering a 
More Sustainable Transport Net work and the Whole Plan Viability Assessment4 will 
also be applicable. Both Spalding44 and Boston45 also have Transport Strategies 
covering the Local Plan period that are being implemented by the County Council in 
partnership with transport operators, deve lopers, the Boston Borough and South 
Holland District Councils and interest groups.     
5.3.7  New housing growth can have negative impacts upon assets such as the natural or 
historic environments. But it is considered that housing site allocations promoted 
throu gh Policy 11 have no such known constraints to prevent development taking 
place, although mitigation may be required through Policy  28: The Natural 
Environment and Policy 29: The Historic Environment, which provide a detailed 
policy approach to conserve an d enhance such assets.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.3.8  In the delivery of housing developments Policy 2: De velopment Management and 
Policy  3: Design of New Development will be key considerations in designing 
efficient and sustainable forms of housing. Appendix 5 : ‘Allocations - Infrastru cture 
Requirements, Constraints and Mitigation ’ of the Local Plan provides an 
assessment of constraints and infrastructure that may need to be met on the 
housing sites in Policy 11. Whilst these cons iderations may change over the P lan 
period they are a useful starting point in preparing development proposals.    
5.3.9  The housing site allocations for each settlement identified by Policy 11 indicate the 
capacity of the sites shown on the Inset Maps. This is only a broad indication based 
upon 30 dwellings per hectare for sites within the Boston urban area and Spalding, 
and 20 dwellings per hectare for all the Main and Minor Service Centres. The 
settlement -specific Housing Papers30 will highlight those few sites where this 
assumed ratio of dwellings per hectare is different. The stated capacity is not 
necessarily a maximum or, in some cases, a minimum capacity that would be 
expected on each site; viability, design, constraints and the most efficient use of 
land in delivering new homes should  be the primary considerations in meeting 
housing needs.  
Monitoring  
Number  of housing completions per annum for the Plan area and by settlement  
Housing commitments derived from extant and submitted planning applications, by settlement per 
annum  
5.4. Reserve  Sites  
5.4.1  The need to identify an alternative range of reserve sites for residential 
development is necessary to ensure that the strategy in the Local Plan provides 
sufficient flexibility in the event that development on allocated and existing 
commitments sta lls.  Appendix 5 of the Local Plan provides information with regard 
to the constraints and infrastructure requirements that may need to be met in 
bringing these sites forward .    
Policy 12 - Reserve Sites  
The following sites in the table below are identifi ed on the Policies Maps as 
Reserve Sites. These are sites that will be brought forward for development in 
the event that the allocated sites do not deliver housing development at the 
expected rate as expressed in the Housing Trajectory (Appendix 4 : Expecte d 
housing completions ).  
The trigger for releasing Reserve Sites will be determined by the application 
of the Housing Delivery Test set out in National Policy and Guidance.  
The decision to release reserve sites w ill be made by the appropriate Local 
Planni ng Authority where it  has been determined from the Housing Delivery 
Test that it is necessary to release reserve sites. All reserv e sites within the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
appropriate Local Planning A uthority will be considered for release.  
Settlement  Site ref.  Site Name  Site Area 
(ha) Site Capacity  
Donington  Don035  Land to the north of Town 
Dam Lane  6.76  135 
Holbeach  Hob011  Land to the south of Wignals 
Gate  3.48  70 
Kirton  Kir036  Land to the north of Craven 
Avenue  3.84  77 
Sutterton  Sut034  Land to the north of Wigtoft 
Road  2.47  49 
Deeping St 
Nicholas  Dsn018  Land off New Road  1.90  38 
Fishtoft  Fis041  Land to the east of Church 
Green Road  1.97  39 
Gosberton  Gos011  Land to the north -west of 
Belchmire Lane  4.95  99 
Moulton 
Chapel  Mou028  Land to the east of Roman 
Road  0.82  16 
Old Leake  Old005  Land to the south and east 
of School Lane  0.66  10 
Quadring  Qua006  Land to the south of 
Watergate  1.90  38 
Surfleet  Sur018  Land between Station Road 
and the A152  5.06  101 
Weston  Wsn03 6 Land to the south of High 
Road  7.06  141 
Wigtoft  Wig015  Land to the east of Asperton 
Road  0.52  10 
 
Reasoned Justification  
5.4.2  The SELLP identifies 13 Reserve S ites that are intended to be brought forward for 
development if the delivery of allocated sites and other housing commitments fails 
to meet the threshold of delivery set out in the Housing Delivery Test defined by 
Government policy .  
5.4.3  The policy makes it cl ear that the Housing Delivery Test will be applied at an 
individual local authority scale. This is consistent with the approach to five year land 
supply that is set out for Boston and South Holland. A failure to meet the Housing 
Delivery Test in either Bos ton or South Holland Council areas will therefore trigger 
the release of all reserve sites within that authority’s area. If both local authorities South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
do not meet the Housing Delivery Test then the reserve sites will be released in 
both Councils’ areas.  
5.4.4  Specif ic attention will need to be paid to any consideration of the release of site 
Dsn018 in Deeping St Nicholas. Appendix 5 of the Local Plan notes that Deeping St 
Nicholas has existing challenges with respect to its capacity to deal with the 
treatment of wast ewater and sewerage from any further new developments in the 
village.  A suitable solution will need to be agree d with the Environment Agency and 
Anglian Water before planning permission is granted for development at the site .  
Monitoring  
Number  of housing completions per annum by LPA  
Number  of housing completions on released Reserve Sites  
5.5. South West Quadrant (Sou006) Sustainable Urban 
Extension  
5.5.1  The Sustainable Urban Extension (SUE) site identified as Sou006 on the Boston 
Inset Map is a large m ixed development predominantly led by meeting housing 
needs but also incorporating significant highway infrastructure (part of the Boston 
Distributor Road), employment opportunities and tourist leisure attractions.   An 
indicative layout plan (for illustrat ive purposes) can be found in A ppendix 10 to the 
Local Plan.  
Policy 13: South West Quadrant Sustainable Urban Extension 
(Sou006)  
Land to the south west of the existing urban area of Boston is allocated as a 
mixed use development and will be developed in ac cordance with a 
Masterplan for the area, to be agreed with Boston Borough Council, so as to 
deliver the following: -  
1. Approximately 1515 new homes (of which about 1276 will be built in the 
plan period);  
2. Approximately 2.5 ha of employment comprising of B1, A 2, A3 and A4 
uses;  
3. Open space comprising equipped play space, informal play space and 
space of ecological value combined with Sustainable Urban Drainage 
systems and linked with integrated footpaths and, where possible, 
providing wider access to the existi ng permissive footpath/cycleway 
network;  
4. A marina hub linked to the South Forty Foot Drainage channel and inland 
waterways incorporating moorings and associated marina facilities 
together with residential, comm ercial and leisure/tourist uses ; South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5. Community Hub  incorporating a site for a new Primary School, local 
shopping and community facilities;  
6. A section of the Boston Distributor Road from London Road to the site 
and West End Road;  
7. Satisfactory mitigation of flood risk;  
8. Satisfactory mitigation for impact upon adjacent Scheduled Ancient 
Monument.   
Reasoned Justification  
5.5.2  Site Sou006 is a large sustainable urban extension of about 63 ha. that is expected 
to deliver housing, employment and community infrastructure (through the mixed 
uses on BO008 and a site for a new Primary School), a marina linked to the inland 
waterways and a network of open space. The primary means of access will be via a 
proposed section of the Boston Distributor Road. It is expected that the majority o f 
developmen t will be completed within the P lan period.  
5.5.3  The 1515 new homes (approximately) will provide a wide range of house types 
meeting affordable housing needs as identified in Policy 18: Affordable Housing  and 
a mix of ho using as identified in Polic y 17: Providing a Mix of Housing . Inclusive 
living with definable and distinctive neighbourhoods will be provided through good 
design and well integrated access and open space. Footpath and cycle access to 
community facilities and play space will also be i ntegral to the residential areas. The 
provision of an integrated footpath network is particularly important to give options 
for dog walking and offset the likelihood of impacts upon the Wash coastal 
footpaths and areas of h abitat importance (see Policy 28 : The Natural 
Environment).  
5.5.4  In addition to the residential uses, the Masterplan will be evolved around both a 
Marina and Community “Hub” to provide a unique mixed use development for the 
town.  Further traffic modelling will be undertaken to inform the dev elopment of the 
Masterplan, design of the Distributor Road and the phased delivery of the 
development and associated transport infrastructure.       
5.5.5  The Marina Hub will be a major focal point for the development, providing a 
prestigious location for a tour ist/leisure attraction linked to the development of the 
regional inland waterways network.  The Community Hub will provide a site for a 
new primary school, alongside local shopping and other community facilities.  
5.5.6  A Heritage Impact Assessment as part of a w ider archaeological assessment of the 
site will be required to ensure that the scheduled ancient monument located 
immediately adjacent to the north eastern extent of the site is appropriately 
considered with suitable mitigation measures as part of the Mast erplan.  
5.5.7  The site is identified as being vulnerable to the severest flood risk with a failure in 
tidal defences providing a threat of ‘danger for all’  and so flood mitigation will be an South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
essential requirement to ensure safety for residents now and for the e xpected 
lifetime of the homes. Sustainable urban drainage systems will also be necessary 
and these might work in combination with informal open space provision, ecological 
habitat creation and opportunities for drainage and water retention provided by the 
marina.  
Monitoring  
Number of housing completions within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Area of land in B1, B2 and B8 use within the sustainable urban extension per annum   
Area of land in open space use (by type) within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Length (Kilometres)  of the Boston Distributor Road delivered within each five year period  (by 
phase)  
5.6. South of North Forty Foot Drain (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension  
5.6.1  The Sustainable Urban Extension (SUE) site identified as Wes002 on the Boston 
Inset Map is a large residential development provi ding access to nearby existing 
employment opportunities and community infrastruc ture namely; a Primary School, 
Princes s Royal Sports Are na and sports pitches, and extensive retailing. The 
development  also provides the opportunity for a local centre and is accessed, 
primarily, by part of the Boston Distributor Road.   An indicative layout plan (for 
illustrativ e purposes) ca n be found in A ppendix 10 to the Local Plan . 
Policy 14: South of the North Forty Foot Drain Sustainable Urban 
Extension (Wes002)  
Land to the south of the North Forty Foot Drain and adjoining the existing 
urban area of Boston  allocated as a  predominantly re sidential development ,  
will provide:  
1. Approximately 1 ,138 new homes;  
2. Approximately 10 ha of public open space and space of ecological value  
combined with Sustainable  Drainage systems linked with  integrated 
footpaths and where possible providing access to  the wider permissive 
footpath network;  
3. A 0.5.ha site for a Local Centre;  
4. A Distributor Road (with landscaping) extending south to north to the 
North Forty Foot Drain;  
5. Good pedestrian and cycle access to nearby employment and community 
facilities will be integral to the development;  
6. Satisfactory mitigation of flood risk.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reasoned Justification  
5.6.2  Site Wes002 is a large sustainable urban extension of about 46 ha. which is 
expected to deliver housing, community infrastructure, a network of open space and 
good access to nearby primary school provision (existing). Employment 
opportunities lie immediately to the south and a wide range of shopping facilities 
within a mile. The primary means of access will be via the Boston Distributor Road 
joining the existing acce ss on Gilbert Drive and then going northwards to the North 
Forty Foot Drain. The development is e xpected to be completed in the P lan period.  
5.6.3  The 1 ,138 new homes (approximately) will provide a range of house types meeting 
affordable housing needs as identified in Policy 18: Affordable Housing  and a mix of 
housing as identified in Policy 17: Providing a Mix of Housing . Inclusive living with 
definable and distinctive neighbourhoods will be provided through good design and 
well integrated access and open  space. Footpath and cycle access to community 
facilities and play space will also be integral to the residential areas. The provision 
of an integrated footpath network is also particularly important to give options for 
dog walking and offset the likelihoo d of impacts upon the Wash coastal footpaths 
and areas of h abitat importance (see Policy 28 : The Natural Environment).  
5.6.4  The site is identified as being vulnerable to severe flood risk with a failure in tidal 
defences providing a threat of ‘danger for all’ or ‘danger for most’  and so flood 
mitigation will be an essential requirement to ensure safety for residents now and 
for the expected lifetime of the homes. Sustainable urban drainage systems will 
also be necessary and these might work in combination with informal open space 
provision and ecological habitat creation.  
Monitoring  
Number of housing completions within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Area of land in open space use (by type) within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Length (Kilometres) of the Boston Distributor Road delivered within each five year period (by 
phase)  
5.7. Vernatts Sustainable Urban Extension  
5.7.1  The need for a second urban extension in Spalding to meet a significant part of its 
housing need and help fund the d elivery of the Spalding Western Relief Road (the 
first being the 2,250 -dwelling Holland Park scheme to the south -west of the town 
which is under construction) has been longstanding, since the preparation of the 
Preferred Options report6.  
5.7.2  However, followin g the Preferred Options report6, work on developing the detail of 
this proposal (through the Local Plan: draft for public consultation7 and the 
Preferred Sites consultation8), informed by a variety of public consultation 
comments and other considerations, has led to two significant changes to the 
concept: firstly, the aim of avoiding the virtual coalescence of the settlements of 
Pinchbeck and Spalding has been dropped for reason of practicability; and  
secondly, given its significant size, this proposal now makes provision for the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
majority of housing development to be deliv ered after the completion of  that part of 
the Spalding Western Relief Road running from Spalding Road all the way to the 
A151 Bourne Road, thus avoiding the creation of a signi ficant ‘cul -de-sac’ 
development.  
Policy  15:  Vernatts Sustainable Urban Extension  
Land to the north of the Vernatt’s Drain, as identified on the Policies Map 
Inset for Spalding and Pinchbeck , will provide approximately 4,000 dwellings 
and supporting community infrastructure, Sections 4 and 5 of the Spalding 
Western Relief Road (SWRR) and significant open space.  
The Vernatts S ustainable Urban E xtension (SUE) will be delivered in several 
phase s as follows, the completion of which is expected to extend beyond the 
Local Plan period:  
A.   Phase 1 will include:  
1. the creation of a five -spur roundabout at the junction of Spalding Road 
with Enterprise Way (Roundabout 1, which will form the first part o f 
Section 5 of the SWRR) , and the Local Highway Authority’s acquisition of 
the land required for the SWRR through to Blue Gowt Lane;  
2. the development of approximately 500 dwellings on land to the east of 
the Joint Line railway and north of the proposed Sec tion 5 of the SWRR, 
accessed off the five -spur roundabout;  
3. land lying to the east of the Joint Line railway and south of the proposed 
Section 5 of the SWRR to be designated as Recreational Open Space which 
will be protected from built development;  
4. 4 ha of  land adjoining Market Way to be designated as Recreational Open 
Space which will be protected from built development;  
B.  Phase 2 will include:  
1. the south -westward continuation of Section 5 of the SWRR to a 
roundabout junction (Roundabout 2) situated to th e west of Two Plank 
Bridge; and  
2. the development of approximately 500 dwellings and appropriate 
community infrastructure accessed off Roundabout 2, which are expected 
to be completed within the Local Plan period.   
C.   Phase 3 will include:  
1. Section 4 of the SWRR, which involves its south -westward continuation in 
parallel with the Vernatt’s Drain up to a bridge crossing of it to the west of 
Wygate Park, and then leaving the urban extension and progressing 
southwards to a junction with the A151 Bourne Road; and  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2. the development of approximately 3 ,000 dwellings and appropriate 
community infrastructure beyond the Local Plan period, accessed off a 
combination of Roundabout 2, and one or more junctions on that part of 
the SWRR lying within the urban extension.  
The provision of new or enhanced physical and community infrastructure will 
be required to mitigate the impact of development across the three phases of 
the urban extension and contribute to the creation of a sustainable 
community. Some of this will be provi ded within the urban extension and 
some outside, as appropriate. It will be secured via s106 agreements and 
relate to the provision of:  
1. a local centre within the urban extension to west of the Joint Line railway;  
2. nursery, primary and secondary school place s; 
3. health care facilities;  
4. open space, and sports and recreational facilities; and  
5. mitigation and/or enhancement measures in respect of the historic and 
natural environment s. 
Development proposals will be expected to:  
i. undertake a heritage impact assessment to inform the master planning of 
the site. The heritage impact assessment will identify heritage assets 
including non -designated archaeology, assess their significance, and 
assess the impact of the development on their significance. Appropriate 
measures for mitigation and enhancement will be identified and set out in 
the assessment;  
ii. the heritage impact assessment results should inform th e approaches to 
the layout and design of development across the site. Planning 
applications for the site should  accord with the heritage impact 
assessment;   
iii. provide an element of affordable housing in accordance with Policy  18; 
iv. provide a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver a balanced 
community over the lifetime of the development;  
v. take account of agreed Design Codes (or other mechanisms employed) to 
ensure high -quality and locally -distinctive design;  
vi. make appropriate provision of on -site open space, including any specific 
requirements identified to mitigate any impacts identified by project -level 
HRA;  
vii. maximise opportunities for safe and convenient walking and cycling by 
giving careful consideration to the location of key uses within the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Sustainable Urban Extension  and by providing links to neighbouring areas;  
viii. integrate sufficient car and cycle parking in accordance with the standards 
set out in Policy 36;  
ix. demonstrate that potential noise and visual impacts arising from the 
SWRR and the Joint Line railway can be adequately mitigated;  
x. incorporate a foul drainage strategy for the Sustainable Urban E xtension 
as a whole, and for each phase;  
xi. incorporate a comprehensive Sustainable Drainage System to manage 
surface water drainage and safeguard against any increased flood risk ; 
and 
xii. create natural habitat, contribute to resilient ecological networks and 
provide net  natural environment al gain . 
Phases 1 and 2 of development will be required to contribute to the delivery 
of Section 5 of the SWRR, and Phase 3 will be required to contribute to the 
delivery of Sections 3 and 4 of the SWRR. These contributions will be in 
accordance with the Local Highway Authority’s approved SWRR Delivery 
Strategy69;  
In respect of all three Phases, South Holland District Council and the Local 
Highway Authority will seek to secure formal agreements with relevant 
developers/landowners on fin ancial and other contributions. However, if 
necessary, the authorities will also consider the use of statutory powers, 
including compulsory purchase, to ensure delivery of the SWRR.  
Notwithstanding the provisions of other policies in this Local Plan, all 
proposals for development within the designated area of this SUE will be 
subject to developer contributions , the calculation of which will be subject to 
viability. 
Development proposals for these three Phases which do not meet the 
detailed requirements set out in the SWRR Delivery Strategy or which 
compromise the strategic role of the road will not be permitted. Specifically, 
housing development cannot commence on:  
 Phase 1, until such time as the land required for the route of Section 5 to 
Blue Gowt Lane is  acquired by the Local Highway Authority; and  
 Phase 3, until Sout h Holland District Council, as Local Planning A uthority, 
has approved the number of dwellings that could be provided in advance 
of the completion of Section 3 of the SWRR (which links the Ver natts  SUE 
with the A151 Bourne Road) should there be a delay in its delivery . 
Further detail relating to the delivery of this proposal will be set out in South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
separate master plans for the individual phases to be agreed with South 
Holland District Council and i ts partners, which must conform to the 
approved SWRR Delivery Strategy. The preparation of master plans should 
have regard to the key constraints outlined below.  
In respect of the whole of the proposed development:  
 water supply network: infrastructure and  any improvements  required to 
serve proposed growth; and  
 foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and  any improvements  
required to serve proposed growth.  
In respect of Site Pin045 (covering Phase 1 and part of Phase 2):  
 it is within Flood Zone 3a, an d the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 2115 as 
a combination of ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’, and flood 
depth in 2115 as up to 1m. Development will be required to include 
appropriate mitigation;  
 gas mains cross the site;  
 water mains and sewers cr oss the site  and the site layout should be 
designed to take these into account consistent with the requirements of 
Policy 5: Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs of the Local 
Plan ; and  
 the South Holland District Council (SHDC) contaminated lan d register 
refers to the railway line and to filled land near this site.  
In respect of Site Pin024 (covering part of Phase 2 and Phase 3):  
 it is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 2115 as 
a combination of ‘danger for some’, ‘low hazard and ‘no hazard’ and flood 
depth in 2115 as up to 0.5m. Development will be required to include 
appropriate mitigation.  
 water mains cross the site  and the site layout should be designed to take 
these into account consistent with the requirements of P olicy 5: Meeting 
Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs of the Local Plan ; and  
 it wraps around a pottery which is identified on the SHDC contaminated 
land register.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.7.3  The provision of an additional 4,000 new homes is expected to require significant 
supporting community infrastructure to meet the needs of future residents in the 
Local Plan period and beyond. This could include education, healthcare and sports 
facilities as well as affordable homes. Infrastructure requirements for the urban South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
extension will be developed through the Infrastructure Delivery Plan5 and Whole 
Plan Viability Assessment4, and through negotiations with developers and partners.  
5.7.4  A heritage impact ass essment will ensure that, in addition t o potential archaeology, 
the various land drains and field patterns forming part of the historic landscape 
character of the area, and associated with the Vernatt’s Drain, are taken into 
account in preparing the master  plans.  
5.7.5  A green infrastructure strategy will show how the extent and mix of open space 
functions will be managed, in the long -term, and should incorporate the findings of 
the project -level HRA required for this site (see Policy 28). All provision should al so 
be identified on the respective master plans for each phase.  
5.7.6  To support the delivery of the proposed urban extension and the strategic SWRR, 
the policy seeks to ensure that land required to deliver the SWRR through each 
phase of the development is secured. South Holland District Council’s expectation 
is that this should be through acquisition of the required land by the Local Highway 
Authority. The precise details of the mechanism for the securing of the land will be 
identified in the approved SWRR Delivery Strategy. As part of the Local Highway 
Authority’s approach to supporting the delivery of the SWRR, the County Council 
has confirmed that it will seek to utilise its statutory powers to secure the land if 
necessary. This approach seeks to ensure t hat the phases of development and 
their respective timing align with the delivery of the strategic highway infrastructure.  
5.7.7  South Holland District Council and the County Council will utilise their best 
endeavours to secure the completion of Section 3 of the  SWRR in advance of the 
commencement of development on Phase 3 of the SUE, in order to create two 
principal points of vehicular access into the urban extension as soon as possible, 
and thereby help to spread the impact of traffic arising from the proposal.  However, 
there might be unavoidable delays associated with the road’s construction which 
should not unduly delay the commencement of housing development on Phase 3 if 
market circumstances are favourable. Accordingly, careful consideration would be 
given t o identifying the number of dwellings that could be accommodated on Phase 
3, in traffic -management terms, should there be a delay in providing  the second 
point of access.  
5.7.8  Further background in respect of the provision of the SWRR is set out in Policy 35: 
Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Monitoring  
Number of housing completions within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Length (Kilometres ) of the northern phase of the SWRR delivered within each five year period  
5.8. Holbeach West Sustainable U rban Extension   
5.8.1  The Holbeach West Sustainable Urban Extension is identified as a strategic 
location for new housing over the Local Plan period and beyond. It is an extensive, 
mainly greenfield site, covering about 44ha, adjacent to the western boundary of South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Holbeach, extending west to the A151 and is contained to the north by the A17, and 
to the south by the Spalding Road. The site is closely related to HO002: Holbeach 
Food Enterprise Zone (see Policy 7: Improving South East Lincolnshire’s 
Employment Land Por tfolio and Policy 8 : Prestige Employment Sites ) to the west of 
the A151.  
5.8.2  The National Planning Policy Framework9 recognises that allocations should help 
deliver the development and infrastructure required in the Local Plan area over the 
period of the Local Plan. The residential provision at Holbeach West is an 
opportunity to bring forward a range of new housing, early in the Local Plan period, 
as part of a compreh ensively planned and sustainable neighbourhood with 
associated community facilities, and green and physical infrastructure.  
Policy  16: Holbeach West Sustainable Urban Extension  
44 ha of land at Holbeach West is allocated for residential use, and will be 
developed according to a master plan for the area, to be agreed with South 
Holland District Council, so as to deliver the following:  
1. approximately 900 new homes, of which about 750 new dwellings and 
associated infrastructure will be delivered in the Local Plan period (2011 -
2036); the remaining dwellings and associated infrastructure will be 
delivered thereafter, as part of a new neighbourhood;  
2. up to 25% affordable housing provided across the development, the 
tenure mix to be agreed prior to each phase;  
3. an o verall housing mix to include housing designed to meet the national 
space standards10, be capable of being readily adapted to meet a range of 
needs and/or housing to meet specific needs;  
4. publicly accessible green infrastructure to include:  
i. green corridors alongside the New River Drain and other drains 
crossing the site to  provide a well -connected green network for 
access and recreation and to enhance the historic environment;  
ii. wetlands and woodland and associated environmental enhancements 
to enhance the bi odiversity value of the site;  
iii. a 2ha local park and other multifunctional open space to be a focus for 
informal recreation and children’s play within each neighbourhood  
iv. specific requirements identified to mitigate any impacts identified by 
the project -level  HRA;  
5. significant structural landscaping belts along the boundaries with the 
A151 and the A17;  
6. a flood management scheme for fluvial and surface water run off;  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
7. a foul drainage strategy for the Holbeach West Sustainable Urban 
Extension as a whole, and for e ach phase;  
8. a network of linked streets, including new road links from the A151 and 
Spalding Road connecting the northern and southern areas;  
9. new high quality walking and cycling access along main routes and green 
corridors to link in with existing foot/cy cle paths, including a new 
foot/cycle path along Northons Lane;  
10. capacity to extend public transport routes within the site and to link to 
HO002: Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone;  
11. high speed broadband to every home.  
Improvements to physical and community infr astructure will be required to 
mitigate the impact of development and contribute to the creation of a 
sustainable community. These will be secured via a s106 agreement to:  
1. support the provision of the roundabouts on the A151 and at the 
A151/A17 junction wh ich will enable access to the residential site and the 
proposed Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone;  
2. provide additional nursery, primary and secondary school places;  
3. support the provision of health care facilities; and  
4. enhance existing sports facilities in Holb each.  
Exceptionally, where these requirements cannot be delivered, a 
comprehensive viability assessment should be submitted with a planning 
application to aid negotiations.  
Notwithstanding the provisions of other policies in this Local Plan, all 
proposals  for development within the designated area of this SUE will be 
subject to developer contributions , the calculation of which will be subject to 
viability. 
The preparation of a master plan should have regard to the key constraints 
outlined below:  
1. the site i s within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as a combination of ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’ and 
flood depth in 2115 as 0m -1.0m. Development will be required to include 
appropriate mitigation;  
2. the site has considerable h eritage significance as it comprises the 
immediate and wider setting of a Grade II listed building (The Old 
Cottage);  
3. a sewer pipe crosses the site , and therefore the site layout should be South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
designed to take this into account consistent with the requirement s of 
Policy 5: Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs of the Local 
Plan and 
4. the site lies within the encroachment zone for Holbeach Water Recycling 
Centre  (WRC). Accordingly, the risk of odour should be considered as part 
of the master planning of the site with the requirements of Policy 30: 
Pollution of the Local Plan. Development proposals will need to 
demonstrate that neither the continuing use of the WRC nor the 
residential amenity of future occupants will be compromised .  
Reasoned Justifica tion 
5.8.3  Essential for the proper planning of the area is to create a neighbourhood where 
people will aspire to live and to ensure that the new community integrates positively 
with the existing neighbouring residents to the east and south, which also provides 
links to HO002: Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone to the west. The details will need 
to be identified in a comprehensive master plan, agreed with South Holland District 
Council to guide the development and infrastructure of the area within the Local 
Plan perio d, and beyond.  
5.8.4  The phasing of supporting infrastructure will be important. Key infrastructure (such 
as road links to the A151 and to Spalding Road) should begin delivery from the 
outset: and other on -site infrastructure, such as the internal road network a nd the 
foul drainage system , should be designed with capacity to accommodate further 
development beyond  2036.   
5.8.5  Whilst about 750 new homes are envisaged by 2036, the end date of this Local 
Plan, to ensure that there is a continuous supply of housing land th ere is an 
expectation that further new development will continue on this site well beyond 
2036. To enable this, and allow for more than one developer to build at any one 
time, residential development should be planned to be built out from the south and 
north in parallel progressing to the centre of the site in the long -term.  
5.8.6  The development will be expected to include a range of house types and sizes. This 
area is particularly suitable for three and four bedroom family homes, smaller family 
homes to support  newly formed families and bungalows for older people, 
addressing a shortfall in the stock compared to demand23, 24. An appropriate 
amount, type and mix of affordable housing will also be required on site; this should 
be 25% of the planned development, unl ess a viability statement indicates 
other wise. All should be designed to  meet the appropriate national space 
standards10 be safe and accessible to a range of shops and services.  
5.8.7  Ensuring future residents have access to education is important; safe, well -lit routes 
between Holbeach West and local primary and secondary schools will be required. 
It may also be necessary to secure additional capacity at existing GP surgeries and 
schools in Holbeach to ensure residents, exist ing and future, suffer  no adverse South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
impacts in terms of access to health care and education. The educational and 
health care provision will be provided for through a S 106 agreement.  
5.8.8  A Flood Risk Assessment will ensure that development does not increase fluvial 
and surface water flood risk, an d preferably, secures betterment. Parts of Holbeach 
West are at high risk of surface water flooding, meaning that a sustainable drainage 
network of balancing ponds, swales and other features needs to be integrated into 
the new development and green infrast ructure. The scheme should also aim to 
increase the level of protected and priority habitats and species that are found in 
the area and provide for recreation and education.  
5.8.9  A green infrastructure strategy will show how the extent and mix of open space 
functions will be managed, in the long -term, and should incorporate the findings of 
the project -level HRA required for this site (see Policy 2 8: The Natural 
Environment ). Connectivity and access for pedestrians, cyclists and equestrians 
along and between exi sting and new green corridors should be provided or 
improved, particularly along Northons Lane, alongside the A151, the A17, drains 
and between different neighbourhoods and for home, work, school and leisure. The 
biodiversity value of the landscape should be significantly enhanced; mature trees 
and hedgerows will be retained appropriately, and new environmental 
enhancements including wetlands, ponds and woodland will create a more natural 
landscape for wildlife. Complementary provision of accessible space f or recreation, 
adventurous and natural play, including a 2ha local park, as well as space to grow 
food, will be provided close to homes. Together this approach will help address 
residents ’ open space needs.  
5.8.10  At its boundaries, particularly alongside the A17  and A151, significant structural 
landscaping, with mixed native woodland and species rich planting should create a 
positive vibrant green environment which will protect residents amenity by 
minimising noise from the adjoining road network, while creating an attractive 
pedestrian and cycle corridor linking the development with the Food Enterprise 
Zone. To support ongoing management and maintenance of high quality spaces, a 
green infrastructure management scheme will need to be agreed through the 
master plan ning process.  
5.8.11  A Heritage Impact Assessment will ensure that the significance of the Grade II 
listed building adjoining the site and any associated archaeological remains are 
identified, and addressed in the master plan. Meanwhile the promotion of green 
infrastructure alongside the drainage channels will help reflect the distinctive 
historic landscape character of the area in the design of any new development.  
5.8.12  Access to, and  within, Holbeach West will be easy on foot and by bicycle. 
Sustainable travel routes  should radiate, linking provision to both existing and 
proposed housing areas and other main travel routes. Valuable new routes will be 
added providing connections to employment, schools, and to the town centre. The 
new road to the A151 will also enable s ustainable access to the Food Enterprise 
Zone to the west. Existing bus stops close to the southern access will also enable 
the existing frequent bus service to Spalding and King’s Lynn to be accessed by South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
new residents. This high -quality provision will prov ide attractive travel choice for 
residents.  
5.8.13  A Transport Assessment will ensure that the extra traffic generated by the 
development does not have an adverse impact on the local highway network, or 
affect the efficient functioning of the major highway network, particularly at junctions 
with the A151 and the A151/A17, the lat ter of which experiences a high volume of 
traffic, particularly at peak times. To avoid severe impacts on these networks the 
proposed development will need to mitigate its impact by contributing to planned 
highways improvements along the A151 and the A17 to reflect the amount and type 
of development proposed (see Policy 33: Delivering a More Sustainable Transport 
Network ). The development must also include roads designed to an appropr iate 
standard to link areas of new development to the existing highway network. These 
will form a package of measures secured through a s106 agreement.  
Monitoring  
Number of housing completions within the sustainable urban extension per annum  
Delivery of Peppermint Junction highways improvements  
5.9. Providing a Mix of Housing  
5.9.1  Providing a mix of property types is not only important in meeting housing needs 
but is also important in delivering sustainable development for the community. In 
addition, a mix of prop erties encourages diverse design that can result in 
development layouts that are varied, interesting and distinctive. Such developments 
will also be more attractive to house buyers.  
Policy 17: Providing a Mix of Housing  
The provision of new houses will se ek to m eet the long term needs of the 
Plan area in order to maintain and provide mixed, inclusive and sustainable 
communities. Family homes of two or three bedrooms are in highest demand 
for both the market and affordable housing sectors and one bedroom homes 
are also required to meet affordable needs.  
A growing ageing population with the increasing likelihood of mobility and 
disability needs to be met also make up over  10% of housing needs over the 
Plan period and these should be met through provision of  homes capable of 
adaption and also through specialist care home provision. With a decreasing 
ability to access everyday facilities independently and an increasing need for 
healthcare, specialist care home provision should be located in the most 
sustainabl e settlements e.g. Sub -Regional Centres and Main Service Centres.    
The Local Plan will also seek to meet the housing needs of non travelling 
Gypsy and Traveller households and also custom and self builders as they 
may come forward.          South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reasoned Justification  
5.9.2  Housing needs and house types will change over time but , by aiming for a mix of 
development , it is expected that such developments will not only bring about better  
overall design but will remain  sustainable, viable and attractive residential 
environments in the long -term. The Strategic Housing Market Assessments for both 
Boston and South Holland identify that over 80% of new homes (for market houses) 
should provide two or three bedrooms (about 30% two bedrooms and 50% three 
bedrooms). The need  for four or more bedrooms as market housing is above 15% 
for South Holland but in Boston Borough this need is less (at about 12%). To meet 
affordable housing the needs in both areas are also for one bedroom 
accommodation (about 30% in Boston Borough and a bout 25% in South Holland).  
In general, the mix of housing should be applied with some flexibility; the size and 
shape of each site, the type and tenure of housing proposed, as well as site -specific 
constraints and viability may inform the housing mix.  
5.9.3  In consideration of the mix of house types it will also be important for  developers to 
provide homes that are fit for purpose. Outside Building Regulations, the Local 
Planning Authorities will advise developers to, at least, meet the minimum space 
standards in national guidance10. Homes that are capable of adaption over time 
(e.g. through Part M of the Building Regulations) will help to meet the evolving 
needs of people with disabilities and the ageing population.  South East 
Lincolnshire has a growing ageing  population with an increasing likelihood of 
mobility and care support needs over the P lan period. The delivery of specialist 
housing is complex whether provided by the private or public sector, and 
partnership working with all relevant stakeholders will b e paramount to the delivery 
of such schemes. When considering planning applications for sheltered and 
specialist housing schemes for older and disabled people the relevant Co uncil will 
favour schemes where:  the site is well served by passenger transport; t here is good 
access to local services and facilities ; and the proposal is appropriate to its locality 
e.g. Sub -Regional Centres and Main Service Centres.  
5.9.4  The Strategic Housing Market Assessment for the two Housing Market Areas 
considers arising housing ne eds irrespective of ethnic origin or lifestyle preferences 
e.g. non -travelling Gypsy and Travellers or Houseboat Dwellers. Boston Borough 
and South Holland District have existing boat mooring opportunities and also a very 
small number of boat dwellers (les s than 5 in the two Council areas). There are also 
proposals for additional marina facilities and longer term improvements to waterway 
access and use. The Local Plan provides significant opportunities by which a large 
variety of arising housing needs can b e met through; small to large allocated sites, 
infill opportunities and rural exception sites plus criteria based policies providing a 
positive assessment of unforeseen arising needs and pro posals. As noted under 
Policy 11  (Distribution of New Housing), op portunities for infill development within 
Settlement Boundaries can also meet the known interest registered by self and 
custom house builders.   Neither the Boston Borough or South Holland District 
Council areas have significant populations of further educa tion students with 
specific housing requirements to be met nor do they border other plan areas where South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
further education establishments are in close proximity. Former and existing RAF 
and Army bases lie outside the P lan area but there are no known proposals for 
closure or evidence that the specific housing needs of perso nal will need to be met 
in the P lan area.     
5.9.5  Applicants are strongly encouraged to discuss the housing mix and requirements, 
including affordable housing requirements (in terms of percentage,  tenure mix, 
types and sizes) with the relevant planning authority at pre -application stage.  
Monitoring  
Number of homes completed by size to meet market and affordable housing needs per annum  
5.10.  Affordable Housing  
5.10.1  In promoting sustainable development the Local Plan has several challenges to 
meet, one of the most fundamental is to meet the housing needs of all the 
community (including young families, housing for people with disabilities and older 
people). The provision of new affordable housing is a basic n eed for low income 
families and individuals that may be reliant on private -rented accommodation that is 
inadequate or costly, or have little choice but to share overcrowded 
accommodation. Health, social and economic well -being are just some of the 
factors that might be constrained by having inadequate housing.  
5.10.2  The Strategic Housing Market Assessments22,23,24 for the Local Plan area confirm 
there is a significant proportion of the overall housing need to be met by affordable 
housing. Whilst existing social housing stock, properties in the private -rented sector 
and vacant housing brought back into use, will continue to meet needs it is 
recognised that new affordable housing stock is needed to improve choice and 
provide improved accommodation that is more ener gy efficient. As a result, new 
affordable housing may be provided in many ways, including: - by developers who 
are acting as social landlords, or can also be provided as a proportion of a market 
housing development scheme. As with new market housing stock,  new, affordable 
housing stock will also be built to be flood resilient where this is necessary.  
Policy  18: Affordable Housing  
In South East Lincolnshire the following need for affordable housing has been 
identified:  
A. In Boston Borough about 263 new afforda ble dwellings per annum, 
equating to over 80% of the overall annual housing need; and  
B. In South Holland about 282 new affordable dwellings per annum, 
equating to  about 60%   of the overall annual housing need.  
The affordable housing need will be sought on:  
1. market housing sites of 11 or more dwellings  (or residential 
developments with an internal floor area of 1 ,000sqm or more with a South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
requirement of:  
i. about 20% being affordable housing on sites in Boston Borough; and  
ii. about 25% being affordable housing on sites in South Holland;  
2. sites proposed by developers specifically for affordable housing; and  
3. Rural Exceptions Sites.  
The proportion of affordable housing that can be provided on market housing 
sites may vary according to the site specific considerations such as  viability, 
other infrastructure requirements and the type of affordable housing need to 
be met. The following provision  will be sought in each Local Planning Area:  
4. on sites in Boston Borough a mix of about 75% affordable  for rent  and 
about 25% intermediat e housing  for sale ; and  
5. on sites in South Holland District a mix of about 70% affordable  for rent  
and about 30% intermediate housing  for sale . 
Affordable  for rent  may include social rented , affordable rented or 
intermediate rented  and intermediate housing  for sale may include shared 
ownership, shared equity and starter homes depending on the identified 
need . 
On site provision will be required. Where circumstances relating to the 
delivery of affordable housing make it impractical to deliver the affordable 
housing on site, developers will provide sound evidence to the Local 
Authority why on site provision cannot be achieved. Where such evidence is 
accepted by the Local Authority the developer will be expected to make 
equivalent off -site provision or a financi al contribution to enable the need to 
be met elsewhere. In Boston Borough this will be elsewhere in the sub area in 
which the site is located (either: Boston, North/East Parishes or South/West 
Parishes). In South Holland elsewhere is anywhere within the Di strict.  
As part of the mix of affordable housing, developments should also consider 
needs for specialist accommodation and how a site could contribute towards 
delivering them. This may include provision for affordable Gypsy, Traveller 
and Travelling Showpersons pitches and plots in line with any needs 
identified in the latest Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment or 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment. This would include the needs of those 
communities who are identified either within or outside  the Government’s 
definition set out in Planning Policy for Traveller Sites . 
Reasoned Justification  
5.10.3  It is acknowledged that the need for affordable housing may occur in settlements of 
different sizes, and therefore access to employment, physical, social or green South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
infrastructure will vary, especially where car ownership may be limited. However, 
Policy 18 will be supported by other policies in the Local Plan with regard to the 
sustainability of sites for development.   
5.10.4  The proportion of affordable housing to be provided on -site through a market 
housing scheme will be dependent upon several factors and, in pa rticular, the other 
development costs that might need to be met to make the development sustainable. 
The guidelines provided by Policy 18 will need to be weighed up against other 
infrastructure costs as covered by other policies in the Local Plan, includin g 
developer contributions. In some instances, a site -specific viability assessment will 
be needed in order to determine whether the priorities identified for a development 
can be met (see Policy 6 : Developer Contributions  for more information). Usually 
affordable housing will be secured by Section 106 agreements although Planning 
Conditions may be appropriate in particular circumstances.  
5.10.5  With changes brought through by The Housing and Planning Act 2016 the definition 
of affordable housing now includes ‘Star ter Homes’. Evidence from the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessments22, 23 for the Local Plan area suggest that starter 
homes provided at 20% below market value will only be of marginal benefit in 
meeting overall affordable housing needs. This is because inc ome levels for the 
majority of those in need of affordable housing would still be below the market level 
with the 20% reduction. It is also the case that to commit to a Starter Home and a 
mortgage requires job security and  a steady income. Policy 18 indica tes a flexible 
approach towards the proportion of affordable housing that might be met on any 
one site. This is necessary as a single  type of affordable housing product ( social -
rented, affordable rented, intermediate rented, shared ownership, shared equit y 
products or Starter Homes ) are unlikely to meet the overall need on any one site 
and also the viability of individual sites in relation to land values and the profitability 
of developments will vary, especially over the Local Plan period.  The Local 
Planning Authorities will ask for site -specific viability assessments where there is 
uncertainty that a submitted scheme will meet overall housing needs.       
5.10.6  Since April 2015 there have been 327 affordable homes completed within the South 
East Lincolnshire a rea. Of these 78% have been Registered Provider (RP) led all 
affordable housing schemes with support from Homes England (HE ) grant, and in 
Boston they were supporting RPs with their own grant, as op posed to planning gain 
through S .106 obligations. These we re delivered, at a time when RPs were scaling 
back their development programmes in response to a number of Government 
austerity measures, including:  
 The 1% rent reduction imposed on all Affordable Housing Providers  
 Lower HE  grant allocations, available fo r Shared Ownership tenures only  
 Introduction of Universal Credit, Benefit Cap, ‘Bedroom Tax’, Local Housing 
Allowance freezes, shared room rate for under 35s and uncertainty over 
supported housing rent rates  
 Introduction of Starter Homes in affordable hou sing definitions.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.10.7  Recently there has been a change in emphasis in national policy with RPs and 
Councils being encouraged to build more affordable homes through a variety of 
initiatives including: an end to the rent reduction from 2020, greater HE  grant 
available for Social and Affordable Rent, greater certainty for higher rent levels for 
supported housing and a relaxation of borrowing rules. Historical lower levels of 
affordable housing RP led delivery can be attributed to the confusion that has gone 
befor e (especially around revenue) of the Government measures. However, it is  
considered that we are moving in a direction where the environment for investment 
through RPs and Councils is going to be more favourable.  
5.10.8  Many of the local RPs to South East Lincolns hire have good working relationships 
with both Councils and Accent Nene, Longhurst, LACE Housing and Waterloo 
Housing Group are all exploring developing all affordable schemes in the area. 
Westleigh Homes and Kaplan Property Group are both looking for land  
opportunities in the area to develop all affordable schemes in partnership with the 
Registered Providers listed above. RPs are increasingly preferring developing all 
affordable schemes to acquiring s.106 affordable stock, therefore it is presenting 
more o f a challenge in the area to ensure that all of the affordable housing delivered 
through planning gain is acquired by RPs at the preferred tenure mix to best meet 
local needs.  
5.10.9  It is difficult to predict exactly when housing will be delivered as to some ex tent it 
depends on how the market is performing. However , for South Holland there are 
projected to be 390 affordable housing completions up to March 2020. Over 60% of 
which are all affordable RP or Council led schemes. SHDC has £18 million 
budgeted for the  delivery of new affordable housing and has two schemes at 
advanced stages. For Boston there are projected to be 319 affordable completions 
up to March 2019, 60% of which are all affordable RP led schemes. These 
sche mes will be funded partly by HE  grant th rough the Affordable Homes 
Programme 2016 -21, for which Continuous Market Engagement is operating at 
present.  
5.10.10  Homes England, formerly ‘The Homes and Communities Agency’ operate funding 
rounds e.g. the Affordable Homes Programme 2015 -18 and the Shared Owne rship 
and Affordable Homes Programme 2016 - 2021 by issuing prospectus ’ and inviting 
bids from qualified investment partners. In addition they also operate Continuous 
Market Engagement for new schemes coming forward during these programmes. 
Programmes and s chemes with partners are selected on a number of factors 
including track record of partners, deliverability of individual schemes and local 
authority support. The information above demonstrates that RPs have contributed 
significantly to past affordable hou sing completions and are expected to be a major 
source of affordable housing delivery within the next few years but because policy 
at national level is evolving and funding availability uncertain for more than a few 
years in advance these levels of deliver y are difficult to predict. Both Councils will 
continue to work in partnership with the RPs to maximise all opportunities for an 
increase in the supply of affordable housing.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.10.11  Where there is evidence that the proportion of affordable housing cannot be met 
on-site, Policy 18 would enable off -site provision or a financial contribution to be 
made to enable provision elsewhere. This might be on a n allocated site through 
Policy  11 Distribution of New Housing  or through Policy  19: Rural Exception Si tes. 
Planning conditions or a Section 106 agreement will be used in the implementation 
of Policy 18 or where off -site provision or financial contributions are sought.  
5.10.12  As part of the mix of affordable housing, developments should also consider needs 
for spe cialist accommodation and how a site could contribute towards delivering 
them. This may include provision for affordable Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling 
Showpersons pitches and plots in line with any needs identified in the latest Gypsy 
and Traveller Accom modation Assessment or Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment. This would include the needs of those communities who are identified 
either within or outside the Government’s definition set out in Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites . 
Monitoring  
The number of affordable homes completed per annum  
5.11.  Rural Exception Sites  
5.11.1  The Strategic Housing Market Assessments22,23,24 and the Whole Plan Viability 
Assessment4 indicate that meeting the housing needs, particularly for affordable 
housing is a significant challenge. T herefore, promoting specific housing provision 
particularly  affordable housing (see Policy  18: Affordable Housing ) is a significant 
challenge.  
5.11.2  Policy 19 provides  a framework for considering proposals rather than identifying 
specific sites. That is because the scale and variety of specific housing needs 
throughout the numerous settlements in the spatial strategy (see Policy 1: Spatial 
Strategy ) and options for sites are substantial. Policy 19 may, however, be seen as 
a starting point by which the housing pro viders and local councils, for example, can 
work with the Housing Authorities and the Local Planning Authorities.  
Policy 19: Rural Exception Sites  
Proposals for  housing  on sites situated outside, but adjoining the defined 
settlement boundaries identified by Policy 1 will be permitted where the 
following criteria are met:  
1. the scheme would meet an identified local need for affordable housing, 
Starter Homes or specialist housing that cannot be  met within the 
settlement boundaries;  
2. the scale of the development  would be in -keeping with the role and 
function of the settlement; and  
3. pre-application engagement with the local community has been South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
undertaken to the satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority.  
Where it is demonstrated that a proportion of market housin g is necessary to 
cross -subsidise the specific identified housing need , the housing market 
proportion will be 50% or less.    
The housing need to be met will be secured by legal agreement to ensure 
that the need can be met in perpetuity and available for me mbers of the 
immediate community.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.11.3  Policy 19 provides the opportunity for a number of specific housing need gaps to be 
met. Affordable housing, in general, is likely to b e the need to be met but Policy 19 
would also allow more specific elements of housing to come forward, such as 
Starter Homes or sheltered accommodation within the social -housing rented sector.  
5.11.4  Rural Exception Sites are specific to an identified need and to a particular 
settlement; therefore local understanding o f the need and general support within 
that community will be required for proposals to be considered positively. Evidence 
will need to be provided to the Local Planning Authority and Housing Authority that 
the proposals are deliverable and that they provid e mechanisms for the specific 
local housing need to be met. Where site or financial viability constraints indicate 
that cross -subsidy through an element of market housing provision may be 
necessary the Local Planning Authority will need to be satisfied tha t there are no 
other options (e.g. funding from other sources) available. It must be evident from 
the proposal that the local affordable housing need is the focus of the proposal so 
market housing cross -subsidy should be no more than 50% of the overall sch eme.  
Monitoring  
Number of affordable and market homes committed on Rural Homes Exception Sites  
5.12.  Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
5.12.1  In Planning policy for traveller sites, 201546, the Government identifies that its 
‘overarching  aim is to ensure fair and equal treatment for travellers, in a way that 
facilitates the traditional and nomadic way of life for travellers while respecting the 
interests of the settled community’. It goes on to identify that it expects Local Plans 
to: 
 be based upon robust evidence of the likely accommodation needs of gypsies, 
travellers and travelling showpeople;  
 set targets to meet these needs;  
 identify enough sites to accommodate at least the first ten years’ needs; and  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 set out criteria to guide land supply allocations and decisions on planning 
applications.  
Policy 20:  Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
The redevelopment or change of use of an Existing Residential 
Gypsy/Traveller Site or Existing Residential Travelling Sho wperson’s Site (as 
identified on the Policies Map) will be permitted only if an assessment has 
been undertaken which has clearly shown that the site is no longer required 
to meet the accommodation needs of the Gypsy/Traveller or Travelling 
Showpersons comm unities.  
Between 2011 and 2036, evidence suggests that, in South East Lincolnshire, 
there will be a need for the provision of:  
 4 new permanent residential pitches for gypsies and travellers; and  
 1 new permanent residential plot for travelling showpeople.  
This need will be met through the development of the sites identified on the 
Policies Map and listed below:  
 Land at The Stables, Baulkins Drove, Sutton St James  allocated as a 
‘Proposed Residential Travelling Showperson’s Site’, to provide 
accommodation for  one additional household; and  
 Land at Bleu Raye Farm, Mill Gate, Whaplode Fen  allocated as a 
‘Proposed Residential Gypsy/Traveller Site’, to provide accommodation 
for four households.  
Planning permission will be granted for the development of these sites,  
provided that proposals:  
1. will be adequately provided with appropriate infrastructure such as 
electricity, drinking -water, waste -water treatment and recycling/waste 
management;  
2. will not have a significant adverse effect on the amenities of existing local 
residents or adjoining land users  (and proposals must therefore give 
careful consideration to layout, landscaping, external lighting schemes, 
and the type of business uses that would be appropriate (if mixed 
residential and business use is proposed)) ; and  
3. will be successfully assimilated into both their immediate environs and 
the wider landscape.  
Additional needs which may arise during the Local Plan period will be met 
through the determination of planning applications on other, unallocated 
sites. Planning p ermission will be granted for proposals on such sites, South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
provided that they meet criteria 1 to 3 above, and they:  
a. provide occupants with an acceptable standard of amenity;  
b. are not located adjacent to uses likely to endanger the health of 
occupants, such as a  refuse tip, water recycling centres or contaminated 
land;  
c. respect the scale of the nearest settled community;  
d. will not place undue pressure on local infrastructure;  
e. will not adversely affect heritage assets or areas of importance to nature 
conservation;  
f. will not prejudice highway safety or give rise to problems of parking or 
highway access;  
g. for sites for permanent residential use they:  
i. provide occupants with access to education, health care and 
recreational facilities, shops and employment within reasonab le 
travelling distances, preferably by walking, cycling or public transport;  
ii. are suitable (or capable of being made suitable) for mixed residential 
and business use;  
iii. are not located within Flood Zone 3a or 3b  and, if located in Flood 
Zone 2,  the Sequential and Exception Tests have been passed; and  
h. for sites for transit or stopping place use, are not located within Flood 
Zone 3b and, if located within Flood Zone 3a, the Sequential and 
Exception Tests have been passed.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.12.2  Interv iews conducted with gypsy, traveller and travelling showperson households 
for the Boston and South Holland Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessment,  2016 (GTAA)47 identify that there is a ‘known’ need for the provision 
of: 
 1 residential pitch in Boston  Borough and 4 residential pitches in South Holland 
District for gypsy and traveller households;  
 1 residential plot in South Holland District for a travelling showperson’s 
household; and  
 no new transit pitches.  
5.12.3  It is not considered necessary for the need identified in Boston Borough to be 
reflected in the Local Plan’s targets, because it can be satisfactorily accommodated 
on vacant pitches on the Redstone Traveller Site in Boston. However, the other 
‘known’ needs translate into the targets set out in Table  4 below.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
Years 1 -5 
(1 April 2011 to 31 
March 2016)  
Years 6 -10 (1 April 
2016 to 31 March 
2021)  
Years 11 -15 
(1 April 2021 to 31 
March 2026)  
Years 16 -20 
(1 April 2026 to 31 
March 2031)  
Years 21 -25 
(1 April 2031 to 31 
March 2036)  
TOTAL  
(1 April 2011 to 31 
March 2036)  
Residential pitches for 
gypsies & travellers  
(Boston Borough)  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Residential pitches for 
gypsies & travellers 
(South Holland)  0 1 1 1 1 4 
Residential plots for 
travelling showpeople 
(Boston Borough)  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Residential plots for 
travelling showpeople 
(South Holland)  0 1 0 0 0 1 
Transit pitches (Boston 
Borough)  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Transit pitches (South 
Holland)  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Table 3: Pitch and plot targets for gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople in South 
East Lincolnshire (1st April 2011 to 31st March 2036)  
5.12.4   The GTAA47 also identifies an ‘unknown’ need for up to 16 additional residential 
pitches for gypsy and traveller households (up to 3 in Boston Borough, and up to 13 
in South Holland. [‘Unknown’ needs are those which may arise from gypsy, traveller 
and travelling sho wperson’s households who were not interviewed by the GTAA 
consultants.] This ‘unknown’ need will be met by determining planning applications, 
taking into account the provisions of the NPPF9, Planning policy for traveller sites46,  
and the policies of this Local Plan (in particular Policy 20).  
Monitoring  
Net additional residential pitches for gypsies and travellers  
Net additional residential plots for travelling showpeople  
Net additional transit pitches  
Number of unauthorised encampments  
5.13.  Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Sub -Division of 
Dwellings  
5.13.1  The Housing Act 2004 provides a definition of a House in Multiple Occupation 
(HMO), which, in summary, is that it is a building or part of a building that is rented 
out by at least 3 people who are not from 1 ‘household’ (e.g. a family) but share 
some facilities such as a bathroom or kitchen.   South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.13.2  HMOs accommodating six or more unrelated individuals are unclassified by the 
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, as amended. They are 
therefore de scribed in planning terms as ‘Sui Generis’ and require planning 
permission. Policy 21 provides  a framework for determining planning applications 
for HMOs considered as being ‘Sui Generis’.  
5.13.3  Policy 21 also applies to proposals to proposals to sub -divide lar ger houses into two 
or more dwellings.  
Policy 21: Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Sub -Division of 
Dwellings  
Proposals for the creation of large Houses in Multiple Occupation and the 
sub-division of dwellings will be permitted provided that, in each case:  
1. it would not result in the loss of family -sized dwellings in high density 
residential streets of predominantly terraced and/or semi -detached 
properties;  
2. it would not significantly harm the amenities of the occupiers of adjoining 
or neighbouring prope rties by way of noise, overlooking, general 
disturbance or impact on visual amenity;  
3. it would not have a significant adverse impact on the character and 
appearance of the area, including the historic and natural environment;  
4. adequate provision is made fo r the storage and disposal of refuse and 
recycling;   
5. it would not have a significant adverse impact on the surrounding area by 
way of increased on -street parking, impaired highway safety or by 
impeding proper access to the area;  
6. the site has good access – by walking and cycling – to community 
facilities, services, public transport and local employment;  
7. an adequate standard of residential accommodation and residential 
amenity is provided for future occupiers; and  
8. adequate provision is made for the communal  gardens and amenity 
areas.  
Where all of the above criteria are satisfied, the Nationally Described Space 
Standards10 (or any successor) will be applied to ensure that the occupiers 
have adequate floor space.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.13.4  HMOs form an importan t element of South East Lincolnshire’s housing stock and 
can provide a useful low -cost form of accommodation for single persons and those South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
on low incomes. But they can result in the loss of family -sized units and a 
consequential increase in the overall numb er of units unsuited to family occupation. 
This poses serious issues for maintaining a mixed housing offer across South East 
Lincolnshire. The Strategic Housing Market Assessments22,23,24 for the Local Plan 
area signal that the greatest demand in the futur e will be for three bedroom homes. 
It is important, therefore, that an approach is taken to the creation of HMO and sub -
division of existing properties, which allows only those that do not impact upon the 
overall supply of family -sized homes. In applying t his policy, ‘family -sized dwellings’ 
means houses with 3 or more bedrooms and ‘high density residential streets’ 
should be taken as meaning streets of predominantly terraced and/or semi -
detached properties.  
5.13.5  Policy  21 also applies to proposals to sub -divide  larger houses into two or more 
dwellings. Such schemes are popular because they can provide additional smaller 
units of housing, often at less cost than new build, and can often preserve the life of 
older buildings by providing an opportunity for their re novation.  
5.13.6  However, HMOs and the sub -division of dwellings can raise a number of issues and 
problems, particularly in areas of high concentration, including: parking provision, 
waste/recycling storage and removal, privacy and visual and residential amenity  
(particularly in terms of noise generation).  
5.13.7  Any significant impact on the surrounding roads and the amenity of future residents 
and adjoining or neighbouring properties should be minimised. Furthermore, it is 
important to ensure that development takes place in appropriate locations, avoiding 
the ove r-concentration of such properties where the issues above would be 
proliferated.  
5.13.8  The NPPF9 favours development which facilitates the use of sustainable modes of 
transport. Properties should therefore have good walking and cycling access to key 
services, f acilities and a bus service (by which residents can reach such services 
and facilities). A distance of 400m is generally accepted as an appropriate walking 
distance to key services, facilities and public transport from home.  
5.13.9  Proposals for the creation of HMOs and the sub -division of existing properties into 
flats should provide satisfactory standards of living accommodation and amenity. 
This means that the property should be of an adequate size for the proposed use 
and the layout, range of facilities and e xternal amenity space should ensure an 
adequate standard of residential amenity for future occupiers. One step in achieving 
an adequate standard of accommodation is to ensure that there is adequate living 
space which complies with Nationally Described Spac e Standards set out in 
national policy10. 
Monitoring  
Number of HMOs and flat conversions refused  
The mix of sizes of housing completed compared with the Strategic Housing Market Assessment  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5.14.  Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
5.14.1  For the purpose of polic ies in the Local Plan, areas outside of defined settlement 
boundaries are designated as Countryside. The rural areas of South East 
Lincolnshire are a precious resource and, consequently, the replacement of an 
original dwelling outside a settlement boundary  will only be acceptable in certain 
circumstances .  
Policy 22: Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
Proposals for the erection of replacement dwellings outside defined 
settlement boundaries will be permitted provided that:  
1. the residential use of the building to be replaced (the original building) 
has not been abandoned;  
2. the original building is permanent, has not become derelict and is not the 
result of a temporary permission;  
3. the original building is not of architectural o r historic merit and is not 
capable of repair;  
4. the replacement building is of a high standard in terms of architectural 
detailing and materials of construction;  
5. the replacement building is positioned on a similar footprint to the 
original building unless it can be demonstrated that the re -positioning 
would have beneficial impacts such as improving the character and 
appearance of the site and its locality; and  
6. the replacement building does not exceed the floor area of the original 
dwelling by more than 40%,  unless the development is of exceptional 
quality or innovative in nature in terms of its design, use of materials and 
levels of energy efficiency.  
Where permission is granted, Permitted Development Rights may be 
removed in order to control future alterati ons or extensions that may impact 
on the appearance and character of the surrounding area.   
Reasoned Justification  
5.14.2  The landscape of South East Lincolnshire has a very rural character with extensive 
views and large open skies. In order to preserve this, it is necessary to adopt a 
policy approach to replacement dwellings in the Countryside which ensures that 
such proposals do not harm its character.  
5.14.3  Consequently, the replacement of dwellings in the Countryside will be permitted 
provided that the dwelling t o be replaced has not by its condition or subsequent use 
led to the abandonment of its residential use. Where a building has been 
demolished or has collapsed, or where because of its state of dereliction any new South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
building work would in effect be creating a completely new dwelling in the 
Countryside, its replacement will not be permitted.  
5.14.4  South East Lincolnshire’s stock of traditional and historic buildings is a finite 
resource and so, where applicable, repair or restoration of the existing building 
should b e considered in the first instance. Consequently, the applicant will be 
required to provide evidence that all options for repair and restoration have been 
explored and that demolition and replacement is the only justifiable option. This 
evidence will usual ly take the form of a structural report, ideally prepared by a 
suitably qualified professional experienced with conservation and historic buildings. 
In the case of designated and non -designated heritage assets, the proposal should 
be considered in accordan ce with Policy 29: The Historic Environment.  
5.14.5  Policy 22 will ensure that the highest standards in architecture are achieved in order 
to protect the Countryside from visually intrusive dwellings which could detract from 
the rural character of the area.  
5.14.6  The replacement dwelling should be located on a similar footprint to the dwelling 
which it replaces, unless it can be shown that a more appropriate location within the 
existing residential curtilage exists.  For instance, relocation elsewhere within the 
existi ng residential curtilage may make the replacement dwelling less intrusive in 
the rural landscape or enable it to achieve safer access to the highway. It may also 
have other beneficial environmental impacts such as the reduction of flood risk, the 
remediati on of contaminated land or the promotion of nature conservation and 
biodiversity.  
5.14.7  To help protect the character of South East Lincolnshire’s rural areas, the 
replacement of dwellings need to be controlled in terms of scale, design and access 
to ensure tha t the replacement dwelling leads to an enhancement of its immediate 
surroundings. It is important to protect the rural landscape from the intrusion of 
large dwellings as these will have a greater impact on the character of the area – 
particularly in terms of their visual impact - in comparison to smaller dwellings. If the 
size of replacements is not restricted, there is also a risk that the supply of smaller 
rural dwellings will be progressively reduced which would have a negative impact 
on meeting the obje ctive of providing housing suited to the needs of the population. 
Thus, planning permission shall not be granted for a replacement dwelling which 
exceeds the floor area of the original by more than 40%, unless the design is of 
exceptional quality or innova tive in nature in terms of its design, use of materials 
and levels of energy efficiency in order to justify an exception to the policy limit. The 
design should be sympathetic to the site itself, the surrounding area and the 
character of the wider environme nt.  
5.14.8  There is the potential for existing rural dwellings to be home to a variety of 
protected species, including bats and barn owls.  These species are sensitive to 
disturbance and therefore at risk from building works. They are also protected 
under the 198 1 Wildlife and Countryside Act (as amended), with bats being 
afforded additional protection by the Conservation of Habitats and Species 
Regulations 2010. Consequently, an ecological survey will be required where South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
species protected by law or priority species  listed under Section 41 of the Natural 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 have the potential to be present.  
5.14.9  Permitted development rights may be removed where permission is granted for a 
replacement dwelling so that control can be administered over  the size and design 
of any future alterations or extensions to the dwelling or curtilage buildings to 
ensure that any development carried out at a later date does not have a materially 
harmful effect upon the character of the surrounding area.  
Monitoring  
Number of replacement dwellings completed in the countryside  
5.15.  The Reuse of Buildings in the Countryside for Residential 
Use 
5.15.1  To promote sustainable development in rural areas, the NPPF9 requires local 
planning authorities to ‘avoid new isolated homes in the  countryside unless there 
are special circumstances’, including where such development would reuse 
redundant or disused buildings and lead to an enhancement of the immediate 
setting. It also supports the transition to a low carbon future through the conver sion 
of existing buildings.  
5.15.2  The General Permitted Development Order gives Permitted Development Rights for 
the change of use of an agricultural building to residential use in certain instances. 
Therefore, this policy only applies to proposals that are not covered by these 
Permitted Development Rights.  
Policy 23: The Reuse of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Residential Use  
Proposals for the conversion of existing buildings which are located outside 
defined settlement boundaries to residential use will be p ermitted provided 
that:  
1. the building is structurally sound and capable of conversion without the 
need for significant extension, alteration or rebuilding;  
2. the building is of architectural or historic merit or makes a positive 
contribution to the character  of the landscape, to justify conversion to 
ensure retention;  
3. the proposal is in keeping with its surroundings;  
4. the design is sympathetic to the character and appearance of the building 
in terms of architectural detailing and materials of construction; a nd 
5. development leads to an enhancement of the immediate setting of the 
building.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Where permission is granted, Permitted Development Rights may be 
removed in order to control future alterations or extensions that may impact 
on the appearance and character o f the surrounding area.  
Reasoned Justification  
5.15.3  Rural buildings, such as brick -built barns, can make a significant contribution to the 
character of an area and so there is a concern that they should not remain vacant, 
under -used or become derelict, detracting from the visual character and quality of 
the designated Countryside . Policy 23 therefore makes provision for the conversion 
and reuse of rural buildings as dwellings. South East Lincolnshire’s stock of 
traditional and historic buildings is a fin ite resource and so conversions provide the 
opportunity to retain and enhance the architectural quality and character of the 
building and its setting. In the case of designated and non -designated heritage 
assets, the proposal should also be considered in a ccordance with Policy 29: The 
Historic Environment .  
5.15.4  However, not all buildings in the Countryside are suitable for conversion as they 
may be of insubstantial construction, of poor design or not in keeping with their 
surroundings. Buildings to be converted  should be structurally sound and proposals 
which require significant extension, alteration or rebuilding will be not acceptable. 
Structural surveys may be required in order to demonstrate that a building is 
structurally sound. Proposals which would involv e rebuilding, rather than 
conversion, will be regarded as new dwellings in the Countryside and will not be 
permitted.  
5.15.5  Proposals will be required to be sympathetic to the character and appearance of the 
building in terms of architectural detailing and mate rials of construction in order to 
conserve its interest. They should also seek to optimise the potential to enhance 
the character and quality of the site. In terms of vehicular access, proposals should 
meet the requirements of the Highways Authority.  
5.15.6  Many rural buildings can be habitats for a variety of wildlife including bats and barn 
owls. These species are sensitive to disturbance and therefore at risk from building 
works. They are also protected under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act (as 
amended), with bats being afforded additional protection by the Conservation of 
Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. Consequently, an ecological survey will be 
required where species protected by law or priority species listed under Section 41 
of the Natural Envir onment and Rural Communities Act 2006 have the potential to 
be present.  
Monitoring  
Number of new dwellings completed by converting redundant rural buildings to residential use  
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
6. Vibrant Town Centres and Accessible Shops and Services  
6.1.1  South East Lincolnshire’s eight town centres and local shops and services provide 
important opportunities for shopping, leisure and socialising as well as being ke y 
drivers of the local economy . National planning policy9 identifies that t own centres 
are the preferred  location for retailing and other ‘main town centre uses’  (offices, 
leisure, entertainment, arts, culture and tourism development, and intensive sport 
and recreation uses) - this is where the majority of retail development and other 
main town centre uses a re concentrated, and where additional such development 
should go over the Local Plan period.  
6.1.2  In general, South East Lincolnshire is well provided with shopping facilities; the 
quantity and quality (in terms of accessibility and the range of retailers and r etail 
formats) is broadly appropriate to meet the needs of local people19. Most people are 
able to purchase convenience -goods (food and everyday items) within South East 
Lincolnshire, but there is a higher level of comparison -goods expenditure (clothes 
and household goods) outside the Local Plan area, although variations occur 
depending upon location and goods type. Residents have a fairly high level of 
satisfaction with current provision, but the Town Centre and Retail Capacity Study 
(2013)19 estimates tha t additional retail development will be required by 2031.  
6.1.3  However, like many other areas in the UK, town centres within South East 
Lincolnshire face a number of challenges including changing consumer behaviour, 
such as online shopping and car -based out -of-centre retail and leisure 
development. Over the Local Plan period, the area's town centres will have to take 
on new roles that continue to respond to the needs of local people, while being 
resilient to economic change.  
6.2. The Retail Hierarchy  
6.2.1  National planni ng policy9 advocates the need to develop a hierarchy of centres that 
is resilient to anticipated future economic changes, with each performing a role 
appropriate to meet the needs of its catchment area. The Local Plan defines a 
diverse network of Sub -Regio nal, District and Local Centres across South East 
Lincolnshire; each has a different character and role, but all are the most accessible 
locations in the area, and therefore are well placed to be the focus for a range of 
town -centre uses for residents in t hat settlement and those living within each 
catchment. Thriving town centres also help reduce social isolation and health 
inequalities, improve community resilience as well as foster civic pride.  
6.2.2  The main retail concentration is in Boston and Spalding Sub -Regional Centres; 
these centres will continue to be the focus of retail investment over the Local Plan 
period, as well as from investments in a range of leisure, entertainment, personal 
and professional businesses. Holbeach District Centre performs an impo rtant 
function by providing access to a wide range of retail and related services to serve 
the needs of the town and the immediate hinterland, while the Local Centres 
contain a smaller range of shops and services which support the daily needs of a South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
smaller catchment. Weekly and specialist markets in each centre generate 
significant footfall and expenditure for local businesses, and will continue to be 
supported.  
6.2.3  Elsewhere, local ‘corner’ and village shops, sometimes clustered with other local 
services, such  as a petrol station, or within a neighbourhood parade, are particularly 
important for residents in areas relatively remote from town centres and for those 
without access to a car.  
6.2.4  The General Permitted Development Order gives Permitted Development Rights for 
the change of use of retail uses to alternative uses in certain instances. Therefore, 
this policy only applies to proposals that are not covered by these Permitted 
Development Rights.  
Policy 24: The Retail Hierarchy  
Retail and other main town centre uses should be located in accordance with 
the following hierarchy, as defined on the Policies Map:  
A.   Sub-Regional Centres  
The town centres of Boston and Spalding (as defined by the Town Centre 
Boundaries) will be the locational focus for the development  of town centre 
uses; planning permission will be granted for retail, food and drink outlets, 
financial and professional services, leisure and tourist -related uses (Classes 
A1-A5, B1, D1 and D2) and residential development. The provision of markets 
and oth er appropriate initiatives that would enhance the vitality and viability 
of Boston and Spalding town centres will be supported.  
B.   District and Local Centres  
In the District Centre of Holbeach and the Local Centres of Crowland, 
Donington, Kirton, Long Su tton and Sutton Bridge, town centre uses will be 
permitted where they, on their own or cumulatively with other permitted 
development, will generate no significant harm upon the vitality and viability 
of that centre or any other centre within the hierarchy,  particularly with 
regard to their role for food shopping. The provision of markets and other 
appropriate initiatives that would enhance the vitality and viability of such 
centres will be supported.  
New development within the Sub -Regional, District and Loc al Centres will be 
expected to:  
1. be physically integrated and have good pedestrian and cycle links, with 
the rest of the centre;  
2. generate a reasonable level of footfall and be open to the public;  
3. contribute to an appropriate balance of uses;  
4. achieve an acceptable level of amenity, including provision of refuse and 
recycling facilities; and  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
5. achieve an acceptable level of highway access, parking and servicing.  
C.   Outside the retail hierarchy  
Outside the retail hierarchy, individual local shops and small  neighbourhood 
clusters of them within a settlement boundary, which meet the day -to-day 
needs of nearby residents, will be promoted. Wherever possible such new 
uses should be located in close proximity to each other, unless serving very 
local catchments e. g. corner shops.  
Outside the defined town centre boundaries, development proposals  for the 
change of use or loss of any premises or land currently or last used as a local 
shop (Class A1) will be permitted where it can be demonstrated that:  
1. there is suffic ient provision in the catchment area; and  
2. the applicant has provided clear evidence that the property has been 
openly marketed without a successful conclusion for a period of not less 
than 12 months on terms that reflect the lawful use and condition of th e 
premises . 
The vitality and viability of centres in the retail hierarchy will be maintained 
and enhanced. Proposals for retail use outside the Primary Shopping Areas as 
identified on the Policies Map, or for other main town centre uses, outside 
the town c entre boundaries and where not provided for under Policy 27, will 
be required to demonstrate their suitability through a sequential test in line 
with the National Planning Policy Framework9.  
In addition, and other than for provision under Policy  27, a rob ust assessment 
of impact on nearby town centres will be required for any retail proposal 
that:  
1. provides a retail floor space of 500sqm (net) or more outside Boston town 
centre boundary (but within Boston Borough); and  
2. provides a retail floor space of 250sq m (net) or more outside Spalding 
town centre boundary and the District and Local Centres (for Kirton within 
Boston Borough and for all other town centres within South Holland 
District).  
If planning permission is granted for retail development in an out -of-centre or 
edge -of-centre location (as defined by national policy9), the range of goods 
sold may be restricted either through planning conditions or legal agreement.  
New Local Centres  
Three new Local Centres will be required in the Sustainable Urban Extensions 
at Holland Park, Spalding; at Pin024/Pin045: Vernatts Sustainable Urban 
Extension; and at Sou006: Q2: The Quadrant, Boston. Such provision should South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
provide for local food shopping ( up to 500sqm net) and additional small 
shops, community facilities, and other local services to meet local residents’ 
day-to-day needs. The development of new centres will be required to 
consolidate and enhance the existing network and hierarchy of centres  and 
not harm their vitality and viability. Such provision should be agreed with the 
relevant Local Planning Authority in a master plan for each site.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.2.5  Within Boston and Spalding town centres are defined Primary Shopping Areas 
where  retail uses will be promoted over the Local Plan period. Primary Shopping 
Frontages are defined within each ( see Policy 26: Primary S hopping Frontages ). 
The District and Local Centres  are smaller; their defined town centres encapsulate 
the Primary Shoppin g Area, and Primary Shopping Frontages are therefore not 
appropriate.  
6.2.6  While retail uses are fundamental for attracting customers, non -retail uses, such as 
cafes and restaurants, can add to the vitality of centres. However, poorly -placed 
non-retail uses and  an over -proliferation of similar uses such as hot -food takeaways 
and betting shops, particularly within the Primary Shopping Area, can negatively 
impact on the local amenity and activity within a centre and, therefore, will be 
resisted.  
6.2.7  Accordingly, a  balanced approach to new development in town centres will be 
undertaken to promote an attractive customer experience; new uses will be 
permitted as long as the level of new development promoted is appropriate to its 
location, and does not undermine that cent re’s position in the hierarchy or the role 
of any other centre identified. Uses which attract a reasonable level of customers 
and therefore footfall will be supported, as these can generate passing trade for 
other shops and facilities in that part of a tow n centre thereby aiding the prosperity 
of the centre overall.  
6.2.8  While the overall approach is to focus as many town centre uses as possible within 
a centre, there are circumstances where some communities are reliant on l ocal 
shops and neighbourhood parades to meet their day -to-day needs. The importance 
of retaining such facilities, in areas outside town centres, but within a settlement 
boundary, is recognised in national planning policy9. In the case where a change of 
use is proposed which would result in th e loss of the only remaining facility in an 
area, justification compliant with Policy 24 will be required.  
Sequential Test and Impact Assessment  
6.2.9  It is essential that the town centres, particularly Boston and Spalding, remain the 
focus for retail growth an d for the development of other main town centre uses over 
the Local Plan period. Unless justified by Policy 27: Additional Retail Provision , new  
out-of-centre developments, extensions to existing ones, and large developments 
that are in existing centres bu t out of scale with them, have the potential to compete South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
with town centres and draw trade away from them. This prevents the creation of a 
‘critical mass’ of demand and activity in town centres, impacting on the viability of 
existing and future investment wi thin them.  
6.2.10  Therefore, the impact of proposed new town centre uses on the vitality of existing 
town centres and planned measures to improve them must be fully considered. In 
line with national planning policy9, proposals for retail development outside the 
Primary Shopping Areas (unless justified by Policy 27: Additional Retail Provision ), 
and for other main town centre uses, outside the town centre boundaries should 
first be assessed through a sequential test.  
6.2.11  Additionally, for retail development, an impact assessment may be required (unless 
justified by Policy 2 7: Additional Retail Provision ); the Town Centres and Retail 
Capacity Study (2013)19 identifies that the small scale of many centres in South 
East Linco lnshire means that impac t assessments will be required for proposals 
over 250m2 (net) sales floor space where they are not in Spalding or the District 
and Local Centres. In Boston, a slightly higher threshold of 500m2 is identified to 
reflect the size and function of the existing town centre16. The impact assessment 
should apply to the Local Authority area within which the town centre is situated. 
These thresholds will help protect the town centres from medium and large out -of-
centre food stores and other s hops which could have significant impacts. Proposals 
which will have a significant negative impact on the vitality and viability of town 
centres will not be supported.  
6.2.12  The Springfields Shopping Centre, Spalding and other out -of-town retail parks, such 
as at Wyberton Chain Bridge, Boston, do not constitute town centres, and 
consistent with national planning policy9, are not allocated a place within the retail 
hierarchy. Unless justified by Policy 27: Additional Retail Provision , any  proposals in 
these and ot her similar locations will be subject to an impact and sequential 
assessment.  
Monitoring  
Amount of floor space for town centre uses within the town centre boundaries  
Vacancy rates for retail uses within the town centre boundaries  
Amount of floor space completed for town centre uses by type, by centre and for the Local Plan 
area  
6.3. Supporting the Vitality and Viab ility of Boston and 
Spalding Town Centres  
6.3.1  Policy 25 is an enabling Policy to encourage the Boston and Spalding Town 
Centre s to evolve. It could be seen as a building block to ensure that the Town 
Centres remain in the spotlight for opportunities for retail, entertainment, commerce 
and activity where shops, businesses, restaurants and events continue to attract 
significant num bers of people.  
6.3.2  A large number of public and voluntary agencies, interest groups and stakeholders 
(including town centre residents) have an interest in vital and viable futures for South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Boston and Spalding. These include the Local Councils, County Council, 
infrastructure providers, Historic England, Civic Societies, traders and, essentially, 
the town centre users themselves. Bringing about an improving, functional and 
attractive place in which people want to live, visit and use is the basic  rationale for 
the Pol icy.      
Policy 25: Supporting the Vitality and Viab ility of Boston and 
Spalding Town Centres  
Boston and Spalding town centres will continue to be the primary 
destinations for retail, entertainme nt, markets and events while  their rich 
environmental qualit ies can be promoted, enhanced and appreciated.  
The Councils  will promote appropriate opportunities to support and extend 
the offer of the town centres as destinations through the following:  
1. Supporting the redevelopment of land within the town centre boundary 
that can provide for  retail and other town centre uses in accordance with 
the sequential test;  
2. Enhancing existing sites and ens uring changes to premises have  regard to 
the significance of heritage assets and the special interests of the 
Conservat ion Areas and their settings;  
3. Enhancing the public realm through improvements to public spaces, 
accessibility and signage;  
4. Promoting town centre events;  
5. Providing interpretation and promotional information;   
6. Supporting proposals that seek to maintain the viability and attractiveness 
of the weekly markets;  
7. Encouraging opportunities to support temporary uses in vacant premises 
in the primary shopping areas.  
The Councils in conjunction with other partners will develop partnership 
working to ensure the vitali ty and viability of the Boston and Spalding town 
centres. A review of The Town Centres and Retail Capacity Study will be 
commenced within one year of the adoption of the Local Plan to review retail 
capacity, town centre boundaries, primary shopping frontag es etc. This will 
lead to a review of the Retail section of the Plan and will advise the most 
appropriate actions for the partnership to take, e.g. masterplans, site specific 
development briefs, town centre boundary reviews etc.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reasoned Justification  
6.3.3  Policy 25: Supporting the Vitality and Viability of Bos ton and Spalding Town 
Centres provides a framework policy to encourage progressive and collaborative 
working that looks to ensure that the opportunities to enhance the town cen tres in 
the forthcoming year s are  coordinated and effective. The Town Centres are multi -
functional environments; places of work, commerce, residence, entertainment 
(during the day and into the evening) and also places of historical and architectural 
significance. Town centres, in gen eral, are also evolving all the time and their 
primary role as centres for retail, in particular, is not as significant as once was the 
case. However, both Boston and Spalding Town Centres retain their prominence in 
terms of retail, entertainment and busin ess and have actually seen minimal change 
in terms of vacant retail premises over the last ten years. But in the preceding years 
(before economic recession starting in 2008) retail vacancies were fewer.     
6.3.4  Policy 25 will help provide an approach for stimu lating renewed interest in potential 
development sites and seeking changes to and enhancing existing sites. Whilst 
provisions for new retail have been the main focus of discussions in the preparation 
of this Local Plan the Town Centres are open for all typ es of business and can be 
great places to live (e.g. at first and second floor level). Joint working through Policy 
25 is hoped to enhance and realise new opportunities.  
6.3.5  In addition the Policy aims to  bring about improvements to the public realm; the use 
and enhancement of public spaces, car parks, access routes and signage. Public 
bodies such as the Borough and District Councils, Lincolnshire County Council (e.g. 
Highways Authority) can bring forward improvements, seek wider ownership, and 
agree ways to d eliver them through collaborative working. Some improvements 
may also be proposed and brought about through local interest groups and specific 
projects.  
6.3.6  The Town Centres are not just about buildings and spaces but also about activity. 
Twice weekly markets  are held in Spalding and Boston as well as specially 
arranged market days and events. Hotels, pubs, restaurants, theatres, cinemas and 
sundry meeting places also add to the mix of activities the Town Centres support. 
Annual events and fairs bring in signi ficant numbers of people and visitors.  
6.3.7  These living environments are also historic environments which bring about a 
unique context for all the activity taking place. Interpretation and promotional 
information to enhance the experience of living in, and us ing, the Town Centres 
extend the viability of commercial activities and also the vitality of Boston and 
Spalding as places to visit.  
6.3.8  Policy 25 may also help to bring about temporary solutions to problems such as 
unused spaces that may be untidy or unsightl y or vacant premises where temporary 
window displays may enhance the ov erall appearance of the area.  
Monitoring  
Amount of floor space for town centre uses within the town centre boundaries  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Vacancy rates for retail uses in the town centre boundaries  
Amount of floor space completed for town centre uses by type, by centre and for the Local Plan 
area 
6.4. Primary Shopping Frontages  
6.4.1  The success of Boston and Spalding’s Primary Shopping Areas is strongly 
influenced by the variety and choice of shops, services and other uses within them. 
Within these areas are Primary Shopping Frontages; their principal role is to 
provide convenient and accessible shopping facilities within reasonably compact 
areas.  
Policy 26: Primary  Shopping Frontages  
The Primary Shopping Fron tages of Boston and Spalding  are designated on 
the Policies Map.  
Subject to Permitted Development Rights (or any successor)  ground floor A1 
units in the Primary Shopping Frontages should be retained predominantly 
for retail use unless it can be demonstrate d that the loss of an A1 unit, by 
change of use or redevelopment will:  
1. make a positive contribution to the vitality and viability of the Primary 
Shopping Frontage;  
2. not result in a loss of A1 floor space or frontage of a scale that 
undermines the retail fu nction of the frontage; and  
3. allow upper floors to be effectively used, including the possibility of 
independent use, where appropriate.  
The blanking out of shop windows by externally -positioned opaque blinds or 
vinyl film or by other means will not be permitted.  
Reasoned Justification  
6.4.2  Evidence shows that for a Primary Shopping Area to operate successfully, it is 
necessary for shops (in Class A1) to group together in order to enable shoppers to 
make comparisons. Primary Shopping Frontages are particularly sensitive to breaks 
in the A1 fr ontage; the clustering of non -A1 uses, such as banks, cafes and 
takeaways, particularly units of a large scale or lengthy unit frontage, can reduce 
the attractiveness of a Primary Shopping Area and can create ‘dead frontages’ 
having a knock -on effect on fo otfall and expenditure.  
6.4.3  However, under Permitted Development Rights, buildings in Classes A1 - A5, B1, 
D1 and D2 will be able to change to a number of alternative Classes (A1, A2, A3 
and B1) for a single continuous period of up to two years without requiri ng planning 
permission. Such permitted development is subject to certain conditions and is 
temporary in nature.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
6.4.4  Further Permitted Development Rights allow change of use of generally smaller 
units in specific Classes to alternative uses. These are detailed , but importantly for 
this policy include A1/ A2 units of up to 150sqm to change to A3 use and A1/A2 
units of up to 500sqm to change to D2 use  as part of the Prior Approval Process.  
6.4.5  Nevertheless, there will remain instances where the change of use of a gro und floor 
unit does not constitute Permitted D evelopment and would require the granting of 
planning permission. Policy 26 will therefore help promote the vitality and viability of 
Boston and Spalding Primary Shopping Areas by protecting A1 uses in larger u nits 
within the Primary Shopping Frontages.  
6.4.6  However, as n on-A1 uses are playing a much greater role in modern town centres, 
Policy 26 will need to ensure an appropriate mix of uses can be achieved over time 
to ensure the offer remains attractive. Appro priate non -A1 uses (e.g. banks and 
restaurants) will be supported where it remains subsidiary to the retail offer. A loss 
of A1 frontage of a scale that undermines the retail function of the frontage would 
be considered to have occurred where uses would, indi vidually or cumulatively, 
change the A1 function of that part of the frontage . For the purposes of calculating 
the proportion of retail in any given Primary Shopping Frontage, any building 
operating under a permitted temporary ‘flexible use’ at the time of  assessment will 
be considered on the basis of the Use Class it had prior to the temporary change of 
use (in accordance with Class D2 (d) of the GPDO amendment). For example, a 
retail shop (A1) which has temporarily changed its use to a cafe (A3) under 
Permitted Development Rights would still be considered as an A1 unit for the 
purposes of determining the overall percentage of retailing. The impact of any break 
will be assessed having regard to its extent, location and potential impact on 
shopper footfall a t that location and in other parts of the centre.  
Monitoring  
Amount of floor space for retail use within the primary shopping frontages  
Vacancy rates by unit in the primary shopping frontages  
6.5. Additional Retail Provision  
6.5.1  The need to identify and plan for  further retail provision within the retail hierarchy is 
fundamental to delivering the Local Plan’s priorities for sustainable growth. Based 
on trading density, Boston and Spalding have been identified as the most 
sustainable locations for retail growth ov er the Local Plan period. Accordingly, the 
Town Centres and Retail Capacity Study (2013)19 considers that no additional retail 
floor space is required in the District and Local Centres over that period.  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 
Policy 27: Additional Retail Provision  
A.   Compa rison goods floor space  
Up to 17,294 sqm (net) of additional comparison goods floor space is 
expec ted to be needed within Boston Town C entre by 2031. All provision  
should be consistent with the C entre’s scale, function and physical capacity to 
integrate ex tensions.  
Up to 10,810 sqm (net) of additional comparison goods floor space is 
expected to be required in Spalding by 2031. Approximately 3,700 sqm (net) 
will be allocated at Site SHR010: Springfields Shopping and Festival Gardens 
and developed in the peri od up to 2022 to meet the estimated need at this 
date.  
Any non -A1 uses within Site SHR010 will only be supported where the 
applicant can show that it is ancillary to the effective functioning of the retail 
allocation. A master plan will be required for th e site identified.  
Any application at Site SHR010   to meet the allocated comparison floor space 
need will be required to propose measures to enhance the site’s connections 
to Spalding Town C entre and promote the attractiveness of the town centre 
as a place  to visit  
After 2022 the outstanding requirement for 7,110 sqm (net) floor space 
should only be met by development in Spalding Town -Centre or an edge -of 
Centre location  in accordance with the sequential test . 
B.   Convenience goods floor space  
There is no quantitative need for additional convenience goods floor space in 
the Local Plan area before 2021. There is expected to be a quantitative need 
for an additional 3,365 sqm (net) floor space by 2031. Such provision should 
be provided as small -scale units of up to 500 sqm (net) either within a new 
Local Centre to ser ve a Sustainable Urban E xtension or to provide for an 
underserved area. Extensions which would take existing shops in these 
locations up to these sizes to improve their viability will be permitted.  
C.   Other Local Shops and Town Centre Uses  
Individual local shops, leisure uses and services and small neighbourhood 
clusters of them which meet the day -to-day needs of nearby residents, 
without the need to use a car, will be protected. Proposed new shop s in such 
circumstances, will be limited to a maximum 100 sqm (net) floor space, 
unless a qualitative need to remedy a geographical deficiency in the 
distribution of food shopping can be demonstrated, in which case units up to 
500 sqm (net) floor space wil l be permitted. Extensions which would take South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
existing local shops up to these sizes to improve their viability will be 
permitted, subject to the same demonstration of geographical deficiency for 
proposals over 100 sqm.  
Sub-Regional Centre  Convenience sqm (n et) Comparison sqm (net)  
 2021  2031  2031  
Boston  131 1,079  17,294  
Spalding    1,519  2,286  10,810  
 
Reasoned Justification  
6.5.2  In the food grocery sector, the pressure for additional floor space or additional large 
stores is not high19 and the future demand for convenience goods wi thin South East 
Lincolnshire is  likely to be met by existing commitments and organic growth in the 
short term. Up to 2031, additional provision should be made through small 
supermarkets or convenience stores ( of up to 500sqm net) to meet underserved 
areas or to anchor new Local Centres in the Sustainable Urban Extensions19. 
Therefore, there is no need to allocate sites for convenience floor space to meet 
any potential demand arising in the Local Plan period.  
6.5.3  In terms of comparison -goods floor space ( e.g. clothes and household goods) the 
focus should be on improving the of fer within Spalding and Boston Town C entres. It 
is envisaged that the requirement of 17,294  sqm for Boston19 can be delivered on 
redundant or u nder-used sites or as extensions to the existing retail offer within the 
town centre or at edge -of-centre locations.  
6.5.4  However, the  more compact form of Spalding Town C entre and the unavailability of 
suitab le land within or close to the Town C entre means th at the additional floor 
space cannot be accommodated in accordance with the ‘town centres first’ 
approach. As such Policy  27 provides  for additional comparison floor space at 
SHR010: Springfields Shopping and Festival Gardens; the new floor space will be 
provided within the site boundary of an established retail destination, and the 
provision of comparison goods units would help diversi fy and expand the retail offer 
at Springfields (from the current ‘outlet’ goods - end-of-line goods at reduced prices 
- primarily clothing and accessories and a more limited range of homeware 
products).  
6.5.5  This new development would also promote multi -purpos e, sustainable shopping 
trips, making good use of the existing foot and cycle network and bus service to the 
site from near by residential areas, Spalding Town C entre and the wider District. 
This also means that it would be easy for residents to access the site for work, with 
up to 500 additional jobs expected to be created by such an expansion.  
6.5.6  The Town Centres and Retail Capacity Study (2013)19 forecasts a need of 8,291 
sqm of comparison -goods floor space (net) in Spalding up to 2026, but long -term 
retail  forecasts (in excess of a five year period) are acknowledged as being 
unreliable. Therefore, a flexible approach to additional floor space is proposed. Up 
to 2,508 sqm (net) will initially be provided at SHR010 to address the immediate South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
need to 2021. A fur ther 2,892 sqm (net) will be phased for delivery between 2021 
and 2026.  
6.5.7  Identifying more land in one out -of-centre location may have an adverse impact 
upon the vitality and viability of Spalding Town C entre and constrain future growth. 
Whereas, this phase d approach to delivery will leave a quantum of floor space 
which could be taken up by other developments consistent with the ‘town centres 
first’ approach, such as through an extension to Spalding Town Centre up to, and 
after, 2026. It also allows for some  flexibility in the retail capacity predicted after 
2026, so that Spalding can take advantage of changing consumer behaviour and 
make the most of ongoing changes in the retail sector in a recovering economic 
climate. Consequently, the outstanding 5,410 sqm  (net) will remain unallocated 
pending a review of the Local Pla n informed by an update of the Retail Capacity 
Study. This approach will therefore give f avourable consideration to any Town -
Centre or edge -of-centre proposal for the outstanding floor space.  
6.5.8  While A3, A4 and A5 uses can help provide the leisure experience modern 
shoppers enjoy, it is important that their provision, particularly in edge -of-centre or 
out-of-centre locations does not undermine the  vitality and viability of the Town 
Centres. There fore, only uses ancillary to the main comparison goods provision at 
Springfields will be supported.  
6.5.9  A master plan for SHR010: Springfields Shopping and Festival Gardens should be 
agreed with the District Council; a co -ordinated approach to the delivery of  the retail 
development and associated infrastructure should be identified, including a 
package of measures capable of enhancing the visitor offer, such as support for a 
more frequent bus service and enhanced cycling infrastructure to Spalding Town 
Centre to encourage more linked trips between the two locations. All such provision 
would be secured via a s106 agreement.  
Monitoring  
Amount of floor space completed for town centre uses by type, by centre and for the Local Plan 
area  
Amount of comparison goods  floorspace completed at Springfields Shopping and Festival Gardens  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
7. A Distinctive, Greener, Cleaner, Healthier Environment  
7.1.1  The NPPF9 seeks to balance the protection and development of land. Natural and 
historic built environments should be protected from development. If development is 
necessary it should seek to protect and enhance the site’s important features, and 
its relationship with other natural and built environment sites, in order to make the 
best use of the site.  
7.1.2  Although visual appearance and th e architecture of individual buildings are 
important factors, securing high -quality and inclusive design goes beyond aesthetic 
considerations. Therefore, planning policies and decisions should address the 
connections between people and places and the commu nity facilities they provide, 
as well as the integration of new development into the natural, built and historic 
environment. The planning system can play an important role in facilitating social 
interaction and creating healthy, inclusive communities and as such should seek to 
protect existing, or provide new, built or open -space and community facilities.  
7.1.3  Planning plays a key role in helping shape places to secure reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions, minimising vulnerability and providing resilience to the 
impacts of climate change, and supporting the delivery of renewable and low -
carbon energy and associated infrastructure. This is central to the economic, social 
and environmental dimensions of sustainable development.  
7.1.4  In preparing Local Plans to meet d evelopment needs, the aim should be to 
minimise all forms of pollution (including visual) on the local and natural 
environment and where necessary remediate existing contamination. Accordingly, 
this Local Plan seeks to allocate land for development with th e least environmental 
or amenity value, where consistent with its other policies.  
7.2. The Natural Environment  
7.2.1  There are many protected sites/habitats of nature conservation importance within, 
and surrounding, South East Lincolnshire. The types and numbers are shown in the 
table below.  
Site Designation  Within South 
East 
Lincolnshire  Within 15km of 
the Local Plan 
area 
Ramsar  1 4 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  2 7 
Special Protection Area (SPA)  1 3 
Site of Special Scientific Importance 
(SSSI)  3 50 
National  Nature Reserve (NNR)  1 5 
Local Nature Reserve (LNR)  3 15 
RSPB managed/owned site  2 3 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Local Wildlife Sites (LWS)  80 320 
Table 4 : Nature Conservation Sites within the Plan Area and within 15km of the Local Plan 
area boundary  
7.2.2  Owing to the historic loss and fragmentation of habitat and the possible 
consequences of climate change, it is important that the natural environment is 
protected from avoidable development and improvements are made on a 
landscape -scale. Therefore, a designated nature conservation s ite should not be 
developed, unless in exceptional circumstances. Proposals for allocations should 
carefully consider their impact on, and their potential to contribute to, maintaining or 
enhancing biodiversity both on -site and within their locality.  
Polic y 28: The  Natural Environment  
A high quality, comprehensive ecological network of interconnected 
designated sites, sites of nature conservation importance and wildlife -friendly  
greenspace will be achieved by p rotecting, enhancing and managing natural 
asset s: 
1.   Internationally -designated sites, on land or at sea:  
a. development proposals that would cause harm to these assets will not 
be permitted, except in exceptional circumstances, where imperative 
reasons of overriding public interest exist, and  the loss  will be 
compensated by the creation of sites of equal or greater nature 
conservation value;  
b. all major housing proposals within 10km of The Wash and the North 
Norfolk Coast European Marine Site, including the Sustainable Urban 
Extensions in Boston (site Sou006 & Wes 002), Spalding  (site 
Pin024/Pin045) and Holbeach West (site Hob048), will be the subject 
of a project -level Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) to assess the 
impact of recreational pressure on The Wash and North Norfolk Coast 
European Marine S ite. This should include:  
i. locally -specific information relating to access and site sensitivities;  
Where the project -level HRA concludes that avoidance and/or mitigation 
measures are required, it is expected that:  
ii. Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SA NGs) should be 
provided on site Sou006 and Wes002, site Pin024/Pin045 and site 
Hob048 as part of their package of mitigation measures; or  
iii. all other major housing proposals should provide SANGs on -site 
and/or through a financial contribution to provide and/ or enhance 
natural greenspace in the locality ; 
iv. Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspaces should be designed in 
accordance with capacity and facility requirements in relation to South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
the developments they mitigate for, best practice elsewhere and 
relevant evidenc e. 
2.   Nationally or locally -designated sites and protected or priority habitats 
and species:  
a. development proposals that would directly or indirectly adversely 
affect these assets will not be permitted unless:  
i. there are no alternative sites that would cau se less or no harm; 
and  
ii. the benefits of the development at the proposed site, clearly 
outweigh the adverse impacts on the features of the site and the 
wider network of natural habitats; and  
iii. suitable prevention, mitigation and com pensation measures are 
provided.        
3.   Addressing gaps in the ecological network:  
a. by ensuring that all development proposals shall provide an overall 
net gain in biodiversity, by:  
i. protecting the biodiversity value of land, buildings and trees 
(including veteran trees) minim ising the fragmentation of habitats;  
ii. maximising the opportunities for restoration, enhancement and 
connection of natural habitats and species of principal importance;  
iii. incorporating beneficial biodiversity conservation features on 
buildings, where appropria te; and maximising opportunities to 
enhance green infrastructure and ecological corridors, including 
water space; and  
iv. conserving or enhancing biodiversity or geodiversity conservation 
features that will provide new habitat and help wildlife to adapt to 
climate change, and if the development is within a Nature 
Improvement Area (NIA), contributing to the aims and objectives 
of the NIA.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.2.3  Internationally designated sites, such as Ramsar sites, Special Areas of 
Conservation (SAC) and Speci al Protection Areas (SPAs), are found in the Local 
Plan area in the coastal waters of The Wash. They are the most important 
designations and must be protected from development in all but the most 
exceptional circumstances. Similar sites located beyond Sout h East Lincolnshire 
could be also adversely impacted by development activity within the Local Plan 
area through air quality or water level impacts. However, this Local Plan has been  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
subjected to a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)3 which has discounted all 
impacts except for a risk to the Wash SPA and Gibraltar Point SPA (which form part 
of the overarching Wash and North Norfolk Coast European Marine Site) from 
recreational disturbance from new residential development.  
7.2.4  The Joint Co mmittee will progress additional evidence gathering in order to 
determine whether a more strategic approach to protecting the European sites is 
required in the future. This will include monitoring any mitigation measures 
implemented, and gathering further data on ecological features of the European 
sites.  
7.2.5  Recent visitor surveys of the coastal European wildlife sites around the Wash and 
Gibraltar Point3 have highlighted that most visitors are from South East 
Lincolnshire, living within about 29km of the loca tion where interviewed and visit 
predominantly for dog walking and bird watching. The HRA and the visitor survey 
report3 predicts a 10% increase in visits to the coastal sites as a result of a 35% 
increase in new housing identified in this Local Plan. Howe ver, it is recognised that 
this is a relatively low level of housing growth in comparison to other areas where 
European sites are exposed to recreation pressure. Nevertheless, the HRA3 
highlights the risk that the growth poses to European sites, and Europe an 
legislation requires the Local Authorities to prevent adverse effects rather than 
acting once effects are present.  
7.2.6  The HRA3 therefore identifies measures that allow for a preventative approach 
whilst being proportionate and informed by available inform ation. Its 
recommendations for project -level assessment and mitigation provision hav e been 
incorporated into Policy  28, with the focus being the areas where new housing 
growth will be concentrated. A project –level Habitats Regulations Assessment shall 
be undertaken for all housing development within the Sustainable Urban Extensions  
of Boston (site Sou006 and Wes 002), Spalding (site Pin024/Pin045) and Holbeach 
West (site Hob048). Additionally, major developments elsewhere, but within 10km 
of The Wash and the  North Norfolk Coast European Marine Site  should ensure that 
adequate measures are in place to ensure its protection. Although such 
development is expected to be very low, there is a risk that a large development in 
close proximity to a sensitive part of t he site could increase recreation pressure.  
7.2.7  At project level, the HRA should identify locations where there are sensitive 
features, such as bird roost sites and key feeding areas, and ensure there are no 
risks from increased access and disturbance. This should include all access points 
and footpaths  leading from the access points, current measures to manage access 
and sensitive features. Avoidance and mitigation measures should be designed in 
response to the project level HRA. The housing shall be designed and delivered 
with adequate avoidance and mi tigation measures; Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace (SANGs) should provide a natural greenspace experience: their 
design, size and location should seek to provide recreational facilities that attract 
residents for their primary daily walking and dog  walking, drawing on best practice 
from strategic mitigation schemes and their monitoring in relation to dog walking 
facilities, route length, car parking and toilets. For example, provision of open space South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
at 4.5h/1 ,000 (see Policy 32: Community Health and Well-Being ) that links with 
existing open space and provides new footpaths that link with the existing footpath 
network allowing resi dents to walk for about 2 – 5km. This is  the common distance 
for dog walking  found by the Visitor Survey and  could help encourage residents to 
visit The Wash and the North Norfolk Coast European Marine Site less often, 
minimising pressure on the site.  The former Wash Estuary Strategy Group 
produced a Green Infrastructure Master Plan which contains maps and 
docum entation covering South East Lincolnshire.  The maps show what is recorded 
although there may be unrecorded sites that are beneficial as well. They are a 
starting point in identifying what is available and what Green Infrastructure gaps 
may be usefully clo sed as part of any HRA undertaken for Sustainable Urban 
Extensions and Major planning applications. They also show links to the Wash on 
the Linear Public Access Maps.  
7.2.8  The Wash is also covered by the East Inshore and East Offshore Marine Plan11. It 
overlaps  with the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan because the Marine Plan11 
extends to the mean high -water spring line and the Local Plan area to the mean 
low-water spring line. It will seek to protect The Wash from marine development but 
it is necessary that t he Local Plan protects it from direct or indirect effects such as 
air-borne or water -borne pollution and visitor disturbance. These factors might 
undermine the conservation characteristics for which the sites were originally 
designated and should be consid ered in a project -level Habitats Regulations 
Assessment.  
7.2.9  South East Lincolnshire’s nationally and locally -designated wildlife sites provide 
different levels of protection for a growing range of protected and priority habitats 
and species. Nationally protec ted sites, including Surfleet Lows SSSI, The Wash 
NNR and Havenside LNR, will continue to be protected and enhanced, consistent 
with national legislation and the objectives in their management plans, while Local 
Wildlife Sites and Local Geological Sites ha ve local protection. ‘Local’ Sites are 
determined locally but their significance for nature conservation may be far greater 
because of their varied qualities. While SSSIs are designated on a representative 
basis i.e. it is only necessary to designate a sit e representing one of each type of 
habitat, every Local Site that meets the site selection criteria is designated; in this 
way Local Sites ‘fill the gap’ in other designation systems.  
7.2.10  Nature Improvement Areas (NIAs) can be designated to create joined -up an d 
resilient ecological networks at a landscape scale. At present, there  are no NIAs in 
South East Lincolnshire but potential exists for designation during the lifetime of the 
Local Plan: for example, the South Lincolnshire Fenlands.  
7.2.11  Additionally, within S outh East Lincolnshire there are a number of environmental 
projects:  
 Two RSPB reserves at Freiston Shore and Frampton Marsh;  
 Two Woodland Trust woodlands at Enos Wood and Westgate Wood;  
 The South Lincolnshire Fenlands Partnership aims to restore and re -create up 
to 800 ha of Lincolnshire's lost wild fenlands between Bourne and Market South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Deeping. This includes the Willow Tree Fen Nature  Reserve in South Holland, 
which is owned and managed by the Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust;  
 The Boston Woods Project seeks to pla nt an area of 1200 ha with a mixture of 
woodland and grassland around the west and north of Boston. At present, about 
40 ha of land has been acquired and planted;  
 The Fens Waterways Project seeks to link Lincoln and Ely with an inland 
waterway. Currently,  a lock has been constructed to link the tidal section of the 
River Haven with the Black Sluice navigation. The next stage, linking the Black 
Sluice navigation with the River Glen, near Guthram Gowt in South Holland, will 
require improvement of the upper r eaches of the existing water course and a 
new section of water course to be excavated. Another stretch will be required to 
link the Welland and the Ouse. Although this project is tourist -related, it will also 
help connect habitats.  
7.2.12  Protecting, enhancing, b uffering and connecting these designated and non 
designated sites, either within or outside South East Lincolnshire, by using 
improved direct linkages, such as footways or waterways, or new stepping -stone 
habitats, will help enhance the quantity, quality a nd extent of the priority habitats 
and species in South East Lincolnshire identified under the UK Post -2010 
Biodiversity Framework48, Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act (2006), the Lincolnshire Nature Strategy49 and the Lincoln shire 
Natural Environment Strategy50.  
7.2.13  There are also opportunities to increase the stock of protected and priority habitats 
and species through well -designed new developments. Provision of open space 
and wildlife friendly greenspace, including the use of some types of sustainable 
drainage systems (SuDS) and landscape buffers can also help establish healthy 
ecological networks for a wider range of species and habitats.  
7.2.14  Development can also incorporate a number of simple, low -cost measures to 
deliver biodive rsity benefits and enhance priority habitats and species, such as, the 
use of bat roost boxes, green roofs or walls, and integrating nesting opportunities 
into buildings and green infrastructure. The use of swift bricks on new 
developments in Boston in par ticular, would help minimise the decline in swifts, a 
priority species. This positive approach will also help the Local Planning Authorities 
fulfil their ‘biodiversity duty’ (identified by the Natural Environment Rural 
Communities Act 2006) and help improv e biological resilience to climate change. 
Good practice can be found in the Climate Change Adaptation by Design - A Guide 
for Sustainable Communities51 and Planning for a healthy environment – good 
practice for green infrastructure and biodiversity52. 
7.2.15  Improvements to the natural environment may not always be undertaken as part of 
a built development. Sometimes the community decide to provide new habitat(s), 
such as the Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust at Willow Tree Fen, or the Boston Woods 
project that prov ide multiple benefits. In addition to improving biodiversity and 
resilience to climate change, community projects can foster community cohesion, 
learning opportunities and health and well -being, as well as encouraging more 
tourists to South East Lincolnshi re.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Monitoring  
Number of applications refused owing to their impact on the natural environment  
Number of hectares of mitigation where planning permission granted on protected sites  
Number of hectares of restoration, enhancement or connection of habitats  and ecological networks  
Number of Hectares of Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace  
Number and type of biodiversity enhancement  features incorporated into buildings  
7.3. The Historic Environment  
7.3.1  Much of the land in South East Lincolnshire is drained marsh  and fen. It is 
characterised by flat, open landscape, divided by drainage features and highways. 
There are relatively few trees and as a consequence tall buildings such as old 
windmills, and church towers/spires are visible in the landscape over large 
distances.  
7.3.2  Within the marsh and fen there were areas of higher land where the older market 
town and other settlements in South East Lincolnshire were founded. Once the 
marsh and fen was drained, from the 17th century onwards , a strong mercantile 
economy grew up. As a result, the area has a diverse historic environment with a 
rich variety of heritage assets: Archaeology, Scheduled Monuments, Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas which contribute to local identity and character. 
In addition there are non desig nated heritage assets and potential for new 
archaeological remains to be found during development, that add to the local 
context. Table 5 identifies the number of registered Parks and Gardens, 
Conservation Areas, Scheduled Monuments, Listed Buildings in So uth East 
Lincolnshire.  
Site Designation  Number  
Registered Park and Garden  2 
Conservation Areas  24 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments  43 
Listed buildings  1,029 
Table 5: Heritage Assets within South East Lincolnshire  
 
7.3.3  Table 6 shows there are a number of these heritage assets that are at risk28. It also 
shows that an above average proportion of Conservation Areas, Scheduled 
Monuments and Listed Buildings are ‘at risk’ in South East Lincolnshire, compared 
to England28. 
 Boston 
Borough  South Holland 
District  England  
 Number   
Registered Parks and Gardens  0 0 95 (5.7%)  
Conservation Areas  2 (18.2%)  2 (15.4%)  496 (6.2%)  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments  2 (14.3%)  4 (13.7%)  2,640 (13.3%)  
Grade I and Grade II* Listed 
Buildings (including places of 
worship at risk)  6 (12%)  8(1.5%)  2,097(0.6%)  
Table 6 : Registered Parks and Gardens, Conservation Areas, Scheduled Monuments and 
Listed Buildings (Grade I and II*) on the Heritage at Risk Register (2015)  
 
7.3.4  It is important that these heritage assets are protected from inappropriate 
development and development proposals serve to sustain and enhance them, in 
order to reduce the number considered to be at risk.  
Policy 29: The Historic Environment  
Distinctive elements of the South East Lin colnshire historic environment will 
be conserved and, where appropriate, enhanced. Opportunities to identify a 
heritage asset’s contribution to the economy, tourism, education and the 
local community will be utilised including:  
 The historic archaeological  and drainage landscape of the Fens;  
 The distinctive character of South East Lincolnshire market towns and 
villages;  
 The dominance within the landscape of church towers, spires and historic 
windmills;  
To respect the historical legacy, varied character an d appearance of South 
East Lincolnshire’s historic environment, development proposals will 
conserve and enhance the character and appearance of designated and non -
designated heritage assets, such as important known archaeology or that 
found during developm ent, historic buildings, conservation areas, scheduled 
monuments, street patterns, streetscapes, landscapes, parks (including 
Registered Parks and Gardens), river frontages, structures and their settings 
through high -quality sensitive design.  
A.   Listed Buildings  
1. Proposals to change the use of a Listed Building or to alter or extend such 
a buil ding will be granted where the Local Planning A uthority is satisfied 
that the proposal is in the interest of the building’s preservation and does 
not involve activi ties or alterations prejudicial to the special architectural 
or historic interest of the Listed Building or its setting.  
2. Proposals involving the demolition of Listed Buildings will not be 
permitted, unless in an exceptional case, or wholly exceptional case  
(depending on their grade) where a  clear and convincing justification 
is made in line with national policy9. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
3. Proposals that affect the setting of a Listed Building will be sup ported 
where they preserve or better reveal the significance of the Listed 
Build ing. 
B.   Conservation Areas  
Proposals within, affecting the setting of, or affecting views into or out of, a 
Conservation Area should prese rve (and enhance or reinforce , as 
appropriate) features that contribute positively to the area’s character, 
appearan ce and setting. Proposals should:  
1. Retain buildings/groups of buildings, existing street patterns, historic 
building lines and ground surfaces;  
2. Retain architectural details that contribute to the character and 
appearance of the area;  
3. Where relevant and pr actical, remove features which are incompatible 
with the Conservation Area;  
4. Retain and reinforce local distinctiveness with reference to height, 
massing, scale, form, materials and plot widths of the existing built 
environment;  
5.  Assess, and mitigate against, any negative impact the  proposal might 
have on the townscape, roofscape, skyline and landscape;  
6. Aim to protect trees, or where losses are proposed, demonstrate how 
such losses are appropriately mitigated against.  
C.   Archae ology and Scheduled Monuments  
1. Proposals that affect archaeological remains, whether known or potential, 
designated or non -designated, should take every reasonable step to 
protect and, where possible, enhance their significance.  
2. Planning applications for such development should be accompanied by an 
appropriate and proportionate assessment to understand the potential 
for and significance of remains, and the impact of development upon 
them.  
3. If initial assessment does not provide sufficient information, deve lopers 
will be required to undertake field evaluation in advance of determination 
of the application. This may include a range of techniques for both 
intrusive and non -intrusive evaluation, as appropriate to the site.  
4. Wherever possible and appropriate, mi tigation strategies should ensure 
the preservation of archaeological remains in -situ. Where this is either 
not possible or not desirable, provision must be made for preservation by 
record according to an agreed written scheme of investigation submitted South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
by the developer, undertaken by a suitably qualified person, and 
approved by the Local P lanning Authority.  
5. Any work undertaken as part of the planning process must be 
appropriately archived in a way agreed with the Local Planning A uthority.  
D.   Registered Parks and Gardens  
Proposals that cause substantial harm to a Registered Park or Garden, or its 
setting will not be permitted, unless in an exceptional case, where a clear and 
convincing justification is made in line with national policy.  
E.   Enabling Development  
Proposals for enabling development adjacent to, or within the setting of, a 
heritage asset and used to secure the future of a heritage asset through 
repair, conservation, restoration or enhancement will only be permitted 
where :-  
1. it wil l not materially harm the heritage values of a heritage asset or its 
setting;  
2. it avoids detrimental fragmentation of management of the heritage asset:  
3. it will secure the long -term future of the place and, where applicable, its 
continued use for a sympath etic purpose;  
4. it is necessary to resolve problems arising from the inherent needs of the 
heritage asset   rather than the circumstances of the present owner or the 
purchase price paid  
5. sufficient subsidy is not available from any other source;  
6. it is demo nstrated that the amount of enabling development is the 
minimum necessary to secure the future of the heritage asset and that its 
form minimises harm to other public interests; and  
7. the public benefit of securing the future of the heritage asset through 
such enabling development decisively outweighs the dis -benefits of 
breaching other policies within the Local Plan and national policy  
F.   Development Proposals  
Where a development proposal would affect the significance of a heritage 
asset (whether designat ed or non -designated), including any contribution 
made to its setting, it should be informed by proportionate historic 
environment assessments7 and evaluations (such as heritage impact 
assessments, desk -based appraisals, field evaluation and historic build ing 
reports) that:  
1. identify all heritage assets likely to be affected by the proposal;  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2. explain the nature and degree of any effect on elements that contribute 
to their significance and demonstrating how, in order of preference, any 
harm will be avoided, minimised or mitigated;  
3. provide a clear explanation and justification for the proposal i n order for 
the harm to be weighe d  against public benefits; and   
4. demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been made to sustain the 
existing use, find new uses, or mitigate the extent of the harm to the 
significance of the asset; and whether the works proposed are the 
minimum required to secure the long term use of the asset.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.3.5  Boston, Spalding and older settlements within the Local Plan area were founded on 
higher ground within the fens with a network of public rights of way. Bost on 
Borough has an important trading history that can be seen in the fabric and layout 
of the town. The town had strong trade links, which still exist today through the 
modern port operation, with Europe that resulted in the town, at one time, being the 
second port to London. Spalding's early industries were salt making and fishing.  
7.3.6  The River Witham and River Welland are important to Boston and Spalding 
respectively, as they are the reason for the towns’ existence, being located at the 
lowest bridging point of fertile land in the fens. The second important aspect is the 
drainage of the land which provided the fertile land upon which the agricultural 
industry grew. This drove the development of Boston and Spalding and other 
smaller settlements on the drained f ens and marshes.  
7.3.7  The areas of the T owns adjacent to the rivers have a number of large dwellings that 
were originally owned by wealthy merchants and warehouse buildings. There were 
also riverside wharves where trading occurred. Many are now listed and/or fo rm 
part of Conservation Areas within the centres of Boston and Spalding as well as 
within other parts of the smaller towns and villages.  
Listed Buildings and their Setting  
7.3.8  A proposal to demolish a listed building, or to alter or extend it in a way that wou ld 
affect its special character, requires Listed Building Consent. If the proposal also 
involves 'development', planning permission is required and, in that case, the Local 
Planning Authority will wish to consider applications for Listed Building Consent a nd 
planning applications concurrently.  
7.3.9  Proposals to alter or extend any Listed Building will be assessed against the need 
to preserve the special architectural or historic interest which led to the building 
being listed. There is a general presumption in favour of the preservation of Listed 
Buildings, and consent to demolish or partly demolish such buildings will only be 
granted in exceptional circumstances.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
7.3.10  The setting of a Listed Building may be affected by development. It is important that 
applications for planning permission for development affecting Listed Buildings, or 
their settings, include full details of the proposal so that an informed decision can be 
reached.  
Conservation Areas  
7.3.11  The effect of a proposed development on the character or appearance  of a 
Conservation Area is always a material consideration in the determination of 
planning applications. All development should preserve or enhance that character 
or appearance. It is also important that the spaces around and within the 
conservation area are retained, where they add to its character.  
7.3.12  Demolition within a Conservation A rea should only be allowed in exceptional 
circumstances, and will normally be permitted only if the Council is satisfied that the 
proposal for redevelopment is acceptable and  there is an undertaking to implement 
it within a specified period.  
7.3.13  Development within Conservation A reas must respect the local character and be 
carefully designed to respect the setting, through consideration of scale, height, 
massing, alignment, and us e of appropriate materials. Keeping valued historic 
buildings in active and viable use is important for both the maintenance of the 
building concerned an d the overall character of the Conservation A rea. Proposals 
to change the use of a building might there fore be supported, where features 
essential to the special interest of the individual building are not lost or altered to 
facilitate the change of use.  
7.3.14  The Local Planning Authorities will continue to keep under review Conservation 
Areas in the Local Plan area, and where appropriate, designate new areas. New or 
updated Conservation Areas Appraisals will define the boundaries and analyse the 
special character and appearance of the area. The Local Planning Authorities will 
seek to target areas and properties which are identified through Appraisals and 
influence change in a proactive way, wherever opportunities arise. In some cases, 
where the status of a Conservation Area has become inappropriate or ineffective, 
designation may be removed. Management plans and other guidance will be used 
to help guide the future of a Conservation Area, particularly in areas experiencing 
development pressure, to supplement Historic England advice.  
Archaeology  
7.3.15  Local Planning Authorities may require developers to assess the potenti al impacts 
of their proposal on archaeological remains in order to reach a decision on a 
development proposal. Where archaeological impacts are indicated, developers  are 
expected to work with the Local Planning A uthority to devise a scheme for 
mitigating s uch impacts, which may form part of a planning condition or a planning 
obligation. Such conditions are designed to ensure that such remains are either 
preserved in situ or recorded.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
7.3.16  All archaeological work should be based on a thorough understanding of th e 
available evidence, and of the local, regional and national contribution it makes. 
The known and potential archaeological heritage of the area is recorded by the 
Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record. This and other sources, such as the 
Lincolnshire A rchives, The Lincolnshire Archaeological Handbook and the 
Lincolnshire Historic Landscape Characterisation should be used to inform all 
proposals and decisions.   
Registered Parks and Gardens  
7.3.17  The Register includes sites of particular significance that are g ardens, grounds and 
other planned open spaces. The emphasis of the Register is on 'designed' 
landscapes, rather than on planting or botanical importance. Historic parks and 
gardens are a fragile and finite resource: they can easily be damaged beyond repair  
or lost forever. Registration is a 'material consideration' in the planning process, 
meaning that planning authorities must consider the impact of any proposed 
development on the landscapes' special character.  
Enabling Development  
7.3.18   ‘Heritage at Risk’ incl udes grade I and II* List ed Buildings, Listed places of 
Worship, Conservation Areas, Archaeology and Scheduled Monuments, Registered 
Parks and Gardens  as well as other buildings, structures and sites who are known 
to be at risk as a result of neglect, deca y or inappropriate development. Proposals 
that either secure the future of heritage ‘at risk’ (on the regional Heritage at Risk 
Register28), or prevent assets from becoming ‘at risk’ in the first place will be 
encouraged where the significance of the asset  can be adequately protected in line 
with section E of the policy.  
Development Proposals  
7.3.19  In addition to the advice outlined above this part of the policy outlines the 
information that is required to support applications.  
7.3.20  Development that complements initi atives being actioned or prepared to enhance 
the quality of heritage assets; for example, the shop front grant scheme for 
properties around the Market Place and surrounding streets in Boston and the 
implemented scheme for shops in Spalding, Crowland, Holbe ach and Long Sutton. 
Several  assets and the overall street -scenes have benefitted . In addition schemes 
to restore and adapt the buildings at St Botolph's Church, Boston and Algarkirk and 
Benington parish churches have improved community and heritage touris m 
facilities. The construction of the Boston Barrier, near to Boston Port, will allow 
better use of the river for leisure purposes and the development of existing heritage 
assets to tell the drainage and trade stories of the town.  
7.3.21  The Local Planning Author ities will encourage other proposals that either secure 
greater public access to local heritage assets or provide interpretation relating to 
assets and/or new development that promotes the educational, recreational and/or South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
tourism potential of local agricul tural and cultural heritage, through sensitive 
management and enhancement of heritage assets. Particular support will be given 
to schemes that conserve and enhance the setting of heritage assets and 
archaeological remains most ‘at risk’ through neglect, de cay or other threats. 
Opportunities for heritage assets to mitigate, and adapt to, the effects of climate 
change will be assessed against the impact of the proposal on the significance of 
the heritage asset.  
7.3.22  Owing to the flat landscape church towers and sp ires and the remaining traditional 
wind mills are dominant in the landscape. It is important that new development 
respects these buildings by not undermining their dominance in the landscape and 
also maintains views of them.  
Monitoring  
Number of planning a pplications refused for not conserving or enhancing designated or 
undesignated assets  
Number of planning applications refused for having an adverse impact on listed buildings or sites of 
special historic or archaeological interest  
Number of planning permissions granted for the demolition of listed buildings/buildings in 
conservation areas  
Number of planning applications refused for having an adverse impact upon the dominance of 
church towers, spires and traditional windmills  
7.4. Pollution  
7.4.1  All new development must take into account the potential environmental impacts on 
people, buildings, land, air and water arising from the development itself, existing 
land uses and any former use of the site, including, in particular, adverse effect s 
arising from pollution.  
Policy 30: Pollution  
Development proposals will not be permitted where, taking account of any 
proposed mitigation measures, they would lead to unacceptable  adverse 
impacts upon:  
1. health and safety of the public;  
2. the amenities of the area; or  
3. the natural, historic and built environment;  
by way of:  
4. air quality, including fumes and odour;  
5. noise  including vibration;  
6. light levels;  
7. land quality and condition; or  
8. surface and groundwater quality.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Planning applications, except for development within the curtilage of a 
dwelling house as specified within Schedule 2, Part 1 of The Town and 
Country Planning (General Permitted Development)(England) Order 2015, or 
successor statutory instrument, must include an assessment of:  
9. impact on the proposed development from poor air quality from 
identified sources;  
10. impact on air quality from the proposed development; and  
11. impact on amenity from existing uses.  
Suitable mitigation measures will be provided, if required. Proposals will be 
refused if impacts cannot be suitably mitigated or avoided.  
Development proposals on contaminated land, or where there is reason to 
suspect  contamination, must include an assessment of the extent of 
contamination and any possible risks. Proposals will not b e considered 
favourably unless the land is, or can be made, suitable for the proposed use.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.4.2  Development will impact local amenities, and could, depending on the use, impact 
on a wider area. Development may be also impacted by the are a immediately 
around the site. For instance uses that emit fumes, noise and odours have the 
ability to detrimentally impact on neighbouring uses, and if carried on the wind, 
those further afield. New sources of noise can also raise overall noise levels.  
Similarly new or upgraded lighting may cause extra light pollution for those who are 
near to the site. In some cases very bright flood lighting can be seen well away from 
the site, which adds to the sense of urbanising the countryside.  
7.4.3  In conjunction with Policy 2: Development Management  it is important to assess 
proposed new uses to prevent, or minimise impact on amenities by way of: air 
quality, light levels, noise, odour and vibration. Air quality and odour issues should 
be discussed with Environmental H ealth Officers. Noise assessments will be 
required where it is considered there is a risk of noise disturbance, following advice 
from Environmental Health Officers. Solutions may require, in combination with the 
requirements of Policy 3: Design of New Deve lopment , careful design of buildings, 
layout of the site and suitable plant or machinery to remove or reduce impacts and 
should be discussed with Environmental Health and Planning Officers. In addition 
for lighting, the visual impact of the lanterns and li ght pollution can be ameliorated 
by careful design and layout of the lighting scheme, including the use and 
positioning of suitable lighting fitments which prevent light spilling upwards and 
outwards from the area to be lit. Visual issues can benefit from screening, including 
the use of existing and augmented landscaping belts. If planning permission is 
granted, the suggested solutions may require conditioning to ensure continued 
protection of amenities. Where impacts cannot be suitably mitigated, planning South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
permission will be refused as in some cases the only solution may be identifying a 
better site with fewer constraints.  
7.4.4  Measures to address impacts upon soil can be found in ‘ A Construction Code of 
Practice for the Sustainable Use of Soils on Construction Sites’59 or successor local 
or national guidance .  There are also a number of contaminated sites across South 
East Lincolnshire, which, if remediated, could reduce the pressure on green field 
land, which is mostly Grade 1 and 2 agricultural land. Land affe cted by 
contamination may pose an unacceptable risk to human health, the natural 
environment, including groundwater, the built environment and economic activities, 
through its impacts on the users of the land, and on neighbouring users. Land 
contamination,  or the possibility of it, is therefore a material planning consideration 
in taking decisions on planning applications. Where development is proposed on a 
site which is known, or has the potential to be affected by contamination, a 
preliminary risk assessm ent shall be undertaken as the first stage in assessing the 
risk. Preliminary risk assessments and any subsequent additional information shall 
be carried out in accordance with the Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Pollution Advisory 
Group (YALPAG) Document ‘Deve lopment on Land Affected by Contamination’53 
supported by YALPAG ‘Verification Requirements for Cover Systems’54 and 
YALPAG ‘Verification Requirements for Gas Protections Systems’55, or successor 
local or national guidance.  
7.4.5  New activities need to be deterr ed in certain areas based on their intrinsic hazard to 
groundwater. The hazard may result from a combination of the activity type, its 
duration and the potential for failure of controls. Additionally, new development 
should not pose an unacceptable risk of  pollution to groundwater from sewage 
effluent, trade effluent or contaminated surface water. This also applies where the 
discharge will cause pollution by mobilising contaminants already in the ground. 
The Environment Agency’s, ‘Approach to Groundwater Pr otection’56, or successor 
local or national guidance, highlights best practice.  
7.4.6  There are two Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) in Boston, at Haven Bridge 
and Bargate Bridge, owing to traffic emissions. Car ownership levels are high in 
South East Lincol nshire and therefore traffic levels are likely to grow with more 
development. This will have an impact on air -quality levels, if unmitigated. There is 
now a strong base of scientific evidence that particulate air pollution, of which 
vehicle emissions form part, is a contributor to premature death57. The report shows 
an annual attributable death rate of 25,002 in England, 387 in Lincolnshire and 87 
in South East Lincolnshire. For South East Lincolnshire this amounts to 843 life 
years lost. Consequently, ther e is a strong need to mitigate the impact of poor air 
quality on new development and avoid new development increasing air pollution at 
locations inside or outside a declared AQMA.  
7.4.7  The East Midlands Air Quality Network has prepared ‘Air Quality and Emissio ns 
Mitigation – Guidance for Developers June 2017’58.  It provides a methodology for 
assessing all forms of development and potential air pollution mitigation. It achieves 
this by dividing proposed developments into three categories, minor, medium and 
majo r, using the Department for Transport Threshold Criteria for Transport South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Assessments. Minor and Medium sized development consider the impact from 
exposure to poor air quality from identified sources and how this can be mitigated 
by the design of the developm ent and also mitigate worsening air quality by the 
incorporation of suggested suitable building services and construction protocols. 
Major development will be required to undertake a full Air Quality Assessment and 
will need to undertake additional measure s that may be required by planning 
condition or Planning Obligation.  Therefore, all applications, except residential (C3) 
extensions, shall consider the implications of this, or successor local or national 
guidance, on the proposed development and in cons ultation with Environmental 
Health, Highways and Planning Officers provide the relevant level of mitigation, 
briefly explained in a mitigation statement.  
7.4.8  Waste disposal is a Lincolnshire County Council function and will be managed by 
the Lincolnshire Miner als and Waste Local Plan1. The proportion of waste that is 
being diverted to composting and recycling in South East Lincolnshire is increasing.  
Monitoring  
Number of applications refused owing to environmental impact  
Number  of AQMAs in South East Lincolns hire 
Number of contaminated sites developed  
7.5. Climate Change and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
7.5.1  There is an increasing need for South East Lincolnshire to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change. The Government has set ambitious targets for reducing carbon 
dioxide emissions and increasing the proportion of electricity from renewable 
sources. National guidance is found in the NPPF9, the UK Marine Policy 
Statement60 and the National Policy Statement for Renewable Energy61. The East 
Inshore and East Offshore Mar ine Plan11 will also be relevant. The reduction of 
emissions in South East Lincolnshire may be tackled by carefully siting 
development to encourage cycling, walking and the use of public transport; 
providing energy -efficient buildings; and developing renew able energy schemes.  
 
Policy 31: Climate Change and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
A.   Climate Change  
All development proposals will be required to demonstrate that the 
consequences of current climate change has been addressed, minimised and 
mitigated by: 
1. employing a high -quality design;  
2. the adoption of the sequential approach and Exception Test to flood -risk 
and the incorporation of flood -mitigation measures in design and 
construction to reduce the effects of flooding, including SuDS schemes for South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
all ‘M ajor’ applications;  
3. the protection of the quality, quantity and availability of water resources, 
including for residential developments, complying with the Building 
Regulation water efficiency standard of 110 litres per person per day;  
4. reducing the need to  travel through locational decisions and, where 
appropriate, providing a mix of uses;  
5. incorporating measures which promote and enhance green infrastructure 
and provide an overall net gain in biodiversity as required by Policy 28 to 
improve the resilience of ecosystems withi n and beyond the site.   
B.   Renewable Energy  
With the exception of Wind Energy t he development of renewable energy 
facilities, associated infrastructure and the integration of decentralised 
technologies on existing or proposed structure s will be permitted provided, 
individually, or cumulatively, there would be no significant harm to:  
1. visual amenity, landscape character or quality, or skyscape 
considerations;  
2. residential amenity in respect of: noise, fumes, odour, vibration, shadow 
flicke r, sunlight reflection, broadcast interference, traffic;  
3. highway safety  (including  public rights of way);  
4. agricultural land take;  
5. aviation and radar safety;  
6. heritage assets including their setting; and  
7. the natural environment.  
Provision should be made for  post -construction monitoring and the removal 
of the facility and reinstatement of the site  if the  development ceases to be 
operational.  
Proposals by a local community for the development of renewable and low -
carbon sources of energy, in scale with their c ommunity’s requirements, 
including supporting infrastructure for renewable energy projects, will be 
supported and considered in the context of contributing to the achievement 
of sustainable development and meeting the challenge of climate change and 
agains t criteria B1 -7. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reasoned Justification  
Climate Change  
7.5.2  The consequences of current and future climate change require careful 
consideration. Accordingly, proposed development should be designed with a view 
to minimising and mitigating the effects of climate change. It is expected that 
climate change will produce warmer wetter winters and warmer drier summers.  
7.5.3  The site -specific Flood Risk Assessment will identify the flood risk and whether 
different parts of the site have more or less potential flood d epth. This information 
should be used to influence the layout of the scheme and position of the buildings, 
open space and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), if employed. Lincolnshire 
County Council as Lead Local Flood Authority are implementing the Minis terial 
Statement on Sustainable Drainage S ystems of 18 December 2014.  By providing 
storm -water storage to reduce the risk from surface -water flooding to the 
development and its neighbours, SuDS have the twin effect of slowing water 
discharge, and allowing  some recharge of groundwater levels.   
7.5.4  Water supply has been improved with new infrastructure to the Local Plan area.   
However, the Environment Agency indicates that South East Lincolnshire is a 
Water Stressed Area62. Therefore, it is considered necessary  to require the optional 
water efficiency standard of 110 l itres per person per day. Water stress can be 
helped by employing rainwater and grey water conservation and recycling 
measures in new development to reduce the consumption of wholesome water.   
7.5.5  Mixed -use schemes and the design and position of new development will enable 
better integration with public transport or cycle networks. This will provide 
opportunities to avoid car travel, which will help reduce the air quali ty issues 
referred to in Polic y 30: Pollution , and aid he alth and well -being (see Policy  32: 
Community Health and Well -being) as well as being a way to minimise future 
climate change.  
7.5.6  The impact of higher temperatures can be minimised by the orientation of buildings, 
the choice of wind ow size and position, roof overhangs, or other physical features 
such as the use of trees (see Policy 3: Design of New Development ). Ground cover 
can also slow groundwater evaporation and, along with trees, provide habitat to 
reinforce, or provide, new hab itat networks (see Policy 28: The Natural 
Environment ).  
Renewable Energy  
7.5.7  South East Lincolnshire’s p rogress in relation to  the Government target for 30% of 
electricity used from renewable sources, 15% of all energy used from renewable 
sources and the 34% cut in greenhouse gases by 2020 and 80% by 2050 is 
contained within the ‘South East Lincolnshire’s Carbon Challenge’.  
7.5.8  The Low Carbon Energy Opportunities mapping for onshore wind undertaken in 
March 2011 by ‘Land Use Consultants’, shows some potential alon g the Wash South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
shoreline and along the western and southe rn boundary of the Plan A rea. However, 
the Landscape Character Assessments undertaken for Boston BC and South 
Holland DC indicate the Wash shoreline as moderately or highly sensitive to 
change or highly unsuitable for wind development respectively. In addition a recent 
application in this location was not determin ed owing to radar issues not bei ng 
resolved. The Wash contains an RAF bombing range and there are RAF stat ions 
outside, but close to the Plan A rea.  The potential along the western and southern 
boundary of the plan area is also restricted by a windfarm which has consent at 
East Heckington, but not yet implemented, which with Bicker Fen will produce 35 
wind turbines in close proximity to each other . Along with Tritton Knoll and Viking 
Link they connect to Bicker Fen Substation, which raises unknown capacity issues. 
Cumulative landscape impact is also likely with further wind farm development 
between Deeping St Nicholas and Wryde Croft wind farms as well as impact on the 
setting of Crowland Abbey, which is Grade 1 Listed and a Scheduled Monument. 
Also nearby an application at West Pinchbeck was not determined ow ing to 
unresolved impact on bio diversity. Historically Boston BC has only received one 
application, which was approved at Bicker Fen, and South Holland has received 
three wind farm proposals which have been constructed at Deeping St Nicholas, 
Gedney Marsh and Tydd St Mary in addition to the two referred to above which 
have not been determined o wing to unresolved issues. Therefore, for these reasons 
the ‘Suitable Area of Search’ for wind farm development, referred to in the 
Ministerial Statement of 18 June 2015, has not been identified owing to the 
evidence showing little potential beyond what ha s been developed.  
7.5.9  South East Lincolnshire is within The Fens National Character Area. The Local Plan 
Area is notable for its large -scale, flat, open landscape with extensive vistas to level 
horizons. The level, open topography shapes the impression of huge  skies which 
convey a strong sense of place, tranquillity and inspiration. Planning proposals shall 
assess their implications against the information contained in the: - Landscape 
Character Assessment of Boston Borough63 or the Strategic Landscape Capacity 
Study for South Holland64, as well as the Lincolnshire Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Project65, the Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record (HER), the 
Boston Town and Rural Historic Environment Baseline Studies and the 
Conservation Area appraisals ( see Policy 29: The Historic Environment ) to protect 
landscape character and quality, skyscape and visual amenity.  
7.5.10  In addition proposals can cause changes to visual outlook, emit noise, fumes, odour 
and vibration; produce shadow flicker, sun light reflectio n and broadcast 
interference; and traffic issues on highways of unsuitable width and construction. 
Therefore, it is important that proposals assess their impact individually and in 
combination with other similar developments on: residential amenity; highwa y 
safety, aviation and radar safety, and heritage assets. In addition all proposals use 
land and so lower quality agricultural land should be used and the natural 
environment / biodiversity shall be protected and enhanced .   
7.5.11  There is little woodland in Sou th East Lincolnshire but wood fuel is an important 
source of clean renewable energy, subject to it being sourced from trees and woods South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
which have been managed in an environmentally -sustainable way and preferably 
certified as such by a reputable certificatio n body (e.g. Forest Stewardship Council).  
7.5.12  Pilot schemes to create innovative and low -cost, low -carbon energy schemes in 
rural communities will be supported provided impacts can be made acceptable and 
they have community support in Neighbourhood Plans or Ne ighbourhood 
Development Orders.  
Monitoring  
Number of planning permissions approved for renewable and low carbon energy  
Number of developments approved that minimise and mitigate the impacts of climate change  
Number of residential schemes that are designed to meet Building Regulations Water Efficiency 
Standard of 110  litres per person per day   
7.6. Community, Health and Well -being  
7.6.1  People's health and well -being is influenced by a broad range of factors, including:  
 their genetic inheritance;  
 the quality of the home and wider environment in which they live;  
 access to health and other services;  
 whether they feel able to achieve personal goals and take part in society;  
 whether they feel financially and personally secure;  
 whether they have rewarding employmen t; 
 the amount of physical exercise they take; and  
 diet, smoking, and alcohol use.  
7.6.2  The health issues and priorities for South East Lincolnshire are set out in the 
Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment66 and Joint Health and Wellbeing 
Strategy for Li ncolnshire67, and in ‘Health Profiles’ for Boston Borough and South 
Holland. They identify that life expectancy is around the County average, but that 
this varies significantly for people living in the most and least de prived parts of the 
Local Plan A rea. Particular problems in South East Lincolnshire are excess weight 
in both children and adults, unhealthy diets, low levels of physical activity, and poor 
access to key services in the more rural parts  of the Local Plan A rea. Death rates 
from coronary heart disease, stroke and road traffic accidents are relatively high.  
Policy 32: Community, Health and Well -being  
Development shall contribute to: the creation of socially -cohesive and 
inclusive communities; reducing health inequalities; and improving the 
community’s health and well -being. To this end,  development  will not be 
permitted unless it  (where possible and appropriate):  
1. protects and enhances existing public rights of way, and creates new links 
to the rights of way network; and  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
2. creates environments which:  
i. discourage crime and disorder, and do  not create the fear of crime;  
ii. encourage healthy eating and local food growing;  
iii. are accessible to all sections of the community;  
iv. facilitate walking, cycling and public transport use; and  
v. encourage community use.  
Where a development will increase the need for community facilities 
(education, childcare, teenage services, emergency services, social care, 
health care, libraries, museums, other cultural facilities, places of worship, 
community halls, sports facilities,  recreational open space, or other green 
infrastructure),  it will not be permitted unless it  (where necessary) supports 
the provision of new  facilities, and/or the enhancement of existing facilities in 
accordance with Policy 5. In the case of sports facili ties, recreational open 
space and other green infrastructure, provision will be required in 
accordance with the standards set out below.  
 Hectares / 1,000 additional 
persons  
Amenity Greenspace  0.75  
Provision for children and young 
people  0.10  
Park and Garden  0.10  
Allotments  0.30  
Churchyards and Cemeteries  0.57  
Natural and Semi natural Green Space  4.50  
  Number / 1,000 additional persons  
Sports Hall (33x18x7.6m internal)  1/20,000  
Swimming pool (25x13m)  1/32,500  
Indoor Bowling Green (6 rink)  1/35,000  
Indoor Tennis (4 court)  1/140,000  
Squash Courts  1/16,000  
Gym  1/10,000  
Village Hall  1/2,500  
Athletics Track (400m)  1/250,000  
Synthetic turf pitch (101.4x63m)  1/30,000  
Outdoor Bowling Green  1/4,500  
Outdoor Tennis  1/3,000  
Adult Football Pitch (1.2h)  1/4,650  
Junior Football Pitch (0.75h)  1/4,000  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Mini Football Pitch (0.2h)  1/10,000  
Rugby Pitch (1.25h)  1/9,000  
Cricket Pitch (1.2h)  1/10,000  
Golf Course (18 holes)  1/30,000  
As first preference, this provision should be made in a suitable location on -
site. Where on -site provision is not feasible or suitable, consideration will be 
given to a financial contribution towards the creation of a new facility nearby, 
or the improvement of an existing nearby facility. Whenever new provision is 
made,  appropriate mechanisms must be put in place to ensure its satisfact ory 
maintenance and management.  
The redevelopment or change of use of an existing community facility will be 
permitted only if:  
1. an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown th at the 
facility is:  
a. surplus to requirements; or  
b. not economically viable; or  
c. unfit for purpose; and  
d. in the case of recreational open space, does not make an important 
contribution in amenity, visual or nature conservation terms; or  
2. the loss resulting from t he proposed redevelopment or change of use will 
be replaced by equivalent or better provision (in terms of quantity and 
quality) in a suitable nearby location; or  
3. (in the case of sports  facilities or recreational open space) the 
redevelopment or change of use is for alternative sports or recreational 
provision, the need for which clearly outweighs the loss.  
The development of new community facilities  will be supported, provided 
that they are located so as to be:  
1. as close as possible to the community they will serve;  
2. readily accessible by public transport, on foot, and by bicycle;  
3. compatible with nearby uses and the character and appearance of the 
neighbourhood; and  
4. located and designed to enable (where possible)  shared use with other 
services/facilities.  
The Proposed Cemetery/Playing Field Extension shown on the Policies map 
(Inset Map No.18 – Gosberton) will be developed as a 1.26 -hectare extension 
to the neighbouring playing field and a 0.64 -hectare extension t o the 
neighbouring cemetery in conjunction with the development of Housing South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reserve Site Gos011.  
Reasoned Justification  
7.6.3  Planning decisions can potentially impact on many of the factors that impact on 
people’s health and well -being either directly or indire ctly, and national policy9 
makes it clear that Local Plans are expected to take proper account of health and 
well-being issues. To this end, such issues have been taken into account 
throughout the Local Plan, but this policy seeks to tackle four particular  topics.  
7.6.4  Firstly, it looks at the ways in which development should contribute to the creation 
of a healthy community, which is defined in the NPPG10 as ‘a good place to grow up 
and grow old in. It is one which supports healthy behaviours and supports 
reduc tions in health inequalities. It should enhance the physical and mental health 
of the community and, where appropriate encourage:  
 active healthy lifestyles that are made easy through the pattern of deve lopment, 
good urban design, places for food growing, a nd is accessible by walking and 
cycling and public transport;  
 the creation of healthy living environments for people of all ages which supports 
social interaction. It meets the needs of children and young people to grow and 
develop, as well as being adapta ble to the needs of an increasingly elderly 
population and those with dementia and other s ensory or mobility impairments.  
7.6.5  Applicants must consider the potential health impacts of their development at the 
earliest possible stage of drawing up their proposal s. If significant adverse impacts 
are identified, applicants must (as part of their planning application) show how 
these impacts will be mitigated.  
7.6.6  Secondly, it seeks to ensure that development which will increase the need for 
community facilities will sup port their provision - whether through newly -built or 
enhanced existing facilities. The need for such facilities will be established by 
consultation with service -providers and/or by reference to up -to-date evidence. 
Where there is the risk that developer c ontributions to the provision of facilities will 
affect the viability of a proposal, the provisions of Policy 6: Developer Contributions  
will be taken into account.  
7.6.7  Thirdly, it seeks to guard against the loss of existing, valued community facilities. 
Such losses will be permitted only if it can be demonstrated that the facility is no 
longer needed or will be replaced elsewhere nearby, or (in the case of sport or 
recreational facilities) the redevelopment or change of use will retain the facility in 
sport or  recreational use, albeit of a different type.  
7.6.8  Lastly, it sets out the particular criteria against which proposals to build new 
community facilities will be judged.  
Monitoring  
Planning permission granted for the extension of Cemetery and open space at Gosberton  
Number of planning applications refused because they have an unacceptable impact on the criteria  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Number of planning applications approved for new and/or the enhancement of community facilities  
Number, area, and area/1,000 people by open space  type 
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
8. Efficient and Effective Transport  
8.1.1  National planning policy9 sets out the importance of balancing the transport system 
in favour of sustainable modes. Promoting walking, cycling and public transport 
gives people a real choice about how they travel,  and can also generate health, 
social -inclusion and air -quality benefits, particularly important within Bargate Bridge 
and Haven Bridge Air Quality Management Areas in Boston. However, national 
planning policy9 recognises that solutions will vary from urba n to rural areas.  
8.1.2  This is particularly important in South East Lincolnshire, where key roads, including 
the A16, A52 and the A17, are the point of arrival for those travelling by road from 
the East Midlands and the East of England. They are also heavily us ed to connect 
communities; 81.5% of households in South East Lincolnshire have access to a car 
(compared to 74.2% nationally)15, and it is expected that the car is likely to remain 
an essential mode of transport for residents, particularly within the more remote 
parts of the rural area.  
8.1.3  The highways network also provides important routes for businesses, such as the 
agricultural and horticultural industries that use the network to move goods and 
freight to, from and across South East Lincolnshire. Roads such  as the A17 and the 
A52 are also important tourist routes during the summer to both the Lincolnshire 
and Norfolk coasts. As a result, parts of these key routes experience high traffic 
flows and congestion at peak times.  
8.1.4  Within the Boston and Spalding buil t-up areas, the bus network is relatively good 
with fully accessible IntoTown services operating, while the InterConnect services 
operate regularly along the key inter -urban corridors (e.g. Spalding – Holbeach – 
Sutton Bridge). Across the rural areas, the demand -responsive CallConnect 
services provide pre -bookable, flexible feeder services to local centres and onward 
connections to the larger urban centres. However, services typically remain very 
limited in the evenings and at weekends.  
8.1.5  The Joint Line railw ay running through Spalding provides connections with 
Peterborough, and has recently been upgraded to provide increased freight 
capacity. However, the increased freight services together with the large number of 
level crossings in South Holland have an adv erse impact on other parts of the 
transport network, slowing traffic flows at certain times. Meanwhile, the recently -
upgraded Poacher Line (within Boston Borough) has stations at Swineshead, 
Hubberts Bridge and Boston, providing well -used connections to Li ncoln, 
Grantham, Sleafor d and Skegness in Lincolnshire.  
8.1.6  The 4th Lincolnshire Local Transport Plan (LTP4) (2013/14 - 2022/23)26 and 
complementary transport strategies for Boston and Spalding45,44 provide an 
approach to the provision and improvement of trans port and access for each town 
and the surrounding area . Developed jointly by Lincolnshire County Council and the 
relevant Local Authority, as well as with key stakeholders and through wider public 
engagement,  the strategies:  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 address existing issues and support proposals for significant growth in each 
town in the short, medium and long -term;  
 cover provision of improved and sustainable transport policy, services and 
infrastructure;  
 are designed to support economic development a iding the long -term prosperity 
of Boston town, Spalding and their surrounding areas;  
 propose interventions which can be delivered over a range of time frames as 
each town expands, and provides a sustainable framework for transport 
infrastructure investment  in Boston and Spalding for the next 20 years or so;  
 emphasise potential partnerships to delivery and how the planning process can 
be used to enable economic development and deliver supporting transport 
interventions, whilst maintaining Boston and Spalding  as high -quality places in 
which to live and work.  
8.2. Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network  
8.2.1  This Local Plan reinforces the national approach9 promoting sustainable 
alternatives to the car through new development, whilst recognising that as a 
predomi nantly rural area, the private car will remain the dominant form of transport, 
and as such, improvements to the highway network will be needed.  
Policy 33: Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network  
The Local Planning Authorities will work with partners to make the best use 
of, and seek improvements to, existing transport infrastructure and services 
within, and connecting to South East Lincolnshire, having considered first 
solutions that are based on better promotion and management of the 
existin g network and the provision of sustainable forms of travel. To achieve 
this, the following priorities and actions have been identified:  
A.   For the road -based transport network this will be by:  
1. working with the Local Highway Authority to militate against congestion 
at pinch points and continuing to actively manage roads under its control;  
2. securing the delivery of new local access roads to open -up allocations and 
other locations for development;  
3. enabling the delivery of the Northern and Southern sections of  the 
Spalding Western Relief Road, associated junctions and crossing points;  
4. enabling the delivery of Phase 2 of the Boston Distributor Road, 
associated junctions and crossing points;  
5. enabling the delivery of improvements to the A17/A151 Peppermint 
junctio n, Holbeach and associated new access junction on the A151; and  
6. identifying safeguarding routes on the Policies Map, within which  sections 
2 and 3 of the Spalding Western Relief Road and Phase 3 of the Boston South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Distributor Road w ill be delivered (outside thi s Plan period). Any 
development that would prejudice the design of this infra structure will 
not be permitted.  
B.   For the rail -based transport network this will be by working with Network 
Rail, train operators and community rail partnerships to:  
1. improve i nter and sub -regional links to neighbouring centres by ensuring 
that the area is served by high -quality rail transport links;  
2. enhance connectivity between other forms of sustainable travel and the 
rail network by providing improved interchange facilities; and 
3. investigate the potential to improve connectivity to Spalding railway 
station;  
4. seek to secure improved rail services as part of the new East Midlands 
franchise due to commence in October 2018.  
C.   For cycling, walking and other sustainable transport this will be by:  
1. protecting existing footpaths, cycle routes and public rights of way from 
development;  
2. improving connectivity to create a more coherent walking and cycling 
network through the provision of new multi -user routes, including:  
i. between Fenside Road, Boston town centre and Beech Wood;  
ii. alongside the South Forty Foot Drain, Boston;  
iii. along the former Boston -Woodhall Spa railway line;  
iv. between Market Way, Pinchbeck, and Woolram Wygate, Spalding; and  
v. alongside the Coronation Channel (east bank), Spaldin g;  
vi. along West Elloe Aven ue and Enterprise Way, Spalding.  
3. ensuring that major new developments provide for walking and cycling 
routes and/or links to existing networks, to key public transport corridors 
and to transport interchanges;  
4. protecting the ‘key pu blic transport corridors’ and supporting the ongoing 
provision, and, where appropriate, extension of bus services, in 
partnership with bus operators; and  
5. helping to ensure the continuous and safe operation of the Port of Boston 
and the Port of Sutton Bridg e. 
To demonstrate compliance with this policy, an appropriate Transport 
Assessment and associated Travel Plan should be submitted with proposals. 
The form will be dependent upon the scale and nature of the development 
and agreed through early discussion wi th the Local Highway Authority.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
All development should contribute to the delivery of necessary transport 
infrastructure, either directly, where appropriate, or indirectly such as 
through developer contributions or CIL payment.  
Reasoned Justification  
Local  highway network  
8.2.2  The quality of the road network is central to facilitating vehicle as well as 
sustainable and public transport movements. It is therefore in the wider interest to 
have a road network that is as free -flowing as possible. In the first instan ce, better 
use will be made of the existing network, for example, by maximising the capacity of 
the roads in the Spalding core.  
8.2.3  However, as part of the delivery of a safer and more efficient highway network and 
to promote the successful and sustai nable gro wth of the Local Plan A rea, it will be 
necessary for Policy 33 to provide for the following major highway infrastructure 
schemes. These schemes are also promoted by LTP426 and the Spalding and 
Boston Transport Strategies44,45 as expected to start by 2036, through the delivery 
of new development, (but are expected to be completed in the long -term, beyond 
this Local Plan period):  
A. Spalding Western Relief Road  
Over the Local Plan period, the Southern section should be delivered through the 
Holland Park developm ent (which is under construction for housing development). 
The first part of the Northern section is expected to be delivered through the 
development of the Vernatts Sustainable Urban Extension (see Policy  15: Vernatts 
Sustainable Urban Extension ).  
B. Boston  Distributor Road  
Over the Local Plan period, Phase 1 (which is under construction) is expected to be 
delivered through Q1: The Quadrant. Additional parts of the highway infrastructure 
(for Phase 2) is expected to commence in parallel with the development of Q2: The 
South West Quadrant (Site: Sou006) and north of the South Forty Foot Drain (Site: 
Wes002)  (See Policy 13: South West Quadrant Sustainable Urban Extension 
(Sou006) and Policy 14: South of North Forty Foot Drain Sustainable Urban 
Extension (Wes002 )). 
Corridors will be safeguarded to ensure that later sections of these roads, including 
their junctions and crossings, can be accommodated outside this Local Plan period. 
To ensure that an appropriately designed route can be accommodated any 
development that would be prejudicial to the design of the later sections of these 
roads will not be permitted. Developer contributions are expected to be used to 
enable delivery, to be secured via legal agreement with involved developers and 
landowners, as well as th e Local Highway Authority. Other funding will be secured, 
where appropriate, to help facilitate delivery in the shortest possible time frame.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
C. A17/A151 highways improvements (Peppermint Junction), near Holbeach  
This scheme is expected to commence in Spring  2017; enhanced traffic flow and 
road safety will be secured, and will also open -up the adjoining Hob048: Holbeach 
West Sustainable U rban Extension (see Policy 16 ) for residential development, and 
the adjoining HO002: Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone for empl oyment and 
educational development. Planning permission has been granted for the scheme 
and partial funding has been secured through the Greater Lincolnshire Growth 
Deal. Additional funding is expected to be secured through developer contributions.  
8.2.4  Project -level HRA will be required for these schemes to check for impact pathways 
and to ensure no adverse impacts upon The Wash and the North Norfolk Coast 
European Marine Site (see Policy 28: The Natural Environment ). 
8.2.5  Proposals for other new roads and/or juncti ons elsewhere will be supported, where 
it can be demonstrated that the schemes are necessary, viable, and will also 
improve the economic prosperity of the area. In all cases, schemes should be 
supported by complementary sustainable and public transport ini tiatives.  
Walking and cycling provision  
8.2.6  Providing safe and convenient access to a comprehensive and attractive foot and 
cycle path network can help encourage greater use, particularly for local journeys 
that may otherwise have been made by private car. Ot her sustainability, health and 
transport objectives identified in this Local Plan can also be delivered.  
8.2.7  Enhancing access on foot or bicycle to town centres, schools, shops, leisure 
facilities and places of work, particularly in Boston town and south -east Spalding, 
and improving opportunities for multi -modal journeys to/from transport interchanges 
will continue. Existing Public Rights of Way, footways and cycle routes will be 
safeguarded consistent with the Lincolnshire Rights of Way Improvement Plan68. 
New provision, including for the England Coastal Trail, will be supported.  
8.2.8  All major development should incorporate high -quality walking and cycling routes, 
ensuring connection to the existing network, where practicable. This will be 
particularly important at  the Sustainable Urban Extensions where the opportunity to 
provide significant extensions to the multi -modal network can be achieved. Such 
measures should be identified through the master plan for each location.  
Public Transport  
8.2.9  Bus services play an import ant role in tackling congestion and improving access 
across South East Lincolnshire, particularly for those who may not have access to a 
car. Expansion of the IntoTown services along key public transport corridors in 
Boston and Spalding, and the InterConne ct services in Holbeach, or as extensions 
to these routes, may be required at the Sustainable Urban Extensions. Subsidies to 
support an initial extension to services or to help provide for community -based 
transport elsewhere may be sought through developer  contributions.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Rail Network  
8.2.10  The relatively limited rail coverage and service experienced in South East 
Lincolnshire still has an important role to play for the 385,000 people who made 
trips from its four stations in 2014 -1525. The new East Midlands passen ger 
franchise (expected to begin in October 2018) will provide an opportunity to lobby 
for improvements to passenger services along the Joint Line through Spalding, and 
along the Poacher Line through Boston Borough, to help realise the benefits recent 
investment could bring to service times, particularly to the East Coast Main Line via 
Grantham and Peterborough.  
8.2.11  The Poacher Line Community Rail Partnership is expected to continue to work with 
its partners to deliver a range of initiatives to encourage modal switch to rail in the 
short -medium term.  
8.2.12  Meanwhile, recent significant investment by Network Rail has led to the substantial 
increase of up to fifteen additional rail -freight services a day passing through 
Spalding, leading to more ‘downtime’ at level cros sings and the disruption of the 
road network. It is expected that this will be alleviated in the long -term by the 
Spalding Western Relief Road, particularly by the introduction of railway -bridge 
road crossings.  
Boston and Sutton Bridge Ports  
8.2.13  It is expecte d that the ports of Boston and Sutton Bridge will continue to handle a 
variety of cargoes for local and international markets over the Local Plan period. To 
ensure their unique role is maintained, land will be safeguarded for their continued 
operation and expansion. Complementary employme nt land is iden tified by Policy 
7: Improving South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land Portfolio . 
8.2.14  To demonstrate how accessibility, mobility, parking and transport -related matters 
have been considered and taken in to account in new development, a Transport 
Assessment and Travel Plan should be submitted with planning applications that 
are likely to generate significant transport impacts. A Design and Access Statement 
should address issues for all other schemes. Advice o n the level of detail required 
should be confirmed through early discussion with the Local Planning Authority 
and/or the Local Highway Authority.  
Monitoring  
CO2 emissions per head  
Number of AQMAs  
Number  of planning permissions granted with an approved Tr avel Plan  
Number of electric vehicle charging points provided in association with new development  
No of permissions granted with new or improved access facilities for the disabled  
8.3. Delivering the Boston Distributor Road  
8.3.1  The Boston Distributor Road (BDR) is a long term highway development 
programme, in the main, led by, and facilitated by, development opportunities. Its South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
completion is likely to extend well beyond the 2036 end date of this Local Plan but a 
significant sectio n is expec ted to be completed within the P lan period.  
8.3.2  An alternative route around Boston has been a long held aspiration and the 
opportunity to bring such a route to the fore through this Local Plan has been a 
significant factor in assessing development op portunities. The 4th Lincolnshire Local 
Transport Plan (LLTP) provides the statutory context for this approach in proposing 
that the Local Plan be prepared by assessing whether development opportunities to 
meet development needs might also support the deli very of a Distributor Road for 
Boston. A western route for the Distributor Road is shown to be the best option as it 
is better integrated with the existing highway network. The eastern route also has 
more constraints with marginally better agricultural lan d and marginally worst flood 
risk (e.g. hazard in terms of rapid inundation from the Haven). The land 
development options being submitted through the Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment process have also been far fewer and less comprehensive 
on the eastern side of the urban area than to the west.  
8.3.3  The BDR is also one of many proposals in the Boston Tra nsport Strategy (BTS) 
(2017) linked with improving accessibility and better use of the strategic highway 
network. The BTS was updated in 2017 to hav e the same time frame as the Local 
Plan. Many of its proposals are at the option stage with delivery mechanisms yet to 
be determined. However the Local Plan can assist in several ways, e.g. helping to 
deliver a secondary school on the western side of the u rban area (and so reducing 
cross town traffic), incorporating improvements to accessibility in new development 
(e.g. though Policy 33: Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network) and by 
helping to deliver part of the BDR. Also linked to the improvemen ts to the strategic 
highway network is the need to address poor air quality at the two Air Quality  
Management Areas in Boston.    
Policy 34: Delivering the Boston Distributor Road  
The Boston Distributor Road (BDR) will be delivered in three phases (as 
shown on the Plan: Indicative Layout Boston Distributor Road). The first two 
phases  are expected to happen in the P lan period up until 2036.  
The three phases are as follows:  
Phase 1:  A16 to London Road through the development known as Q1;  
Phase 2:   London Road to West End Road (on the southern perimeter o f the 
SUE site known as Sou006) and from Gilbert Drive to the North Forty Foot 
Drain (through the SUE site known as Wes002);  
Phase 3:  North Forty Foot Drain to the A16 north of Boston. Phase  3 also 
include s highway improvement options from West End Road which may 
include new infrastructure to the A52 and beyond to the North Forty Foot 
Drain section of highway.  
Highway design for the BDR will be in accordance with the Design Manual for South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Roads and Bridges as r equired by the Highways Authority.  
Reasoned Justification  
8.3.4  Phase 1 of the BDR is under construction as part of the Q1 mixed use 
development. The two sections of Phase 2 of the BDR are also part of the 
Sustainable Urban Extensions (SUE) Policies (Policy 13: South West Quadrant 
Sustainable Urban Extension (Sou006) and Policy 14: South of North Forty Foot 
Drain Sustainable Urban Extension (Wes002)).  Policies 1 3, 14 and 3 3: Delivering a 
More Sustainable Transport Network  do not specify any delivery phasing for the 
BDR sections because they are part of accessing and opening up development 
opportunities. The developers of both Sou006 and Wes002 expect that all or most 
of their sites will be developed in the P lan period. The  Whole Plan Viability 
Assessment undertaken for the Local Plan suggests that the costs for these 
sections of the BDR are achievable as part of the open ing up costs.  The SUE site 
Wes002 will be linked to Gilbert Drive which has been built and designed as a  7.3m 
width carriageway. This is the current design standard for a residential distributor 
road and future sections will need to meet the standards required by the County 
Council Highway’s Authority.  
8.3.5  Phase 3 of the BDR is expected to take place beyond 2036  and the preparation of 
the Local Plan has explored whether land use options and sites might be 
forthcoming. Strategic sites were presented as possible options during the 
preparation leading up to the Publication Draft. Phase 3 also includes the 
considerat ion of highway improvements from West End Road which may include 
new highway infrastructure and bridging effectively from the A52 through to the new 
BDR highway provisions at the North Forty Foot. However the provisions of this 
Local Plan are for part of t he BDR in terms of both infrastructure and function. It is 
acknowledged that Phase 3 of the BDR will require the examination of options in 
greater detail. The need for this is likely to be part of the preparation of a Local Plan 
review or as part of a comp letely new Local Plan.  
Monitoring  
Length (kilometres)  of the Boston Distributor Road delivered within each five year period (by phase)  
Progress with funding applications for the delivery of the Boston Distributor Road  
8.4. Delivering the Spalding Transport St rategy  
8.4.1  The Spalding Transport Strategy 2014 (the STS)44, finalised in September 2014, 
was developed jointly by Lincolnshire County Council and South Holland District 
Council (SHDC).  
8.4.2  The STS provides a comprehensive approach for the improvement and provision of 
transport and access for Spalding and its surrounding area, including the delivery of 
the Spalding Western Relief Road (SWRR). It was prepared with a view to 
addressing existing  issues and supporting proposals for significant growth in the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
town in the short, medium and long term.  The STS is designed to be a 
complementary package of measures that can be delivered through a range of 
supportive activities led by the relevant party including highway authority, planning 
authority, other public body or developer/ landowner interests.  
8.4.3  Accordingly, from the outset the STS was developed in close cooperation by 
Lincolnshire County Council (LCC), SHDC and other key stakeholders, and throug h 
wider public engagement. The adoption of this approach at an early stage was 
intended to ensure that the STS would complement and support other local and 
national policies, including the emerging South East Lincolnshire Local Plan.  
8.4.4  Policy 35  therefore cr eates a mechanism for securing developer contributions 
towards the delivery of the variety of complementary solutions to current transport -
management issues identified in the STS.  
Policy 35:  Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy  
A. In accordance with  Policy 15  and Policies Map Inset No. 2: Spalding and 
Pinchbeck, the housing allocations Site Pin024: Land north of the Vernatt’s 
Drain and Site Pin045: Land west of Spalding Road will be required to 
contribute to the delivery of Section 4 and 5 of the SWR R in accordance with 
the Local Highway Authority’s approved SWRR Delivery Strategy, subject to 
viability69.  
In respect of these allocations, SHDC  and the Local Highway Authority will 
seek to secure formal agreements with relevant developers/landowners on 
financial and other contributions. How ever, if necessary, the A uthorities will 
also consider the use of statutory powers, including compulsory purchase, to 
ensure delivery of the SWRR.  
Development proposals for these allocations which do not meet the detai led 
requirements set out in the SWRR Delivery Strategy or which compromise the 
strategic role of the road will not be permitted.  
B. In accordance with Policy 6, Policy 15  and Inset Map 2: Spalding and 
Pinchbeck, the following housing allocations and all developments for 11 or 
more dwellings, or which have a combined gross floor space of more than 
1,000 sqm, or non -residential development of 1 ,000 sqm or more floor space 
(gross), granted planning permission on unallocated sites within the 
designated settlement boundaries for Spalding and Pinchbeck, will be subject 
to financial contributions towards the funding of projects featured in the 
STS44, or any successor:  
 Site Mon005:  Land south of Horseshoe Road;  
 Site Mon008: Land north of Bourne  Road;  
 Site Pin002: Land north of Market Way;  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Site Pin019: Land east of Surfleet Road;  
 Site Pin025: Land east of Spalding Road;  
 Site Pin050: Spalding Lifestyle, Spalding Road;  
 Site Pin065: Bi rchgrove Garden Centre, Surfleet Road;  
 Site Stm004: Land east of Spalding Common;  
 Site Stm010: Land west of Spalding Common; and  
 Site Stm028: The Elders.  
Financial contributions to the non -SWRR schemes identified in the STS, as 
prioritised by the Local Hig hway Authority, will be secured through legal 
agreements, subject to the provisions o f Policy 6 . Their calculation will be 
subject to viability.  
Development proposals for these sites which do not include appropriate 
financial contributions to secure delive ry of identified off -site traffic - 
mitigation schemes will not be permitted.  
C.  Other development proposals for sites situated outside of the designated 
settlement boundaries for Spalding and Pinchbeck , which would have a 
detrimental impact on traffic man agement in the Spalding area , will not be 
permitted without South Holland District Council securing contributions 
towards the Local Highway Authority’s identified off -site mitigation schemes 
from such proposals in accordance with the relevant provisions se t out in B.  
of this policy.                                                                                                                                                                                          
Reasoned Justification  
8.4.5  The STS highlights the importance of the proposed SWRR, which will link the 
B1172 (Spalding Com mon), in the south -west of the T own to the B1356 (Spalding 
Road) in the north. This road scheme is an integral part of the 4th Lincolnshire Local 
Transport Plan26, and is identifie d as one of four major schemes within Lincolnshire 
in the short to medium term. LCC, as the Local Highway Authority, recognises it as 
playing a strategic role in opening -up development sites including the Holland Park 
Sustainable Urban Extension (SUE), the  Vernatts SUE (see Policy 1 5: Vernatts 
Sustainable Urban Extension ) and other major sites to the west of Spalding; and in 
providing an alternative route to the congested A151 which passes through the 
centre of Spalding and is subject to increasing delays r esulting from level -crossing 
‘downtime’. As a consequence of the SWRR’s strategic importance, LCC is leading 
on the submission of the planning application for Section 1 of the SWRR, and will 
do the same for Section  5. 
8.4.6  The SWRR, when completed, is expected to deliver significant benefits to traffic 
management around Spalding. However, its total cost and current funding South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
arrangements (i.e. through developer contributions linked to housing delivery) mean 
that its construction is viewed as a series of separate ‘ projects’ over a number of 
years, with the completion of the road currently expected to stretch beyond the end 
of the Local Plan period in 2036.  
8.4.7  The first project h as been ’Section 1 of the SWRR ( previously described as the 
‘Southern section’ and associat ed with the development of the Holland Park SUE 
by a single developer). The second project is ’Section 5’ (previously described as 
the ‘Northern section’). Both of these sections are indicated diagrammatically on the 
Policies Map Inset for Spalding and Pin chbeck and described in the South East 
Lincolnshire Infrastructure Delivery Plan using their former names5. Sections 2, 3 
and, 4 (previously described as the ‘Central section’) will link Sections 1 and 5, and 
due to their total length, may be delivered as several smaller projects. The precise 
route s of Sections 2 and 3 have yet to be confirmed, but it will proceed through the 
designated ‘SWRR Safeguarding Corridor’ as shown on the Policies Map Inset for 
Spald ing and Pinchbeck. Section 4  will run parallel wi th, and close to the Vernatt ’s 
Drain.  An Indicative plan showing the extent of the SWRR sections is contained in 
Appendix 10.  
8.4.8  Given that there is currently no proposal to introduce a Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL) in South Holland District, LCC, with the support of SHDC, has prepared 
a ‘SWRR Delivery Strategy’69 to provide a robust and equitable funding and delivery 
mechanism to govern the development of the outstanding Sections 2-5 of the 
SWRR until such time as they are completed. It is sufficiently flexible to enable the 
implementation of individual SWRR projects to be reviewed in the light of additional 
funding opportunities (e.g. various public -sector initiatives) as and when they 
emerge.  
8.4.9  The STS also proposes important road/traffic improvement sch emes, prioritised by 
the Local Highway Authority, which are required to mitigate the traffic impact of 
residential growth in and around Spalding pending the completion of the SWRR. 
These are to be supported by financial contributions from housing and other  
developments not directly related to the route of the SWRR.  
Monitoring  
Number  of Spalding Transport Strategy projects completed  
8.5. Vehicle and Cycle Parking  
8.5.1  Parking provision can have a significant effect upon development quality, the 
amenity of occupiers and users, as well as the efficient and safe use of the 
highway. The amount of parking provided can also influence people’s transport 
choices; an over -provis ion of car parking can lead to unattractive, car -dominated 
environments that are unsafe for non -car users, whilst an under -provision can lead 
to unsuitable or unsafe on -street parking. A balanced approach to parking 
provision, when promoted as part of a pa ckage of measures, can promote South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
sustainable transport choices and provide attractive and safe environments whilst 
ensuring that sufficient parking is provided to meet local needs.  
Policy 36: Vehicle and Cycle Parking  
All new development, including change o f use, should provide vehicle and 
cycle parking, in accordance with the minimum Parking Standards adopted by 
the Local Planning Authorities (in Appendix 6), unless  a high quality -design 
can demonstrate that a lower standard of provision delivers the 
requir ements set out in 1 -4 below.  
Parking for residents, employees and visitors should be integral to the design 
and form of all new development, and should ensure that:  
1. parking spaces are fit for their intended use in terms of size and design;  
2. for major reside ntial development:  
a. a balanced provision of allocated and communal parking is provided, 
overlooked and accessible to the development it serves;  
b. off-curtilage parking is designed to maximise levels of security and 
safety for vehicles, drivers and pedestrian s; and  
c. a secure, covered, convenient space to store at least two bicycles is 
provided within each residential plot; in the case of flatted 
developments this may be provided as a communal facility within the 
curtilage of the building containing the flats;  
3. for major non -residential development:  
a. secure, covered, convenient storage for bicycles for employees should 
be provided close to an entrance to the building. Changing and shower 
facilities should be provided where possible;  
b. secure, covered bicycle storage  for visitors are located close to the 
main entrance to the building;  
c. where more than 50 parking spaces are provided, at least one double 
electric vehicle charge point will be required (2 spaces). For each 
additional 50 parking spaces, one double charging  point should be 
provided up to a maximum of three (6 spaces); and  
4. parking is well -integrated within the townscape or landscape, through an 
appropriate use of materials and landscaping;  
Innovative solutions to vehicle -parking provision including shared spa ces 
(where the location and patterns of use permit), and the incorporation of 
measures such as car clubs, will be supported.  
An adequate supply of safe, secure and convenient public parking for vehicles South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
will be delivered within and adjacent to the town cen tres, in partnership with 
the Local Highway Authority.  
To demonstrate compliance with this policy, a Transport Assessment and 
associated Travel Plan should be submitted with proposals. The form will be 
dependent upon the scale and nature of the development  and should be 
agreed through early discussion with the Local Highway Authority.  
Negotiation on parking requirements should be in accordance with the 
Parking Standards SPD.  
Reasoned Justification  
8.5.2  Poor design and inappropriate provision has adversely impacted upon the success 
of parking in South East Lincolnshire in recent years, particularly in residential 
areas, in terms of location, control and management. In places, this has created 
perceived ro ad-safety concerns and cluttered, car -dominated environments.  
8.5.3  To help address this issue, all major development should provide for the minimum 
level of parking provision for vehicles and cycles set out in Appendix 6: Parking 
Standards at least two spaces will be sought within the curtilage of  a residential 
property (Use Class C3a) of 3 bedrooms or less, all other dwellings (in C3a) should 
provide for at least 3 spaces. One space could include a garage/car port; however 
to ensure that parking provision func tions as intended, each garage/car port should 
be able to accommodate a medium -sized family car (2.6m wide x 5.6m length, with 
an additional 1m for cycle storage and/or to provide space for electric charging 
points).  
8.5.4  Exceptionally, these parking standards  can be reduced should a high -quality design 
be submitted demonstrating that parking can be accommodated within the 
development, and that the long -term impacts upon environmental quality, safety 
and amenity will not be compromised.  
8.5.5  Within non -residential d evelopment, off -street parking should be seamlessly 
integrated into the landscape through a high -quality design and landscaping 
scheme. Appropriate provision for visitors and disabled people close to the 
entrance to a building will be required, and clear p edestrian routes should be 
provided for all users to avoid conflict with manoeuvring vehicles. Adequate 
charging points should be provided to help promote more sustainable transport 
solutions.   
8.5.6  The availability of car parking is often seen as key to econo mic prosperity of the 
town centres; provision is about right for current demand44, although the quality in 
some areas does not always meet users' expectations. In the long -term, should car 
ownership and population growth continue to rise without sustainabl e transport 
intervention, demand may outstrip supply in Spalding Town Centre. Ensuring town 
centre car parks are convenient, safe and secure for all, including for those with 
disabilities will be a priority. Opportunities to provide additional facilities t o the west South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
of the Joint Line in Spalding will be investigated through any review of the Spalding 
Transport Strategy44. 
8.5.7  Quality cycle parking can encourage more people to cycle for local journeys – in 
that they are assured of a safe and secure place to park . Within residential 
development this should be within a covered, lockable enclosure; in other 
development, provision (e.g. stands or lockers) should be covered, convenient and 
secure, and capable of holding a number of bicycles, visitor parking should be close 
to the entrance of a building. Showers and changing facilities for cyclists in non -
residential development will be supported.  
8.5.8  A Parking Design Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared to provide 
further guidance on the design requirements of this policy.  
Monitoring  
Number of Council car parking bays in the Town Centres, by short stay (time limited), short stay 
unlimited and long stay (annual frequency)  
Number of electric vehicle charging points provided in association with new development  
Number  of permissions granted with new or improved parking facilities for the disabled  
 
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
9. Monitoring and Review  
9.1.1  The South East Lincolnshire Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) will monitor the 
effectiveness of the policies of the Local Plan annually. The effect iveness of each 
policy will be monitored using indicators identified in the Monitoring section for each 
policy. Appendix  7: Local Plan Implementation  sets out how each policy will be 
monitored and key implementation mechanisms. With respect to housing deli very, 
the Housing Implementation Strategy70 includes details on how the two local 
authorities will address delivery of the housing trajectory and the actions that will be 
taken where delivery deviates from the expected path. The AMR will also report on 
the implementation of future site allocations.  
9.1.2  The Local Planning Authorities are also required to monitor the significant 
environmental effects of implementing the Local Plan. This will need to focus on 
significant sustainability effects, such as those:  
 That indicate a likely breach of international, national or local legislation, 
recognised guidelines or standards;  
 That may give rise to irreversible damage, with a view to identifying trends 
before such damage is caused; and  
 Where there was uncertainty in the  SA, and where monitoring would enable 
preventative or mitigation measures to be taken  
9.1.3  The AMR will also monitor the effectiveness of the SA to ensure that any 
unforeseen adverse effects are identified, and, where possible addressed. Further 
details can be  found in the Sustainability Appraisal2. 
9.1.4  In accordance with regulation 4 of The Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning)(England)(Amendment) Regulations 2017’ the Local Plan review will be 
completed every 5 years, starting fr om the date of adoption of the Local P lan. 
  
 
 
 
 
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Glossary  
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Affordable Housing   See NPPF Annex 2:  Glossary.  
Air Quality 
Management Areas  AQMA  Areas designated by local authorities 
because they are not likely to achieve 
national air quality objectives by the relevant 
deadlines.  
Amenity   A positive element or elements that contribute 
to the overall character or enjoyment of an 
area. For example, open land, trees, historic 
buildings and the inter -relationship between 
them, or less tangible factors such as 
tranquillity.  
Biodiversity   The whole variety of life encompassing 
variations, including plants and animals.  
Climate Change  
   Long -term changes in temperature, 
precipitation, wind and all other aspects of the 
Earth's climate. Often regarded as a resu lt of 
human activity and fossil fuel consumption. 
Mitigation is action to reduce the impact on 
climate change and adaption is lowering the 
risks posed by the consequences of climate 
change.  
Community 
Infrastructure Levy  CIL A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds 
from owners or developers of land 
undertaking new building projects in their 
area.  
Comparison Retail   Comparison retail goods include non -food 
and drink items such as clothing, shoes, 
furniture, household appliances, books and 
stationery, jewellery and other personal 
effects. Consumers tend to buy these goods 
less frequently and so usually compare 
prices, features and quality of an item before 
buying.  
Conservation Areas   Areas designated by the Local Planning 
Authority under the  Planning (Listed Buildings 
and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 Section 69 
as being of special architectural or historic 
interest, the character of which it is desirable 
to preserve and enhance.  
Countryside   In terms of the Local Plan, this is land not 
within Sub -Regional Centres, Main Service 
Centres,  Minor Service Centr es or Other 
Service Centre and Settlement . South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Developer 
contributions   Developer contributions, also known as 
planning obligations, can be secured via a 
section 106 agreement or planning condition 
attached to a planning permission. They help 
mitigate any adverse impacts generated by 
new development on infrastructure and 
facilities.  
Development Plan 
Document  DPD  Development Plan Documents are planning 
policy documents which  make up the Loc al 
Plan. They help to guide development within 
a local planning authority area by setting out 
the detailed planning policies, which planning 
officers use to make their decisions on 
planning applications.  
Employment Land 
Technical Paper   Identifies the amount of B  class employment 
land that will be required to deliver job growth 
in South East Lincolnshire to 2036, and 
recommends sites to be allocated or 
safeguarded for employment use  
Environmental Impact 
Assessment  EIA A procedure to be followed for certain types 
of project to ensure that decisions are made 
in full knowledge of any likely significant 
effects on the environment.  
Established 
Employment Site   A existing site containing B1, B2 and/or B8 
development in the settlement boundary of a 
higher tier settlement or within 400m of such 
settlements, have good access, are within 
easy access of local labour and are actively 
managed and are capable of accommodating 
employment uses in the long -term.  
Evidence Base   The information and data gathered by lo cal 
authorities to inform and support the policy 
approaches to be set out in Development 
Plan Documents (DPDs).  
Examination in Public  EIP An independent assessment carried out by an 
inspector to determine the soundness of a 
plan.  
Exception Test   In certain cases, some types of development 
in areas of higher flood risk may, however, be 
acceptable if an additional Exception Test is 
passed.  
Flood Hazard   Danger to persons or property from depth of 
water, debris carried in the flow and/or speed 
of its f low during a flood.  
Flood Probability   The likelihood of a given flood occurrence in a 
calendar year. It is often quoted as a 
percentage value called the Annual 
Exceedance Probability  (AEP). For example, 
a 1% AEP flood has a 1 -in-100 chance of 
occurring o nce in any given year.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Flood risk   The combination of probability of a particular 
flood event and its corresponding hazard and 
is used to refer to the scale of flood effect, 
combining hazard and probability, upon a 
particular site.  
Flood Zone 1 (low 
probability)  FZ1 Comprises land assessed as having a less 
than 1 in 1,000 annual probability of river or 
sea flooding (<0.1%).  
Flood Zone 2 (medium 
probability)  FZ2 Comprises land assessed as having between 
a 1 in 100 and 1 in 1,000 annual probability of 
river flooding (1% – 0.1%), or between a 1 in 
200 and 1 in 1,000 annual probability of sea 
flooding (0.5% – 0.1%) in any year.  
Flood Zone 3a (high 
probability)  FZ3a  Comprises land assessed as having a 1 in 
100 or greater annual probability of river 
floodi ng (>1%), or a 1 in 200 or greater 
annual probability of flooding from the sea 
(>0.5%) in any year.  
Flood Zone 3b (the 
functional flood plain)  FZ3b  Comprises land where water has to flow or be 
stored in times of flood.  
Green Infrastructure   A network of multi -functional green space and 
other environmental features, urban and rural, 
including both established and new sites - 
which supports natural and ecological 
processes, and are capable of delivering a 
wide range of environmental and quality of life 
bene fits for local communities.  
Greenfield sites   Land (or a defined site) usually farmland, that 
has not previously been developed (not be 
confused with Green Belts, of which there are 
none in South East Lincolnshire).  
Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation 
Asse ssment  GTAA  A survey of current Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople facilities and needs.  
Habitats Regulations 
Assessment  HRA  Tests the impacts of a proposal on nature 
conservation sites of European importance 
and is a requirement under EU legislation for 
land use plans and projects.  
Heritage asset   A building, monument, site, place, area or 
landscape identified as having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions, because of its heritage 
interest. Heritage asset includes designated 
heritage assets and assets identified by the 
local planning authority (including local 
listing).  
Houses in Multiple 
Occupation  HMO  A building or part of a building that is being 
occupied as a main residence by three or 
more unrelated p eople who share some 
facilities, such as a bathroom or kitchen  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan  IDP Identifies the physical, social and green 
infrastructure needed to support the policies 
over the Local Plan period, including when 
the infrastructure will be required, how much 
it will cost and how it will be funded  
Internal Drainage 
Board  IDB Each Internal Drainage Board is a local public 
authority established in areas of 
special  drainage need in  England and Wales. 
They have permissive powers to manage 
water levels within their respective drainage 
districts. IDBs undertake works to reduce 
flood risk to people and property and manage 
water levels to meet local needs.   
Joint Policy Unit  JPU A small team of officers drawn from South 
Holland and Boston Borough Co uncils, which 
supports the work of The South East 
Lincolnshire's Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee.  
Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee  JSPC  The Joint Committee which works together to 
create a single Local Plan for the area of 
South Holland and Boston Bo rough 
comprises nine councillors – three each from 
South Holland District, Boston Borough and 
Lincolnshire County Councils.  
Lead Local Flood 
Authority  LLFA  Lincolnshire County Council is the lead 
authority responsible for the management of 
surface  water flood risk.  They also have a 
duty to develop a Local Flood Risk 
Management Strategy outlining  how flood risk 
will be managed locally.  
Local Employment 
Area   Small -scale existing or proposed employment 
site within or adjacent to a Main Service 
Centre or Minor Service Centre and will serve 
the local employment needs and/or small 
business component of that settlement or 
parish, capable of accommodating B1/B2 -
Uses, have good access, are within easy 
access of local labour and are actively 
managed.  
Local Development 
Order  LDO LDOs grant automatic planning permission for 
specified development in defined areas. 
LDOs can be used for different uses and 
developments in  different areas.  
Local Geological Site  LGS A site designated to protect areas of 
geological value in the Local Plan area.  
Local Nature Reserve  LNR A site of importance for wildlife, geology, 
education or public enjoyment, declared by 
district, borough and county councils.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Local Plan   The plan for the future development of the 
local area, drawn up by the Local Planning 
Authority in consultation with the community. 
In law this is described as the development 
plan documents adopted under the Planning 
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. Current 
core strategies or other planning policies, 
which under the regulations would be 
considered to be development plan 
documents, form part of the Local Plan. The 
term includes old policies which have been 
saved under the 2004 Act.  
Local Wildlife Site  LWS  Non statutory sites of substantive nature 
conservation interest determined locally 
according to national, regional and local 
biodiversity needs.  
Main Employment 
Area   Strategic sites within the settlement 
boundaries of a  Sub-Regional Centre, Main 
Service Centre or Minor Service Centre or are 
well established within 400m of such 
settlements, have a good level of access to 
the major road network and public transport, 
to local labour, are capable of 
accommodating the full ra nge of B -Uses 
within 10 or more medium -large units, and 
are or will be actively managed.  
Main Service Centre   These will continue to provide for significant 
housing, employment and commercial 
development to support their roles as service 
centres for surrounding rural areas.  
Major Development   Major development is a proposal of 10 or 
more dwellings or has a site area of 0.5 
hectares or more, the development is for 
1,000 square metres or more of floorspace, or 
has a site area of 1 hectare or more.  
Mixed-use 
Development   A type of urban development where multiple 
compatible land uses – such as residential, 
business, retail or recreational uses - are 
combined. The uses are physically and 
functionally integrated with one another within 
the development. Ma y vary in intensity and 
scale from a single building to an urban 
extension.  
Monitoring Report   The main mechanism for assessing 
performance of policies contained within the 
Local Plan and allows the two authorities to 
understand the wider social, economic  and 
environmental issues that affect South East 
Lincolnshire.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
National Planning 
Policy Framework  NPPF  The National  Planning Policy Fr amework, 
2018  sets out the Government’s planning 
policies for England and how these are 
expected to be applied.  
National Planning 
Practice Guidance  NPPG  A web -based resource, the National Planning 
Practice Guidance was launched in 2014 to 
provide more detailed guidance on the 
contents of the NPPF.  
Nature Improvement 
Area  NIA Established to create joined up and resilient 
ecological networks at a landscape -scale. 
They are run by partnerships of local 
authorities, local communities and 
landowners, the pri vate sector and 
conservation organisations. Funding is 
provided by the Department for the 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and 
Natural England.  
Neighbourhood 
Planning   Formally introduced under the Localism Act 
2011, neighbourhood planning and, 
specifically the preparation of ‘Neighbourhood 
Development Plans’ is a new way for 
communities to influence the future of the 
places where the live and work. It is a 
community -led initiative for guiding the future 
development, regeneration and conservation  
of an area.  
Office for National 
Statistics  ONS  The executive office of the UK Statistics 
Authority  
Other Service Centres 
and Settlements   These will act as local servi ce centres for the 
surrounding rural area. Limited new 
development should support or improve their 
role as a focus for social and economic 
activity.  
Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase 
Act (2004)   The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, as amended by the 2008 Planning Act, 
is the primary legislation for the development 
plan process.  
Planning Inspectorate  PINS  Government agency which provides 
inspectors to hold public examinations (EiP) 
into Development Plan Documents (DPD's)  
Policies Map   This illustrates the spatial extent of all the 
Council’s planning policies and reflects up -to-
date planning strategy for the area, which 
may include separate inset maps for part of 
an area.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Previously Developed  
Land   Land which is or was occupied by a 
permane nt structure, including the curtilage of 
the developed land (although it should not be 
assumed that the whole of the curtilage 
should be developed) and any associated 
fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: 
land that is or has been occupied by 
agricul tural or forestry buildings; land that has 
been developed for minerals extraction or 
waste disposal by landfill purposes where 
provision for restoration has been made 
through development control procedures; 
land in built -up areas such as private 
residentia l gardens, parks, recreation grounds 
and allotments; and land that was previously -
developed but where the remains of the 
permanent structure or fixed surface structure 
have blended into the landscape in the 
process of time.  
Prestige Employment 
Site  A high-profile site, with a prominent frontage, 
within a strategic, sustainable location  
Ramsar sites   Ramsar sites are wetlands of international 
importance, designated under the Ramsar 
Convention  
Registered Provider  RP Technical name for a body registered  with the 
Housing Corporation. M ost Housing 
Associations are RP s. 
Reserve Site   A site allocated for housing that will be 
released if other allocated sites do not 
provide housing in sufficient numbers to 
satisfy the Government’s ‘Housing Delivery 
Test’ (to be finalised November 2018).  
Restricted Use Site   Existing and proposed restricted use sites 
protect the unique function that the ports and 
Spalding Rail -Freight Interchange perform 
and prevent the sites coming forward for 
employment uses that could b e 
accommodated in a Main Employment Area.  
Safeguarding Corridor   A specific area of land that is defined for the 
purpose of protecting proposed large -scale 
infrastructure projects, such as roads, from 
conflicting development  
Sequential Test   An approach to planning decision making 
which may require certain sites or locations to 
have their development potential fully 
considered before moving on to consider 
others. The approach could apply to issues 
such as retail development, the use of 
previously develope d land and/or the use of 
land at risk from flooding.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Shoreline 
Management Plan   A plan providing a large -scale assessment of 
the risk to people and to the developed, 
historic and natural environment associated 
with coastal processes.  
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest  SSSI  Sites designated by Natural England under 
the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.  
Soundness   Once a Development Plan Document is 
submitted for approval an Inspector at the 
Examination in Public will check to see 
whether correct pro cedures have been 
followed, plans and policies are reasonable, 
supported by evidence and conform to 
national policy and legislation. This process 
examines whether the Plan can be deemed 
‘sound’ so that it can be adopted.  
South East 
Lincolnshire Local 
Plan   The plan for the future development of South 
East Lincolnshire drawn up by the Joint 
Strategic Planning Committee (JSPC).  
Spatial Planning   An approach which goes beyond the 
traditional land use planning system focused 
upon the regulation and control of  the use of 
land, to take account of the strategies and 
plans of other agencies which also have an 
impact on spatial development.  
Special Areas of 
Conservation  SAC Areas which have been given special 
protection under the European Union's 
Habitats Directiv e. They provide increased 
protection to a variety of wild animals, plants 
and habitats and are a vital part of global 
efforts to conserve the world’s biodiversity.  
Special Protection 
Areas  SPA Sites on land, at water or sea classified under 
the European C ommunity Directive on Wild 
Birds as being of international importance for 
the breeding, feeding, wintering or the 
migration of rare and vulnerable species of 
birds.  
Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  SCI Sets out the standards that local authorities 
will achieve when involving local communities 
in the preparation of Local Development 
Documents and development control 
decisions.  
Strategic 
Environmental 
Assessment  SEA An assessment of the environmental effects 
of a plan or programme required by EU 
Directive  2001/42/EC. This is combined with 
the Sustainability Appraisal.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  SFRA  An assessment of the probability of flooding 
occurring in Boston Borough and South 
Holland (two separate assessments) 
including hazard ratings should thi s occur. 
There is also a more detailed analysis of 
issues from those additional pieces of 
information where normally significant 
development might be expected to occur over 
the next five to ten years.  
Strategic Housing 
Land Availability 
Assessment  SHLAA  Assesses the suitability, availability and 
deliverability of land that have been promoted 
for allocation as sites for housing 
development.  
Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment  SHMA  Assessment of the local housing market, 
which studies the supply and demand of 
housing, housing and planning policies, the 
need for affordable housing and the 
affordability of the local housing market.  
Sub-Regional Centre   Boston and Spalding will be the main 
locations for new development.  
Supplementary 
Planning Document  SPD Provide supplementary information to support 
policies in Development Plan Documents but 
do not form part of the Development Plan and 
are not subject to independent examination. 
They carry some weight in planning decisions 
but less weight than Development Plan  
Documents.  
Sustainability 
Appraisal  SA A tool for appraising policies to assess the 
extent to which they reflect sustainable 
development objectives (i.e. social, 
environmental and economic factors). An SA 
is required for all Development Plan 
Documents an d some SPDs.  
Sustainable 
Development   The (2004) Act contains a statutory 
requirement for local planning authorities to 
undertake their functions with a view to 
contributing to the achievement of sustainable 
development. The widely used definition of 
sustainable development is “development that 
meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs”. To achieve this, 
communities, planners, developers and 
decision makers need to consider the long -
term social, environmental, economic and 
resource impacts of development.  
Sustainable Drainage 
Systems  SuDS  An artificial drainage solution which reduces 
and slows the quantity and rate of surface 
water run off from new development, dealing 
with it as close  to the source as possible.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Sustainable Urban 
Extension  SUE The large -scale planned expansion of a town 
which can contribute to more sustainable 
patterns of development when co -ordinated 
with well -planned supporting infrastructure  
Transport Assessment  TA A comprehensive and systematic process 
that sets out transport issues relating to a 
proposed development. It identifies what 
measures will be required to improve 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particularly for alternatives to the car such as 
walking, cycling and public transport and what 
measures will need to be taken to deal with 
the anticipated transport impacts of the 
development.  
Travel Plan   A long -term management strategy for an 
organisation or site that seeks to deliver 
sustain able transport objectives through 
action and is articulated in a document that is 
regularly reviewed.  
Use Classes   A Use Class is something that falls under the 
General Use Classes Order. The General 
Use Classes Order groups types of use of 
premises into classes, so that no 
development is involved if a building is 
changed from one use to another within the 
same class. Changing the use of a building 
from one class to another constitutes 
development, and needs planning 
permission, but in certain circumstance s this 
may be automatically permitted without the 
need to submit a planning application.  
Veteran Trees   A tree which, because of its age, size and 
condition, is of exceptional biodiversity, 
cultural or heritage value. Not all veteran 
trees are old enough to be ancient, but are 
old relative to other trees of the same 
species.  
Water Stressed Area   An area of serious water stress is where the 
current household demand for water is a high 
proportion of the current effective rainfall 
which is available to meet that demand; or the 
future household demand for water is likely to 
be a high proportion of the effective rainfall 
available to meet that demand.  
Whole Plan Viab ility 
Assessment   identifies all the costs that the policies will 
impose on development, and co nsiders what 
impact those costs will have on financial 
viability of a development scheme  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Term  Abbreviation  Definition  
Windfall site   Sites which have not been specifically 
identified as available in the Local Plan 
process. They normally comprise previously -
developed sites that have u nexpectedly 
become available.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
10. Appendix 1: South East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee  
10.1.1  The Joint Committee was established by the South East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee Order 2011 (Statutory Instrument 2011 No. 1455) whi ch came 
into force on 5th July 2011.  
10.1.2  Article 3 of the Order constitu tes the Joint Committee as the L ocal Planning 
Authority for South East Lincolnshire for the purposes of Part 2 (local development) 
of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004), as am ended, (the 2004 Act). 
Together with article 4 (1) it provides for the Joint Committee to exercise the 
functions of a local planning authority in relation to:  
 the preparation, submission, adoption, monitoring and revision of joint local 
development documents identified in a joint local development scheme; and  
 the preparation, submission, adoption, monitoring and revision of a joint local 
development scheme, in respect of those documents.  
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
11. Appendix 2: Saved Local Plan Policy Replacement List  
11.1.1  Please no te ALL previously saved policies in the South Holland Local Plan (2006) 
and Bosto n Borough Local Plan (1999) have  been deleted upon adoption of the 
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan.  
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved South Holland Local Plan policy(s)  
1: Spatial Strategy  SG2: Distribution of Development  
SG3: Settlement Hierarchy  
SG21: Extension of Curtilages  
HS4: New Housing in Spalding and the Area Centres 
(Other Towns and Donington) (Non -Allocated Sites)  
HS6: New Housing in the Group Centres (Non -Allocated 
Sites)  
LT7: Caravan Sites  
 2: Development Management  SG1: General Sustainable Development  
SG7: Energy Efficiency  
SG12: Sewerage and Development  
SG13: Pollution and Contamination  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG15: New Developme nt: Facilities for Road Users, 
Pedestrians and Cyclists  
SG16: Parking Standards in New Development  
SG18: Landscaping of New Development  
SG20: Extensions and Alterations to Existing Buildings  
HS14: Accommodation for Transient Agricultural 
Workers  
HS16: Conv ersion of Redundant Rural Buildings to 
Residential Use  
HS17: Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
HS18: Change of Use of Property to Housing in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Use  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re-Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
EC7: Retail Development Outside Defined Retail 
Centres  
LT7: Caravan Sites  
3: Design of New Development  SG1: General Sustainable Development  
SG2: Distribution of Development  
SG4: Development in the Countryside  
SG7: Energ y Efficiency  
SG11: Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  
SG13: Pollution and Contamination  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG15: New Development: Facilities for Road Users, 
Pedestrians and Cyclists  
SG17: Protection of Residential Amenity  
SG18: Landscaping of New Development  
SG20: Extensions and Alterations to Existing Buildings  
SG21: Extension of Curtilages  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved South Holland Local Plan policy(s)  
SG23: Advertisements outside Defined Settlement 
Limits  
HS9: Rural Exceptions  
HS14: Accommodation for Transient Agricultural 
Workers  
HS16:  Conversion of Redundant Rural Buildings to 
Residential Use  
HS18: Change of Use of Property to Housing in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Use  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
EC9: Town  Centre Evening Economy  
EC10: Hot Food Takeaways  
EN11: Security Shutters  
LT7: Caravan Sites  
4: Approach to Flood Risk  New P olicy 
5: Meeting Physical 
Infrastructure and Service 
Needs  SG6: Community Infrastructure and Impact Assessment  
SG12: Sewerage and D evelopment  
6: Developer Contributions  SG6: Community Infrastructure and Impact Assessment  
HS8: Affordable Housing  
HS11: Open Space in New Residential Developments  
EN1A: Development and Sites of Local Biodiversity 
Interest  
7: Improving South East 
Lincolnshire’s Employment 
Land Portfolio  SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
EC1: Main Employment Areas – Sites Allocated for 
Employment Use  
EC3: Existing Employment Areas/Premises  
SG4: Development in the Countryside  
EC4: Farm Diversification includ ing Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
8: Prestige Employment Sites  New Policy  
9: Promoting a Stronger Visitor 
Economy  SG4: Development in the Countryside  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
EC12: Garden Centres  
LT7: Caravan Sites  
10: Meeting Assessed Housing 
Requirement s New P olicy 
11: Distribution of New 
Housing  HS3: New Housing Allocations  
12: Reserve Sites  New Policy  
13: South West Quadrant 
Sustainable Urban Extension    
(Sou006)  New Policy  
14:South of the Nor th Forty 
Foot Drain Sustainable Urban 
Extension    (WES002)  New Policy  
15: Vernatts Sustainable New policy  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved South Holland Local Plan policy(s)  
Urban Extension     
16: Holbeach West 
Sustainable Urban Extension     HS3: New Housing Allocations  
17: Providing a Mix of Housing  New policy  
18: Affordable Housing  HS8: Affordable Housing  
19: Rural Exceptions Sites  SG4: Development in the Countryside  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
HS7: New Housing in the Open Countryside including 
Other Rural Settlements  
HS9: Rural Exceptions  
20: Accommodation for 
Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople   SG12: Sewerage and Development  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
21: Houses in Multiple 
Occupation and the Sub -
Division of Dwellings  SG14: D esign and Layout of New Development  
HS18: Change of Use of Property to Housing in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Use  
22: Replacement Dwellings in 
the Countryside  SG4: Development in the Countryside  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG20: Extensions an d Alterations to Existing Buildings  
HS17: Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
23: The Reuse of Buildings in 
the Countryside for  Residential 
Use 
 SG4: Development in the Countryside  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
HS8: Affordable Housing  
HS16: Conversion of Redundant Rural Buildings to 
Residential Use  
24: Retail Hierarchy  SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
EC5: Development Within Retail Town, District and 
Local Centres  
EC6: Development in Primary Shopping Areas  
EC7: Retail Develop ment Outside Defined Retail 
Centres  
EC8: Small Scale Retail Development  
EC9: Town Centre Evening Economy  
EC10: Hot Food Takeaways  
EC12: Garden Centres  
25: Supporting the Vitality and 
Viability of Boston and 
Spalding Town Centres  New Policy  
26: Primary Shopping 
Frontages  SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
EC6: Development in Primary Shopping Areas  
EC9: Town Centre Evening Economy  
27: Additional Retail Provision  New policy  
28: The Natural Environment  SG1: General Sustainable Development  
SG14: De sign and Layout of New Development  
SG18: Landscaping of New Development  
HS14: Accommodation for Transient Agricultural 
Workers  
EN1A: Development and Sites of Local Biodiversity 
Interest  
29: The Historic Environment  SG1: General Sustainable Development  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved South Holland Local Plan policy(s)  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG19: Protection of Open Spaces  
HS16: Conversion of Redundant Rural Buildings to 
Residential Use  
HS17: Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildin gs 
EN11: Security Shutters  
30: Pollution  SG13: Pollution and Contamination  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG17: Protection of Residential Amenity  
HS16: Conversion of Redundant Rural Buildings to 
Residential Use  
HS18: Change of Use of Property to Housing in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Use  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
EC9: Town Centre Evening Economy  
EC10: Hot Food Takeaways  
31: Climate Change and 
Renewable and Low Carbon 
Energy  SG7: Energy Efficiency  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
32: Community Health and 
Well-Being  SG19: Protection of Open Spaces  
HS11: Open Space in New Residential Developments  
LT2: Safeguarding Open Space for Sport, Recreation 
and Lei sure 
LT3: Recreational Routes, Public Rights of Way, 
Disused Railway Lines  
33: Delivering a More 
Sustainable Transport Network  SG2: Distribution of Development  
SG14: Design and Layout of New Development  
SG15: New Development: Facilities for Road Users, 
Pedestrians and Cyclists  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
EC1: Main Employment Areas – Sites Allocated for 
Employment Use  
EC4: Farm Diversification including Re -Use of 
Redundant Rural Buildings  
EC12: Garden Centres  
LT3: Recreational Routes, Public Rights of Way, 
Disused Railway Lines  
TC2: Cycling, Cycleways  
34: Delivering the Boston 
Distributor Road  New Policy  
35: Delivering the Spalding 
Transport Strategy  New P olicy 
36: Vehicle and Cycle Parking  SG16: Parking Standards in New Development  
SG20: E xtensions and Alterations to Existing Buildings  
HS18: Change of Use of Property to Housing in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO) Use  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved South Holland Local Plan policy(s)  
HS19: Sites for Gypsies and Travellers  
EC9: Town Centre Evening Economy  
 
Policies not to be directly replaced and will therefore no  longer form part of the 
development plan:  
EC13: The Northern Expansion Area, Spalding  
EC14: Land Rear of the White Hart, Spalding  
LT4: The Fens Waterways Link  
TC1 Safeguarding Road Routes  
TC4: Roadside Services  
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved Boston Borough Local Plan 
policy(s)  
1: Spatial Strategy  C22: Coastal Zone  
H2: Windfall Housing Sites  
CO1: Development in the Countryside  
CO8: Intensive Livestock Units  
CO9: Agricultural Buildings  
2: Development Management  G1: Amenity  
G2: Wildlife and Landscape Resources  
G3: Foul and Surface Water Disposal  
G7: Accessible Environments  
G8: Air and Soil Resources  
ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED6: Small Developments Within or Next to Settlements  
ED8: Office Development  
ED12: Telecommunications  
RTC1: Retail Development in the Town Centre  
RTC5: Main Ridge East Shopping Area  
RTC10: Village Shops  
T2: Roads and Footpaths in New Developments  
H9: Housing for the Elderly  
H10: Extensions and Alterations  
R2: New Recreational Open Space  
R3: New Indoor Leisure Facilities  
R4: Water -Based Recreation Facilities  
C7: Development of Sites Adjacent to River Witham  
A5: Advance Signs in the Countryside   
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
CO8: Intensive Livestock U nits 
CO9: Agricultural Buildings  
CO10: Kennels and Catteries  
CO11: Equestrian Facilities  
CO12: Replacement Dwellings  
3: Design of New Development  G1: Amenity  
G2: Wildlife and Landscape Resources  
G3: Safeguarding the Water Environment  
G7: Accessible Environments  
G8: Air and Soil Resources  
G10: External Lighting Schemes  
ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED3: Development of the Business Park  
ED6: Small Developments Within or Next to Settlements  
ED11: Renewable Ene rgy 
ED12: Telecommunications  
RTC1: Retail Development in the Town Centre  
RTC5: Main Ridge East Shopping Area  
RTC8: Town Centre Land Uses  
RTC10: Village Shops  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved Boston Borough Local Plan 
policy(s)  
RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
T2: Roads and Footpaths in New Developments  
H3: Quality of Housing Development  
H9: Housing for the Elderly  
H10: Extensions and Alterations  
R2: New Recreational Open Space  
R3: New Indoor Leisure Facilities  
R4: Water -Based Recreation Facilities  
C7: Development of Sites Adjacent to River Witham  
C13: Changes of Use in  Wormgate  
C14: Changes of Use of Shops in Wormgate  
C15: Shopfronts and Advertisements in Wormgate  
CF3: New Community Facilities  
A1: Guidelines for Advertisements  
A2: Flag Advertisements  
A3: Advertising Hoardings  
A4: Advance Signs in the Countryside  
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
CO7: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Residential Purposes  
CO8: Intensive Livestock Units  
CO9: Agricultural Buildings  
CO10: Kennels and Catteries  
CO11: Equestrian Facilities  
CO12: Replaceme nt Dwellings  
4: Approach to Flood Risk  New Policy  
5: Meeting Physical 
Infrastructure and Service 
Needs  G3: Foul and Surface Water Disposal  
ED12: Telecommunication Developments  
6: Developer Contributions  H4: Open Space in Housing Estates  
7: Improving South East 
Lincolnshire’s Employment 
Land Portfolio  ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED3: Development of the Business Park  
ED6: Small Developments Within or Next to Settlements  
ED9: Expansion of Existing Firms  
RTC4:  Chain Bridge Retail Area  
RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
C22: Coastal Zone  
CO1: Development in the Countryside  
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
8: Prestige Employment Sites  New Policy  
9: Promoting a Stronger Visitor 
Econom y RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
R4: Water -based Recreational Activities  
R11: Static Holiday Caravans and Chalets  
R12: Touring Caravan and Camping Sites  
C22: Coastal Zone  
CO1: Development in the Countryside  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved Boston Borough Local Plan 
policy(s)  
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
10: Meeting Assessed Housing 
Requirement s H1: Allocated Housing Sites  
11: Distribution of New 
Housing  H1: Allocated Housing Sites  
12: Reserve Sites  New Policy  
13: South West Quadrant 
Sustainable Urban Extension       
(Sou006)  New Policy  
14:South of the North Forty 
Foot Drain Sustainable Urban 
Extension    (WES002)  New Policy  
15: Vernatts Sustainable 
Urban Extension     New P olicy 
16: Holbeach West 
Sustainable Urban Extension     New P olicy 
17: Providing a Mix of Housing  H6: Housing for the Disabled  
H9: Housing for the Elderly  
18: Affordable Housing  New P olicy 
19: Rural Exceptions Sites  H7: Low Cost Housing for Local Needs  
CO1: Development in the Countryside  
20: Accommodation for 
Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople   New P olicy 
21: Houses in Multiple 
Occupation and the Sub -
Division of Dwellings  H8: Creating Extra Accommodation in Existing Premises  
22: Replacement Dwellings in 
the Countryside  CO1: Development in the Countryside  
CO12: Replacement Dwellings  
23: The Reuse o f Buildings in 
the Countryside for  Residential 
Use CO1: Development in the Countryside  
CO7: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Residential Purposes  
24: Retail Hierarchy  ED8: Office Development  
RTC1: Retail Development in the Town Centre  
RTC4: Chain Bridge Retail Area  
RTC5: Main Ridge East Shopping Area  
RTC7: Other Prime Shopping Frontages  
RTC8: Town Centre Land Uses  
RTC10: Village Shops  
RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
C13: Changes of Use in Wormgate  
25: Supporting the Vitality and 
Viability of  Boston and 
Spalding Town Centres  New Policy  
26: Primary Shopping 
Frontages  RTC6: Prime Shopping Frontages  
RTC8: Town Centre Land Uses  
27: Additional Retail Provision  New P olicy 
28: The Natural Environment  G2: Wildlife and Landscape Resources  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved Boston Borough Local Plan 
policy(s)  
G8: Air and Soil Resources  
ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED11: Renewable Energy  
R4: Water -Based Recreation Facilities  
R5: Witham Way Footpath and Nature Reserve  
C17: Sites of Local Nature Conservation Interest  
C24: Prote cted Landscape Sites  
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
CO7: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Residential Purposes  
29: The Historic Environment  G10: External Lighting Schemes  
RTC1: Retail Development in the Town Centre  
C7: Development of Sites Adjacent to River Witham  
C8: Stump Views  
C13: Changes of Use in Wormgate  
C24: Protected Landscape Sites  
A1: Guidelines for Advertisements  
A2: Flag Advertisements  
30: Pollution  G1: Amenity  
G4: Safeguarding the Water Environm ent 
G8: Air and Soil Resources  
G10: External Lighting Schemes  
ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED6: Small Developments Within or Next to Settlements  
ED8: Office Development  
ED11: Renewable Energy  
RTC5: Main Ridge East Shopping Area  
RTC10: Village Shops  
H8: Creating Extra Accommodation in Existing Premises  
H9: Housing for the Elderly  
R2: New Recreational Open Space  
R3: New Indoor Leisure Facilities  
R4: Water -Based Recreation Facilities  
CF3: New Community Facilities  
CO6: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Employment Uses  
CO7: Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside for 
Residential Purposes  
CO8: Intensive Livestock Units  
CO9: Agricultural Buildings  
CO10: Kennels and Catteries  
CO11: Equestrian Facilities  
31: Climate Change and 
Renewable and Low Carbon 
Energy  ED11: Renewable Energy  
32: Community Health and H4: Open Space in Housing Estates  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Proposed Policy  Replacing Saved Boston Borough Local Plan 
policy(s)  
Well-Being  R1: Protection of Existing Recreational Open Space  
R2: New Recreational Open Space  
R3: New Indoor Leisure Facil ities 
R8: Leisure Facilities in the Countryside.  
R9: Built Development for Countryside Leisure Pursuits.  
R10: Allotments  
C24: Protected Landscape Sites  
CF2: Existing Community Facilities  
CF3: New Community Facilities  
33: Delivering a More 
Sustainable Transport Network  G6: Vehicular and Pedestrian Access  
G7: Accessible Environments  
G10: External Lighting Schemes  
ED1: Development in Industrial/Commercial Areas  
ED2: Development of Ports  
ED6: Small Developments Within or Next to Settlements  
ED8: Office Dev elopment  
RTC1: Retail Development in the Town Centre  
RTC10: Village Shops  
RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
T1: New Accesses Onto Major Roads  
T2: Roads and Footpaths in New Developments  
R2: New Recreational Open Space  
R3: New Indoor Leisure Facilities  
R4: Wa ter-Based Recreation Facilities  
R5: Witham Way Footpath and Nature Reserve  
CF3: New Community Facilities  
CO8: Intensive Livestock Units  
CO9: Agricultural Buildings  
CO11: Equestrian Facilities  
34: Delivering the Boston 
Distributor Road  New Policy  
35: Delivering the Spalding 
Transport Strategy  New Policy  
36: Vehicle and Cycle Parking  RTC10: Village Shops  
RTC11: Shops in the Countryside  
T3: Town Centre Car Parking  
H8: Creating Extra Accommodation in Existing Premises  
Policies not to be directly replace d and will therefore no longer form part of the 
development plan:  
ED5: Development in the Area of Mixed Use  
ED10: Transport Depots and Lorry Parks  
RTC12: Sites for Redevelopment  
T6: Taxi Businesses  
T7: Docks Railway Line  
CF1: Proposed Community Facilities  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
12. Appendix 3: References  
12.1.1  All documents are published by the South East Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Planning Committee, March 2017 unless stated otherwise and are available at  
www.southeastlincslocalplan.or g 
Reference 
Number  Document  Author  Publication 
Date  
1 Lincolnshire Minerals and 
Waste Local Plan: ‘Core 
Strategy and Development 
Management Policies DPD ’  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2016   
 
2 Sustainability Appraisal of the 
South East Lincolnshire Local 
Plan 2011 -2036  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee   and Capita  2013, 2016, 
2017, 2018  
3 Habitats Regulations 
Assessment of the South East 
Lincolnshire Local Plan:  Footprint Ecology  2016, 2017  
4 South East Lincolnshire Whole 
Plan Viability Study – Final 
Report  Peter Brett Associates  2017  
5 South East Lincolnshire 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  Peter Brett Associates  2016  
6 Combined Preferred Options 
and Sustainability Appraisal 
Report  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2013  
7 South East Lincolnshire  Local 
Plan: Draft for Public 
Consultation  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  January 
2016  
8 South East Lincolnshire Local 
Plan: Preferred Sites 
Consultation  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  July 2016  
9 National Planning Policy 
Framework  DCLG  2018 
10 National Planning Practice 
Guidance  DCLG  2014  
11 East Inshore and East Offshore 
Marine Plan  Marine Management 
Organisation  2014  
12 Lincolnshire Minerals and 
Waste Local Plan: Site 
Locations  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2017  
13 Duty to Co -operate Statement  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2017  
14 Mid-year population estimates  Office of National 
Statistics  2015  
15 Census  Office of National 
Statistics  2011  
16 NOMIS  Office of National 
Statistics  2016  
17 Neighbourhood Statistics: Office of National 2011  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reference 
Number  Document  Author  Publication 
Date  
Industry of Employment  Statistics  
18 NOMIS  Office of National 
Statistics  2015  
19 South East Lincolnshire Town 
Centres and Retail Capacity 
Study  Applied P lanning  2013  
20 Indices of Deprivation 2015  DCLG  2015  
21 House Price Index  Land Registry   
22 Boston Borough Strategic 
Housing Market Area 
Assessment  J G Consulting  2015  
23 Peterborough Sub -Regional 
Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  GL Hearn  2015  
24 Peterborough Sub-Regional 
Housing Market Area and 
Boston Borough Council – 
Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment Updates  J G Consulting  2017  
25 Station Usage Estimates  Office of Rail and Road  2015/16  
26 4th Lincolnshire Local Transport 
Plan 2013 -/14-2022/23  Lincolnshir e County 
Council  2013  
27 Boston Borough Council 
Updating and Screening 
Assessment Appraisal Report  Defra  2016  
28 Heritage at Risk Register 2015  Historic England  2015  
29 South East Lincolnshire 
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2018  
30 Housing Papers  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2016, 2017  
31 South East Lincolnshire Site 
Allocations Flood Risk 
Sequential Test Report  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2017  
32 South East Lincolnshire 
Sustainability of Settlements  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2016  
33 Settlement Boundaries 
Background Paper  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2016  
34 South East Lincolnshire 
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  HaskoningDHV UK Ltd 
and the Environment 
Agency  2017  
35 Planning Healthy Weight 
Environments  Town and Country 
Planning Association  2014  
36 Spatial Strategy Background 
Paper  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2018  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reference 
Number  Document  Author  Publication 
Date  
37 Greater Lincolnshire Strategic 
Economic Plan  Greater Lincolnshire 
Local Economic 
Partnership  2014  
38 South East Lincolnshire 
Employment Land Technical 
Paper  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strate gic Planning 
Committee  2016, 2017  
39 South East Lincolnshire 
Strategic Employment Land 
Availability Assessment  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2017  
40 Greater Lincolnshire Destination 
Management Plan 2013 -2020  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2013  
41 Springfields: The East of 
England’s Premier Retail & 
Leisure Destination  UBS Triton Properties  2015  
42 Lincolnshire Structure Plan  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2006  
43 East Midlands Regional Plan  East Midlands Regional 
Assembly  2009  
44 Spalding Transport Strategy 
2014 -2036  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2014  
45 Boston Transport Strategy  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2017  
46 Planning policy for Traveller 
Sites  DCLG  August 2015  
47 Boston and South Holland 
Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment  Opinion Research 
Services  November 
2016  
48 UK Post -2010 Biodiversity 
Framework  JNCC and DEFRA  2012  
49 Lincolnshire Nature Strategy  Lincolnshire Biodiversity 
Partnership  2011  
50 Lincolnshire Natural 
Environment Strategy 2012 -
2018  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2012  
51 Climate Change Adaptation by 
Design - A Guide for 
Sustainable Communities  Town and Country 
Planning Association  2007  
52 Planning for a healthy 
environment – good practice for 
green infrastructure and 
biodiversity  Wildlife Trusts and Town 
and Country Planning 
Association  2012  
53 Development on  Land affected 
by Contamination  Yorkshire and 
Lincolnshire Pollution 
Advisory Group  2018 
54 Verification requirements for 
Cover Systems  Yorkshire and 
Lincolnshire Pollution 
Advisory Group  2017 
55 Verification requirements for 
Gas protection Systems  Yorkshire and 
Lincolnshire Pollution 2016  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reference 
Number  Document  Author  Publication 
Date  
Advisory Group  
56 Approach to Groundwater 
Protection  Environment Agency  2013  
57 Estimating Local Mortality 
Burdens associated with 
Particulate Air Pollution  Public Health England  2014  
58 Air Quality  and Emissions 
Mitigation Guidance for 
Developers  East Midlands Air Quality 
Network  2017  
59 Construction Code of Practice 
for the Sustainable Use of Soils 
on Construction Sites  DEFRA  2009  
60 UK Marine Policy Statement  HM Government  2011  
61 National Policy Statement for 
Renewable Energy  DECC  2011  
62 Water Stressed Areas – Final 
Classification  Environment Agency  2013  
63 Landscape Character 
Assessment of Boston Borough  ECUS Ltd  2009  
64 Strategic Landscape Capacity 
Study for South Holland  John Campion 
Associates Ltd  2003  
65 Lincolnshire Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Project  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2011  
66 Lincolnshire Joint Strategic 
Needs Assessment  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2011  
67 Joint Health and Wellbeing 
Strategy for Lincolnshire 2013 -
2018  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2013  
68 Countryside Access and Rights 
of Way Improvement Plan 
2007 -2012  Lincolnshire County 
Council  2007  
69 Technical Note 3 – Spalding 
Western Relief Road Phase 
North – Additional Traffic 
Modelling  Lincolnshire County 
Council Highways 
Alliance  2016  
70 South East Lincolnshire 
Housing Implementation 
Strategy  South East Lincolnshire 
Joint Strategic Planning 
Committee  2017  
71  Facilities for Primary and 
Community Care Services  Department of Health  2009  
 
 
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
13. Appendix 4: Expected housing completions  
Expected housing completions for each year of the Local Plan period for Boston Borough.   
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  
Notes  
Net completions (total number of dwellings built minus the number of dwellings lost to demolition)  
Completions  91 64 175 109 180 352 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 971 -  
Windfall allowance (number of dwellings expected to be built on sites that are not identified for development in the Local Plan)  
Windfalls  - - - - - - - - - 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 43 688 - It is assumed that over the next three years all ‘windfall’ 
completions will come from the stock of commitments. 
Thus, a windfall allowance is not applied until 2020/21.  
Commitments (sites with full or outline planning permission, and sites where there is a resolution to grant planning permissi on (as at 31st March 2017)  
B/14/0165 and 
B/15/0264 (land 
bounded by A16, 
London Road, Tytton 
Lane East & 
Causeway, Boston 
(known as Q1))  - - - - - - 62 62 62 62 62 62 62 62 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 502 0 Outline planning permission (B/14/0165) granted for the 
erection of 502 dwellings. Reserved matters permission 
(B/15/0264) granted for the erection of 147 dwellings in 
April 2017. Development began almost immediately and 
80 dwellings are currently under construction. 
Development is expected to proceed at an average of 
50-75 dwellings per annum.  
Other, smaller sites  - - - - - - 327 327 330 330 331 39 39 39 39 39 89 89 89 88 88 0 0 0 0 2,283  0 1,565 are on sites where development has not yet 
begun.  
Minus lapse rate  - - - - - - -18 -18 -19 -19 -19 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -9 -9 -9 -9 -9 0 0 0 0 -158 0 The lapse rate assumes that 10% of all planning 
permissions where development has not yet begun will 
not deliver any dwellings.  
Total from 
commitments  - - - - - - 371 371 373 373 374 97 97 97 41 35 80 80 80 79 79 0 0 0 0 2,627  0  
Sustain able Urban Extensions  allocated in the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  
Sou006  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 44 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 88 1,276  239 The site is being promoted by Chestnut Homes. They 
indicate that they expect development to begin in 2021, 
and proceed at 75 -100 dwellings p.a.  
Wes002  - - - - - - 0 38 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 50 0 0 1,138  0 The site is being promoted by Broadgate Homes, who 
have an undetermined (as at November 2017) outline 
application (B/17/0367) for 1,200 dwellings. They 
indicate that they expect development to begin in 
Summer 2018, and proceed at approximately 75 
dwellings per annum.  
Other Housing Allocations identified in the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  
Fen006  - - - - - - 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 240 0 Undetermined (as at November 2017) full application 
(B/16/0106) for 86 dwellings as phase 1. Agent 
indicates that local housebuilder & housing association 
who will undertake phase 1 are expected to develop the 
entire site.  
Fis001  - - - - - - 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 180 0 Planning Cttee resolved to grant outline p.p. for 180 
dwellings on 20th June 2017. Site is in the hands of 
Cyden Homes Ltd.  
Fis033  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 222 0 Site is in 4 ownerships, but all 4 parcels can be 
accessed independently. Agents acting for 2 owners 
indicate that negotiations with a housebuilder are 
advanced. Agent acting for 1 owner indicates that a 
housebuilder is being sought to enter into an Option  or 
Promotion Agreement.  
Wyb033  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 13 0 0 0 0 0 250 0 Site is in 4 ownerships. 1 owner indicates that marketing 
will follow imminent outline application (this parcel can South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  
Notes  
be accessed independently). 3 owners are working 
together & indicate that negotiations with a housebuilder 
are under way. This parcel can be accessed 
independently.  
Cen001  - - - - - - 0 12 12 12 12 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 60 0 Capacity from planning  application. Subject of an 
undetermined (as at November 2017) full application 
(B/17/0121) by developer for 60 dwellings.  
Fen001  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 55 0 Agent indicates that a planning application is intended 
to be submitted in 2017, & that the site will be marketed 
once p.p. is granted.  
Fen002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 35 0 Agent indicates that the site is being actively marketed.  
Fis002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 Agent indicates that marketing will begin shortly.  
Fis003  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 90 0 Owner indicates that survey work is underway in 
preparation for a planning application.  
Fis017a  
 - - - - - - 0 0 0 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 200 0 Undetermined (as at April 2018) outline application 
(B/17/0511) for up to 200 dwellings. No recent 
information on owner’s intentions or developer 
involvement  
Fis038  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 53 0 Agent indicates that a planning application is intended 
to be submitted in 2018 & that several housebuilders 
have expressed interest in the site.  
Nor006  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 71 0 Agent indicates that no planning application is expected 
shortly, & that the site is not currently being actively 
marketed (though it is for sale).  
Pil002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 13 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Pil006  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 19 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Wes001  - - - - - - 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 Agent indicates that full applications for 2 plots will be 
submitted in 2017 for marketing to  potential self -
builders.  
Wyb013  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 85 0 Agent indicates that outline application will shortly be 
submitted, & marketing will commence by Feb 2018.  
Wyb041  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 1 0 0 0 0 41 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Bic004  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 27 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Bic015  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Bic017  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 0 Site is in 2 ownerships, but both parcels can be 
accessed independently. Owners indicates that 
marketing to housebuilders is underway or will begin 
shortly.  
But002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 0 No recent information from landowner.   
But004  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 0 No recent information from landowner.  
But020  - - - - - - 0 0 0 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 The site is being promoted by Broadgate Homes, who 
suggest that: it will accommodate 23 dwellings; 
development will begin in 2020; and development will 
be completed within 1 year.  
Fis046  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 45 0 Agent indicates that a planning application  will be 
submitted in 2017 & that marketing will follow p.p.  
Kir016  - - - - - - 0 10 15 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 40 0 The site is being promoted by Kier Property who 
suggest that: it will accommodate 40 dwellings; 
development will begin in Q3 of 2018; and the scheme 
will be built out in a single phase of development.  
Kir034  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 41 0 Owner indicates that a contract with a housebuilder is 
expected to be completed by Oct 2017 which would 
require the submission of a planning application by Feb 
2018. However, development cannot begin until 
development of land to south has progressed.  
Kir041  - - - - - - 0 0 12 25 25 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 102 0 The site is in 3 ownerships. The owner of 81% of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  
Notes  
site indicates that a contract with a housebuilder is 
expected to be completed by Oct 2017 which would 
require the submission of a planning application by Feb 
2018. This parcel can be accessed independently. The 
owner of 8% of the site indicates that a pla nning 
application is intended to be submitted in late 2017, & 
that marketing will follow p.p. This parcel can be 
accessed independently.  The owner of 11% of the site 
indicates that marketing will commence by Sept 2018. 
This parcel will need to be accessed  via the largest 
parcel.  
Sut009/028  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 1 0 0 0 0 263 0 Agent indicates that discussions have taken place with 
a housebuilder & that matters will be taken further once 
the allocation is confirmed.  
Swi015  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 4 0 0 0 0 116 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Swi018  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 8 8 8 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 35 0 Owner indicates that marketing will begin in mid to late 
2018.  
Swi037  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 59 0 Site is in 2 ownerships, but they indicate that they are 
working together. Indicative layouts/designs are being 
prepared & discussions have taken place with a 
housebuilder.  
Wig014  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 0 Agents indicate that a planning application is likely to be 
submitted once the allocation is confirmed & that 
marketing would then follow.  
Wra013  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 45 0 Owner indicates that a planning application will be 
submitted shortly & marketing will commence once p.p. 
has been obtained.  
TOTAL SUPPLY  91 64 175 109 180 352 371 443 524 678 804 602 584 553 490 496 522 476 403 361 294 207 181 131 131 9,222  239  
TOTAL 
REQUIREMENT  310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 310 7,744  -  
 
Expected housing completions for each year of the Local Plan period for South Holland District  
 
 
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  
Notes  
Net completions (total number of dwellings built minus the number of dwellings lost to demolition)  
Completions  167 200 270 302 293 266 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,498  -  
Windfall allowance (number of dwellings expected to be built on sites that are not identified for development in the Local Pl an) 
Windfalls  - - - - - - - - - 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 53 848 0 It is assumed that, over the next three years, all ‘windfall’ 
completions will come from the stock of commitments. 
Thus, a windfall allowance is not applied until 2020/21  
Commitments (sites with full or outline planning permission, and sites where there is a resolution to grant planning permission (as at 31st March 2017)  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  Notes  
H16-0571 -09  
Holland Park, 
Spalding  - - - - - - 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 1,900  336 Outline planning permission (H16 -0571 -09) granted for the 
erection of 2,250 dwellings. Reserved matters permission 
(H16 -0464 -14) granted for the erection of 312 dwellings in 
October 2014. Development has begun, and 14 dwellings 
were built in 2016/17. Development is expected to proceed 
at an average of 100 dwellings per annum.  
H09-0521 -14 
Manor Farm, 
Fen Road, 
Holbeach  - - - - - - 0 0 38 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 838 62 Outline planning permission (H09 -0521 -14) granted for the 
erection of 900 dwellings. Reserved matters application 
(H09 -0331 -17) for 330 dwellings granted in November 
2017. Development is expected to begin in Summer 2019 
and to proceed at an average of 50 dwellings per annum.  
Other, smaller 
sites - - - - - - 376 375 375 374 374 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,874  0 1,151 are on sites where development has not yet begun.  
Minus lapse rate  - - - - - - -23 -23 -27 -28 -28 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -5 -199 -6 The lapse rate assumes that 10% of all planning 
permissions where development has not yet begun will not 
deliver any dwellings  
Total from 
commitments  - - - - - - 453 452 486 496 496 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 145 4,413  392  
Sustain able Urban Extensions allocated in the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  
Vernatts SUE 
(Pin045)  - - - - - - 0 0 0 25 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 1 0 676 0 The site is being promoted by Ashwood Homes. Funding 
for infrastructure investment is currently being sought.  
Vernatts SUE 
(Pin024)  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 38 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 1,088  2,200  The site is being promoted by Broadgate Homes, who 
suggest that they will apply for p.p. within 2 years of the 
Plan’s adoption, and that development will begin in 
2021/22  & proceed at 75 dwellings p.a. Funding for 
infrastructure investment is currently being sought.  
Holbeach West 
SUE (Hob048)  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 25 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 725 175 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. for 650 
dwellings on part of site, subject to S106A. No known 
housebuilder involvement. No recent information from 
landowner on remainder.  
Other Housing Allocations identified in the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan  
Pin025  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 No recent information from landowner. No known 
constraints.  
Pin050  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 0 Agent indicates that a planning application is intended to 
be submitted in 2017, and that a conditional contract  with a 
housebuilder is expected to be exchanged by Oct 2017.  
Stm004  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 140 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. subject to 
S106A. Agent indicates that preliminary discussions with a 
housebuilder are underway.  
Stm010  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 63 0 Agent indicates that, once the allocation is confirmed, 
either the site will be sold to a housebuilder, an outline 
application will be made, or a promotion/option agreement 
with a housebuilder will be sought.  
Stm028  - - - - - - 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 17 0 0 0 0 0 108 0 Owner indicates that 4 dwellings intended to be built 
before 2019. Remaining site may be marketed to 
housebuilders post -2023.  
Mon005  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 88 0 Agent indicates that a planning application will not be 
submitted until the Housing Allocation is confirmed. At that 
time housebuilders will be approached.  
Mon008  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 25 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 9 0 0 0 0 434 0 Agent indicates that preliminary layout proposals have 
been prepared, & that recent discussions have been had 
with 2 housebuilders. Housebuilders will be approached 
again once the allocation is confirmed.  
Cro011  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Cro036  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30 0 Agent indicates that a planning application will be South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  Notes  
submitted by February 2018. Marketing to housebuilders 
will take place once p.p. is secured and development costs 
are established.  
Cro043  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. subject to 
S106A. No known housebuilder involvement.  
Cro044  - - - - - - 0 7 15 15 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 41 0 Full p.p. for development of 41 homes granted to 
housebuilder on 21st Aug 2017.  
Cro046  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 22 0 Outline p.p. for development of up to 22 dwellings granted 
on 16th Aug 2017. No known housebuilder involvement.  
Cro050  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 70 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Don001  - - - - - - 0 0 12 25 25 19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 81 0 Undetermined (as at November 2017) full planning 
application from housebuilder to construct 81 dwellings.  
Don006  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 110 0 Agent indicates that recent advanced discussions with a 
housebuilder proved fruitless, & that an alternative 
housebuilder is being sought.  
Don008  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 72 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. for 73 
dwellings subject to S106A. No known housebuilder 
involvement.  
Don018  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 52 0 Agent indicates that an outline application will be made 
shortly, or a promotion/option agreement with a 
housebuilder will be sought.  
Don030  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 Agent indicates that recent advanced discussions with a 
housebuilder proved fruitless, & that an alternative 
housebuilder is being sought.  
Hob004  - - - - - - 0 8 8 8 8 4 0 0 0 12 25 25 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 109 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant full p.p. to 
housebuilder for 36 dwellings on part of site, subject to 
S106A. No recent information on remainder.  
Hob032  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 185 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. subject to 
S106A. No known housebuilder involvement.  
Pin002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 26 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Pin019  - - - - - - 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 34 0 Agent indicates that discussions with a housebuilder will 
be taken to formal offer stage once the allocation is 
confirmed.  
Pin065  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 49 0 Agent indicates that recent advanced discussions with a 
housebuilder proved fruitless, & that an alternative 
housebuilder is being sought.  
Los008  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 34 0 Owner indicates that agents have been engaged to market 
the site & to make a planning application.  
Los015  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 3 0 0 0 0 215 0 Agent indicates that work is underway towards submission 
of a planning application, & that marketing will commence 
once planning permission has been obtained.  
Los026  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 46 0 Agent indicates that the land will be marketed once the 
allocation is confirmed.  
Los046  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline p.p. on part of 
the site subject to S106A. No known developer 
involvement.  
Sub027  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 210 0 Agent indicates that discussions with housebuilders are 
on-going.  
Cow004  - - - - - - 0 16 16 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 48 0 Undetermined (as at November 2017) full planning 
application from housebuilder to construct 80 dwellings on 
these two sites.  Cow009  - - - - - - 0 10 11 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 32 0 
Fle003  - - - - - - 0 8 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 Undetermined (as at November 2017) full planning 
application from housebuilder to construct 23 dwellings. 
Housebuilder indicates that development will commence in 
early 2018.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  Notes  
Geh003  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 67 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Geh004  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16 0 Agent indicates that discussions have been held with a 
housebuilder, but that matters will not be formalised until 
the allocation is confirmed.  
Geh015  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 29 0 Agent indicates that discussions have been held with a 
housebuilder, but that matters will not be formalised until 
the allocation is confirmed.  
Gos001  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 76 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline residential 
p.p. subject to S106A. No known developer involvement.  
Gos003  - - - - - - 0 0 0 27 27 27 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 81 0 Housebuilder promoting the site suggests that they will 
apply for p.p. within 6 months of the Plan’s adoption, and 
that development will begin in early 2020 & be complete 
within 18 months.  
Gos006  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 Agent indicates that once the allocation is confirmed, they 
will begin to market the site to housebuilders.  
Gos023  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 70 0 Owner indicates that they are waiting for potential buyers 
and offers.  
Mou029  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 46 0 Undetermined (as at November 2017) outline planning 
application for  up to 78 dwellings. No known developer 
involvement.  
Mou042  - - - - - - 0 0 0 12 25 25 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 78 0 Agent indicates that a conditional contract has been 
entered into with a housebuilder, who is obliged to apply 
for p.p. by June 2018.  
Mou016  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17 0 Agent indicates that an indicative design has been 
prepared, a planning application will be submitted shortly, 
& that developers will not commit to the site until its 
allocation has been confirmed.  
Mou023  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Mou035  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 25 25 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 52 0 Subject of recent pre -application discussions.  
Qua002  - - - - - - 0 3 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 Full p.p. was granted on 4th August 2017. Agent indicates 
that the site’s sale to a housebuilder is contracted, & that 
development is likely to be completed within 2 years.  
Qua003  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 83 0 Outline p.p. was granted on 17th May 2017 for the 
residential development of part of the site. Agent indicates 
that layout proposals for the whole site are being prepared, 
the site is being marketed & developer interest is positive.  
Qua004  - - - - - - 0 0 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 0 Housebuilder promoting the site suggests that they will 
apply for p.p. within 4 months of the Plan’s adoption, and 
that development will begin in late 2019 & be complete 
within 12 months.  
Sur003 (part not 
covered by H17 -
0798 -15) - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 0 Outline p.p. is outstanding for residential development of 
the site’s frontage, and an outline application for the 
remainder is undetermined (as at November 2017). Agent 
indicates that, once p.p. is outstanding, marketing will 
begin.  
Sur006  - - - - - - 0 8 8 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 26 0 Full p.p. for the development of 26 dwellings was granted 
to a housebuilder on 3rd April 2017.  
Sur016  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 44 0 Agent indicates that the site is being marketed to 
housebuilders, & that discussions with several developers 
are underway.  
Suj007  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Suj012  - - - - - - 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 42 0 Outline p.p. was granted on 6th June 2017. Owner 
indicates that the sale of the land to a housebuilder will be 
finalised shortly.  
Tyd014  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 0 Owner indicates that marketing will begin once the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
2031/32  
2032/33  
2033/34  
2034/35  
2035/36  
TOTAL   2011 -2036  
After 31.3.36  Notes  
allocation is confirmed.  
Wsn003  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 12 25 25 25 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 135 0 Planning Cttee has resolved to grant outline residential 
p.p. subject to S106A. Owner indicates that the site will be 
marketed once p.p. is outstanding.  
Wsn022  - - - - - - 0 12 25 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 60 0 Full p.p. for 60 dwellings was granted on 21st August 2017 
to a housebuilder.  
Wsn029  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 25 20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 57 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Wha002  - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 8 8 7 0 0 0 0 0 39 0 No recent information from landowner.  
Wha019  - - - - - - 0 0 0 8 8 8 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 27 0 Outline p.p. was granted in April 2017 for the residential 
development of part of the site. Owner indicates that 
discussions with a housebuilder are on -going.  
TOTAL 
SUPPLY  167 200 270 302 293 266 453 524 605 786 930 816 807 753 704 764 738 667 550 495 385 373 373 324 323 12,868  2,767   
TOTAL 
REQUIREMENT  467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 467 11,681  -  
 
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
14. Appendix 5: Allocations – Infrastructure requirements, 
constraints and mitigation  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Employment 
Allocations in Boston Borough  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All Sites   Surface water – all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and  
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
BO001  
Boston 
Endeavour 
Park 
  No known constraints that could render intensification un viable, as 
infrastructure and highways provided to each unit and the boundaries 
of the available land.  
 Upfront investment would be required to open -up the greenfield 
extension to the north - access, foul and water recycling improvements 
and flood mitigation surface water drainage would be required.  
BO006 
Riverside 
Industrial 
Estate, 
Boston   No known constraints tha t could render intensification un viable, as 
infrastructure and highways provided to the unit and the boundaries of 
each plot of available land.  
 Upfront investment would be required to open -up the available land - 
water, foul and water recycling improvement s, flood mitigation and 
surface water drainage would be required.  
BO008  
Q2: The 
Quadrant, 
Boston*#   No known constraints that could render development un viable. 
 Significant upfront investment would be required to open -up the wider 
site - highways, water, foul & water recycling, flood mitigation & surface 
water drainage would be required.  
 Delivery is likely to be long term following housing development on the 
wider site.  
 Project management team on board, supported by the LEP.  
KI001  
Kirton 
Distribution 
Park*#  No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as spine road, flood mitigation, drainage and landscaping in 
place for the site which minimises opening -up costs for future 
occupiers.  
SU001  
Sutterton 
Enterprise 
Park  No known constraints that could render intensification or 
redevelopment of units for employment use un viable, as infrastructure 
and highways provided to each unit. Opportunities exist for 
intensification on the site.  
SU003  
Love Lane, 
Sutterton   No known constraints  that could render development of the site 
unviable, as access and utilities provided to the site.  
 Access, utilities, water and foul water improvements, surface water 
drainage may need to be upgraded for new development.  
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Infrastructure requirements, con straints and mitigation - Employment 
Allocations in South Holland District  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All Sites   Surface water – all developments should seek t o reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
CRO01  
Crease Drove 
Business 
Park, 
Crowland   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as infrastructure and highways provided to the available land.  
 Water and foul water improvements, flood mitigation  and surface water 
drainage would be required for new development.  
CRO07  
Thoney 
Road, 
Crowland   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as highways provided to the boundary.  
 Access, water and foul water improvements, flood  mitigation and 
surface water drainage would be required for new development.  
HO002  
Holbeach 
Food 
Enterprise 
Zone*#   Significant upfront investment required including: access (funding in 
place/ mechanisms identified to secure it), utilities (electricity, water & 
foul water, surface water drainage & flood mitigation.  
 Planning permission for University of Lincoln establishment in place.  
LO002  
Bridge Road 
Industrial 
Estate, Long 
Sutton   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as access & utilities provided to each unit.  
 Access, utilities, water & foul water, surface water drainage & flood 
mitigation would be required.  
LO009  
Bridge Road, 
Long Sutton*   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as a ccess and utilities provided to the boundary.  
 Access, utilities, water and foul water improvements, surface water 
drainage and flood mitigation would be required for new development.  
SP001 
Wardentree 
Lane, 
Spalding   No known constraints that could render d evelopment of the site 
unviable, as access & utilities provided to each unit & to the boundary 
of each vacant plot.  
 Access, utilities, water & foul water, surface water drainage & flood 
mitigation may need to be upgraded.  
SP002  
Lincs 
Gateway, 
Spalding *#   No known constraints that could render development of un viable: 
access & utilities provided to the boundary.  
 The site has PP for mixed use.  
 Access, utilities, water & foul water, surface water drainage & flood 
mitigation may need upgrades.  
SP012  
Clay L ake, 
Spalding*   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as access & utilities provided to each unit & to the boundary 
of each vacant plot.  
 Part of the site has PP for employment.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Access, utilities, water & foul water, surf ace water drainage & flood 
mitigation may need to be upgraded.  
 Electricity lines cross the southern part of the site - with careful design 
adverse impacts could be mitigated.  
SB002 
Wingland, 
Sutton Bridge   Poor electricity supply not capable of accommodat ing high energy 
uses.  
 Site at high flood risk so flood mitigation costs are likely to be high.  
 Small scale development could be accommodated - access, utilities, 
surface water drainage & flood mitigation may need to be upgraded.  
SB005  
Railway Lane 
Indus trial 
Estate, 
Sutton Bridge   No known constraints that could render development of the site 
unviable, as access and utilities provided to the boundary of the 
available land.  
 Access, utilities, water and foul water improvements, surface water 
drainage may need to be upgraded for new development.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Boston  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – the town’s primary schoo ls are effectively at 
capacity, and 3.5 additional Forms of Entry (FE) will be required to 
accommodate additional needs to 2036. These needs are intended to 
be met by: the expansion of Boston St Nicholas CE Primary by 0.5 FE; 
the expansion of Boston West A cademy by 1.0 FE; and the provision 
of a new 2FE primary school within the South West Quadrant 
Sustainable Urban Extension (Sou006).  
 Secondary and sixth form education – there is no capacity in the town’s 
secondary schools, and 700 school places (including  165 sixth form 
places) will be required to accommodate additional needs to 2036. 
These needs will be met by the provision of a new secondary school 
on a site yet to be identified close to the South of North Forty Foot 
(Wes002) Sustainable Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at the town’s GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, in the long term, a 
new GP surgery may be required to accommodate additional patients.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
Sou006   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be r equired.  
 The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 The site’s development will deliver a section of the Boston Distributor 
Road from London Road to the site and West End Road.  
 The site’s development will deliver open space comprising equipped 
play space, informal play space and space of ecological value 
combined with Sustainable Urban Drainage systems and linked with 
integrated f ootpaths and, where possible, providing wider access to the 
existing permissive footpath/cycleway network.  
 Development will deliver the site for a new 2FE primary school.  
 In order to retain the rural character of the neighbouring Scheduled 
Ancient Monument , the existing belt of trees between the site and the 
Monument must be reinforced. White bargeboards and buildings of 3 
storeys or over will not be acceptable in those parts of the site close to 
the Monument.  
 Potential impacts on TPO trees will need to be avoided by careful 
layout & design.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Wes002   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The site’s development will deliver a section of the Boston Distributor 
Road extending to the North Forty Foot Drain.  
 The site’s development will deliver open space comprising equipped 
play space, informal play space and space of ecologi cal value 
combined with Sustainable Urban Drainage systems and linked with 
integrated footpaths and, where possible, providing wider access to the 
existing permissive footpath/cycleway network.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies floo d hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fen006   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The site’s development will require improvements to be made to 
existing loc al highway infrastructure - widening, and footway & 
drainage provision.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Development will be required to include ap propriate mitigation.  
Fis001   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 It is likely that part of the site has been contaminated by previous use, 
and that remediation works will be required.  
 Existing footpath routes across the site will need to be retained within 
any new residential layout.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fis017a   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be requ ired. 
 Vehicular access can be achieved via a simple priority junction (with 
suitable sized radii) off the A52. However, there is no footway on the 
south side of Wainfleet Road and it would not be acceptable for a 
development of this size to not have a cont inuous link formed from the 
end of the existing footway.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitig ation.  
Fis033   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the  
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 No development will be permitted within 9m of the Internal Drainage 
Board (IDB) watercourses located on the site’s southern and northern 
boundaries and which bisect the site without the prior consent of the 
IDB. 
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Wyb033   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 Upgrades to the treatment capacity of the Frampton Water Recycling 
Centre and enhancements to the capacity of the foul sewerage 
network will be required.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 An existing footpath route across th e site will need to be retained within 
any new residential layout.  
 Improvement works to Tytton Lane East are likely to be required - 
widening and overlaying of the carriageway, the provision of footways, 
kerbs, drainage and street lighting.  
 2 points of veh icular access are likely to be required.  
 Potential impacts from the proximity of the A16 will need to be 
mitigated.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m.  
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Cen001   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 Development proposals will need to be informed by a Heritage Impact 
Assessment, to address impacts on the historic townscape (given that 
the site is within the Boston Conservation Area and that there are 
neighbouring listed buildings).  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a , and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fen001   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The creation of a vehicular access may require the relocation of 
telecommunication infrastructure.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation . 
Fen002   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The creation of a vehicular access may require the relocation of a 
street l ight. 
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fis002   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has  capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The frontage hedge will have to be removed in order to allow the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
formation of appropriate visibility splays.  
 The site is w ithin Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fis003   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an  upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 No development will be permitte d within 9m of the Internal Drainage 
Board (IDB) watercourse located on the site’s eastern boundary 
without the prior consent of the IDB.  
 More than one point of vehicular access should be provided, and a 
frontage footway & highway drainage will be required . 
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Fis038   The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has c apacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 Mitigation for the loss of foraging grounds for Pink Footed Geese may 
be required.  
 The footway on the west side of Church Gr een Road will need to be 
extended across the frontage of some existing dwellings to provide a 
continuous route for pedestrians.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘ 0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Nor006   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 Potential impacts on the Local Wildlife Site to the site’s south will need 
to be explored and mitigated, if necessary.  
 In order to mitigate potential impacts on the Historic Park or Garden to 
the south, the site should be surrounded by a traditional everg reen 
hedge such as green privet or hornbeam.  
 Development at the southern end of the site should be largely single 
storey to relate to the existing properties on Red Cap Lane.  
 Although the vehicular access is adequate in width and visibility is 
acceptable i n both directions, embankment works & relationship to an 
existing tree/street light would require care.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Pil002   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 It is possibl e that the site has been contaminated by previous use, and 
that remediation works will be required.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development wi ll be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Pil006   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 Development proposals will need to be informed by a Heritage Impact 
Assessment, to address impacts on the historic townscape (given that 
the site is adjacent to the Boston Conservation Area and that there are 
neighbouring listed buildings).  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Wes001   The Boston Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Wyb013   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 Upgrades to the treatment capacity of the Frampton Water Recycling 
Centre and enhancements to the capaci ty of the foul sewerage 
network will be required.  
 Vehicular access could be achieved via the existing main access off 
Wortleys Lane (with some carriageway widening & highway 
improvements). The existing access off the A52 is potentially 
acceptable but it wo uld be safer if access were taken from Wortleys 
Lane.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Wyb041   Water resources are adequate to serve this site, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 Upgrades to the treatment capacity of the Frampton Water Recycling 
Centre and enhancements to the capacity of the foul sewerage  
network will be required.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 It is possible that the site has been contaminated by previous use, and 
that remediation works will be required.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Spalding  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites  Primary education - there is no capacity currently available in Spalding. 
A new 3FE primary school is required from development at Holland 
Park in Spalding, on 2.7ha of land, to be built in phases: initially 2FE 
followed by 1FE extension;  
 Secondary  education - capacity is currently available at Spalding 
secondary schools which are ‘closest to development’. There is a 
likelihood that capacity will fill as children cannot attend schools at 
Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings. A new secondary school will be requi red 
in the second five -year period of the plan; and land for this (to the west 
of Monk’s House Lane) has been allocated in the Local Plan.  
 Sixth form education - the closest sixth form is in Spalding; sixth -form 
capacity echoes capacity in the secondary sc hools of which they are 
part (some capacity available).  
 Health - the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at  the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients. However, county -wide there is an increasing shortage of 
GP’s,  nurses and other healthcare staff which could affect future 
capacity should demand increase.  
 Water supply  – Anglian Water has commented that there is adequate 
water capacity to meet the proposed development.  
 Waste water – the Environment Agency has commen ted that Spalding 
water recycling centre has capacity for 25,000 dwellings. Anglian 
Water has commented that the water recycling centre has sufficient 
capacity.  
 Water supply/sewerage networks - Anglian Water has commented that 
a number of the proposed hou sing allocations in this area are expected 
to require improvements to the existing water supply and/or foul 
sewerage network to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
Pin045  
Vernatts 
Sustainable 
Urban  The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’ 
and flood depth in 2115 as up to 1m. Development will be required to South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Extension 
(SUE): 
Phases 1 and 
2 (part)  include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply net work: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may b e required.  
 The site’s development will deliver a major part of the Northern section 
of the Spalding Western Relief Road (SWRR) extending approximately 
to Two Plank Bridge.  
 The site’s development (forming Phase 1 and part of Phase 2 of the 
Vernatts SUE) wi ll deliver open space comprising equipped play 
space, informal play space and space of ecological value combined 
with Sustainable Urban Drainage systems and linked with integrated 
footpaths and, where possible, providing wider access to the existing 
permis sive footpath/cycleway network.  
 Gas mains cross the site  
 Water mains and sewers cross the site  
 The SHDC contaminated land register refers to the railway line and to 
filled land near this site.  
 A heritage impact assessment will inform the master planning of  the 
site. The heritage impact assessment will identify heritage assets 
including non -designated archaeology, assess their significance, and 
assess the impact of the development on their significance. 
Appropriate measures for mitigation and enhancement wil l be identified 
and set out in the assessment; and its results should inform the 
approaches to the layout and design of development across the site. 
Planning applications for the site should accord with the heritage 
impact assessment.  
Pin024  
Vernatts 
SUE:  Phases 
2 (part)  and 3   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for some’, ‘low hazard and ‘no 
hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as up to 0.5m. Development will be 
required to include appropr iate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed gr owth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The site’s development (forming Phase 3 and part of Phase 2 of the 
Vernatts SUE) will deliver the remaining part of the Northern section of 
the SWRR and a significant part of its Central section up to, but 
exclu ding, a bridge crossing of the Vernatt’s Drain.  
 The site’s development (forming Phase 3 and part of Phase 2 of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Vernatts SUE) will deliver open space comprising equipped play 
space, informal play space and space of ecological value combined 
with Sustai nable Urban Drainage systems and linked with integrated 
footpaths and, where possible, providing wider access to the existing 
permissive footpath/cycleway network.  
 The site’s development (forming Phase 3 of the Vernatts SUE) will 
deliver: a local centre; a  nursery and primary school; healthcare 
facilities; and sports and recreational facilities.  
 Water mains cross the site  
 The site wraps around a pottery which is identified on the SHDC 
contaminated land register.  
 A heritage impact assessment will inform the  master planning of the 
site. The heritage impact assessment will identify heritage assets 
including non -designated archaeology, assess their significance, and 
assess the impact of the development on their significance. 
Appropriate measures for mitigation and enhancement will be identified 
and set out in the assessment; and its results should inform the 
approaches to the layout and design of development across the site. 
Planning applications for the site should accord with the heritage 
impact assessment.  
Pin025   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for some’ and ‘low hazard’ and 
flood depth in 2115 as up to 0.5m. Development will be required to 
include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Pin050   The site is w ithin Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as 90% of it being a roughly equal combination of ‘no hazard’, 
‘low hazard’ and ‘danger for some’ with flood depth in 2115 as up to 
0.5m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strate gy. 
Stm004   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as 90% ’danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as up to 1m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 Vehicular  access to the site from Cradge Bank Road will not be 
acceptable.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the  Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Stm010   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as 77% ‘danger for most’ and flood depth up to 2m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: in frastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be requir ed. 
 The absence of a footway on the site’s Spalding Common frontage 
needs to be addressed.  
 There is potential for the site to form an extension to the Holland Park 
SUE.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects fea tured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Stm028   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as 73% ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as up to 2m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capaci ty: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The absence of a footway on the site’s Spalding Common frontage 
needs to be addressed.  
 There is potential for the site to form an extensi on to the Holland Park South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
SUE.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Mon005   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as zero. Development 
will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Waste water has sufficient capacity for this site  
 The foul sewera ge network requires upgrading for this site  
 Sewers and water mains cross the site  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infra structure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The site lies within a significant Iron Age Romano British landscape 
and further information may be required.  
 The site will be subject to financia l contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  
Mon008   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as zero. Development 
will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 Waste water has sufficient capacity for this site  
 The foul sewerage network requires upgrading for this site  
 Sewers and water mai ns cross the site  
 Water supply network: infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades 
required to serve proposed growth or diversion of assets may be 
required.  
 Foul sewerage network capacity: infrastructure and/or treatment 
upgrades required to serve proposed g rowth or diversion of assets 
may be required.  
 The site lies within a significant Iron Age Romano British landscape 
and further information may be required.  
 The site will be subject to financial contributions towards the funding of 
projects featured in the Spalding Transport Strategy in accordance with 
the provisions of policy 30: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Crowland  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education - there is limited capacity at the primary school in 
Crowland. Three additional classrooms could accommodate the 
additional need generated by the housing allocations (excluding sites 
with planning per mission) and the school has sufficient land to expand.  
 Secondary and sixth form education - there is a lack of capacity at 
secondary level and at sixth form level at The Deepings (the nearest 
secondary school and sixth form); additional land would be requi red to 
accommodate demand from new development.  
 Health - currently there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
accommodate additional patients, however County wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff which 
could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).  
 Sewage treatment - the Crowland Water Recycling Centre has 
capacity to serve all si tes however, in terms of the foul sewerage 
network, infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades will be required to 
serve the proposed growth (or a diversion of assets may be required).  
 Water resources - are adequate to serve the proposed growth, 
however inf rastructure of treatment upgrades will be required to serve 
the proposed growth (or a diversion of assets may be required) in 
Crowland.  
Cro011   The sites development will require the footway to be extended to the 
site. 
 There appears to be a filled dyke on part of the site. This should be 
taken into consideration as part of the design and layout.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as mostly ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as 0.5m -
1.0m. Development will be  required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Cro036   Access to the land would require significant widening and upgrading of 
Low Road, the provision of a footway and formal drainage.  
 A water pipe crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing water main within the design 
then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry 
Act 1991.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and th e SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as mostly ‘danger for most’ with some ‘danger for all’ and flood 
depth in 2115 is mainly 0.5m -1.0m. Development will be required to 
include appropriate mitigation.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Cro04 3  The site is within Flood Zone 2, and the SFRA  identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 ranges from 0m to 
0.25-0.5m. Development will be required to include appropriate 
mitigation.  
Cro044   Part of the site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring 
further investigation.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 2, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘da nger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 ranging from 0 - 
0.25m to 0.5 -1.0m. Development will be required to include appropriate 
mitigation.  
Cro046   Reform Street is a one -way street and it appears that existing residents 
habitually park on the east side of this road. Sufficient off -street parking 
for residents and visitors would therefore be required on this site.  
 A sewer pipe crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then 
diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 
1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 1, and the SFRA ident ifies flood hazard in 
2115 as mostly ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 ranging from 
0 - 0.25m to 0.5 -1.0m. Development will be required to include 
appropriate mitigation.  
Cro050   The site should preferably be accessed from both Normanton Road 
and J ubilee Way.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as mostly ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 of mainly 
0.5m -1.0m although there is a small area of 1.0m -2.0m.. Development 
will be required to include approp riate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Donington  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education - there is no capacity at the primary school in 
Donington. Five additional classrooms could accommodate the 
additional need generated by the housing allocations (excluding sites 
with planning permission) but the school has sufficient land to extend.  
 Secondary education - there is a lack of capacity a t secondary level at 
Donington; additional land would be required to accommodate demand 
from new development.  
 Sixth form education - the nearest Sixth form (within a school) is in South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Spalding, which has some capacity available to meet the need 
identified.  
 Health - currently there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
accommodate additional patients, however County -wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff which 
could affect future capacity should demand increase . 
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).  
 Sewerage treatment - the Environment Agency has advised that 
Anglian Water be consulted relating to the phasing of development to 
ensur e that adequate capacity is available to deal with foul water 
drainage before new dwellings are occupied. The foul sewerage 
network would require upgrading for all sites.  
 Water resources – water resources are adequate to serve the 
proposed growth, however the supply network would require upgrading 
for all sites.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised that there are no major 
archaeological issues for housing allocations in Donington, but further 
information may be required depending on the development.  
Don001   Frontage footpaths, kerbs and drainage are required and a 
watercourse may need to be culverted or piped.  
 Although some of the site is within Flood Zones 2 and 3a, the SFRA 
identifies flood hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 
as ‘no depth ’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation will be 
required.  
Don006   Upgrades to the Water Recycling Centre will be required to 
accommodate this site; infrastructure and/or treatment upgrades will be 
required to serve the proposed growth (or a diver sion of assets may be 
required).  
 A frontage footway, kerbs and drainage would be required and need to 
extend northwards if Don001 does not come forward first.  
 The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring further 
investigation.  
 Although  most of the site is within Flood Zones 2 and 3a, the SFRA 
identifies flood hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 
as ‘no depth’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation will be 
required.  
Don008   The site is adjacent to a haulage distribution site which will impact on 
the residential amenities of this site. Impacts can be reduced through 
careful site layout, house design, bunding/screening and acoustic 
vents to bedrooms facing the site.  
 A sewer pi pe crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water I ndustry Act 
1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be considered.  
 Although the site is within Flood Zone 3a, the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘no depth’. It 
is therefore unlikely that flood m itigation will be required.  
Don018   Vehicular access from Wykes Lane (an unclassified road) to the east 
would not be acceptable.  
 Although part of the site is within Flood Zone 3a, the SFRA identifies 
flood hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2 115 as ‘no 
depth’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation will be required.  
Don030   The carriageway is suitable but where would need to be a footway to 
the existing network.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring further 
investigation.  
 Although some of the site is within Flood Zones 2 and 3a, the SFRA 
identifies flood hazar d in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 
as ‘no depth’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation will be 
required.  
Reserve Site 
Don035   It might be possible to serve the site with a single access onto the 
A152, however two access points that are connected internally is 
preferable. A frontage footway will need to be provided westwards 
along the A152 to the end of the existing village footway network, as 
well as any associated drainage and street lighting. A vehicular access 
onto Town Dam Lane w ould not be appropriate however a footway 
connection in the south -western corner of the site would be beneficial 
to provide permeability.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be requi red 
depending on the development.  
 The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring further 
investigation.  
 Although some of the site is within Flood Zones 2 and 3a, the SFRA 
identifies flood hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 
as ‘no depth’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation will be 
required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Holbeach  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites  Primary education - new one form entry primary school and extensions South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
of two existing primary schools are planned over the life of the 
proposed developments (which may go beyond this plan period).  
 Secondary education and sixth form - There is a lack o f capacity at 
secondary level and sixth form level at University Academy Holbeach.  
 Health – there are some issues around the capacity of GP surgeries in 
Holbeach and County -wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff whi ch could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).  
 Sewerage treatment – the Water Recycling Centre has capacity to 
serve all of the sites, however the foul sewerage network will require 
upgrading to accommodate the sites.  
 Water resources – water resources are adequate to serve the 
proposed growth, however the water supply network will require 
upgrading to accommodate the sites.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised that there are no major 
archaeological issues for housing allocations in Holbeach, but further 
information may be required depending on the development.  
Hob004   The site is adjacent to the A17 and the road’s proximity may i mpact 
upon on the amenities that would be enjoyed by new dwellings at the 
northern end of the site. A noise assessment may be required to 
identify noise levels. If necessary, the amenities of future residents 
should be appropriately protected through, for example: site layout; 
house design; bunding/screening; and/or acoustic vents to bedrooms 
facing the road.  
 Part of the site is the subject of a Planning Committee resolution to 
grant full planning permission for 36 dwellings (s106 required). 
However, it do es not appear that this site provides the means by which 
to extend the carriageway into the remainder of Hob004. The footway 
on the north side of Foxes Low Road does not currently extend to the 
site and there is not sufficient verge alongside the road with in which a 
footway could be constructed. The Highway Authority advises that they 
could not be supportive of any application that did not make adequate 
provision for safe non -motorised access. It may be possible to access 
the eastern part of Hob004 via Hob0 32, however it is currently 
unknown whether the reserved matters application for Hob032 will 
seek to address this issue.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for some’, ‘danger for most’ , ‘no 
hazard’ and ‘low hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ up to 
1.0m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Hob032  
  Access to the site from Kings Road is prohibited by a planning 
condition.  
 A sewer and water pipe cros s the site and must remain accessible. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
The design and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If 
it is not possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design 
then diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry 
Act 1991 or entering into a build over/near agreement may be 
considered.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a , and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’ 
and flood depth in 2115 as up to 1.0m. Development will be required to 
include appropriate mitigation.  
Holbeach 
West SUE 
(Hob048)  
 
  the site is adja cent to the A17 and the A151, the proximity which may 
impact upon on the amenities that would be enjoyed by new dwellings 
at the northern and western extents of the site. A noise assessment 
may be required to identify noise levels. If necessary, the amenit ies of 
future residents should be appropriately protected through, for 
example: site layout; house design; bunding/screening; and/or acoustic 
vents to bedrooms facing the road.  
 A roundabout onto the A151 at the west of the site has already been 
constructe d which can form a principal junction into the site. A further 
junction onto the A151 and Spalding Road may be constructed and 
small extensions of estate roads to the west of Holbeach as cul -de-
sacs may be acceptable. There would be no connection from the A151 
and the residential roads to the west of Holbeach.  
 The site has considerable heritage significance as it comprises the 
immediate and wider setting of a Grade II listed building (The Old 
Cottage). A wide buffer would preserve some of the setting from the 
impact of urbanisation.  
 A sewer pipe crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then 
diversion may be pos sible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 
1991.  
 The site lies within the encroachment zone for Holbeach Water 
Recycling Centre. A detailed odour assessment would be required to 
demonstrate that a suitable distance is provided from Holbeach Water 
Recycling Centre and sensitive residential development as part of the 
detailed masterplanning of the site.  
 There is the potential for contaminated land at the site; however there 
are no outstanding land contamination concerns subject to site 
characterisation  and the submission of a remediation scheme.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’ 
and flood depth in 2115 as up to1.0m. Development will be required to 
include appropriate mitigation.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Reserve Site 
Hob011   The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring further 
investigation.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be req uired 
depending on the development.  
 The access to the site needs to be located where the existing 
agricultural buildings are currently situated provided that adequate 
visibility can be achieved. Access in front of Maple Grove would not be 
acceptable. There  is no footway on the southern side of Hall Gate.  
 A water main pipe crosses the site and must remain accessible. The 
design and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is 
not possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the desig n then 
diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 
1991.  
 Although the site is within Flood Zone 3a, the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘no depth’. It 
is therefore unlikely that flood  mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Kirton  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary and secondary education – the village’s primary  and 
secondary schools have sufficient capacity to accommodate additional 
needs to 2036.  
 Sixth form education – there is no capacity in the closest sixth forms 
(Boston).  Needs to 2036 will be met by the provision of a new 
secondary school (including 165 s ixth form places) on a site yet to be 
identified close to the South of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate to serve the sites, but an upgrade to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 Upgrades to the treatment capacity of the Frampton Water Recycling 
Centre and e nhancements to the capacity of the foul sewerage 
network will be required.  
Kir016   An existing footpath route across the site will need to be retained within South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
any new residential layout.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard  
in 2115 as ‘danger for some’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.25m to 
0.5m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Kir034   An existing footpath route across the site will need to be retained within 
any new residential layout.  
 The site  is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘low’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m. Development 
will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Kir041   Development proposals will need to be informed by a Heritage Im pact 
Assessment, to address impacts on the historic townscape & in 
particular how it would preserve & enhance the CA.  
 Vehicular access from Woodside Road would not be acceptable, but 
pedestrian/cycle access would be desirable.  
 The site is within Flood Zone  3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for some’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.25m to 
0.5m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Reserve site 
Kir036   Potential impacts from the proximity of the A16 will need  to be 
mitigated.  
 The carriageway of Horseshoe Lane is suitable to serve residential 
development on this site, and there is an existing frontage footway & 
street lighting. Direct access onto the A16 would not be acceptable.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a , and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Long Sutton  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education - there is no capacity at the primary school in Long 
Sutton at the present time, and there is limited capacity to expand. An 
additional three classrooms would be required; additional playing field 
land would be required to enable the primary school to expand.  
 Secondary education - there is limited secondary capacity in Long 
Sutton from 2016 -2018, additional capacity would be required but The 
Peele School has sufficient land to expand.  
 Sixth form education - there is a lack of capacity at sixth form level at 
University Academy Holbeach.  
 Health - currently there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
accommodate additional patients, howev er County wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff which 
could affect future capacity should demand increase.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Syst ems (SuDS).  
 Sewage treatment – the Water Recycling Centre has capacity to serve 
all the sites, however the foul sewerage network would require 
upgrading for all of the sites.  
 Water resources – water resources are adequate to serve the 
proposed growth, howe ver the water supply network would require 
upgrading to accommodate all of the sites.  
Los008   The site should come forward with or after Los026 in order to preserve 
visual integrity of the settlement.  
 The existing frontage footway and surface water drainage would need 
to be extended to the site. Ideally there should be a vehicular 
connection to Los026 and Anfield Road/Magpie Close.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2 115 as 0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Los015   This site should be developed with a comprehensive road layout with 
access onto both Seagate Road and Wisbech Road  
 A sewer pipe crosses the site and must remain ac cessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then 
diversion may be possible under section 185 of the Water Industry Act 
1991 or entering into a bu ild over/near agreement may be considered.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requi ring further 
investigation.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and ‘danger for some’ and flood depth in 
2115 as mostly 0.25m to 1.0m. Development will be required to include 
appropriate mitig ation.  
Los026   The site should come forward with or before Los008 in order to 
preserve visual integrity of the settlement.  
 The frontage footway, drainage and street lighting along Lime Walk will 
need to be extended. A secondary access off Magpie Close and a 
connection to Los008 would be desirable.  
 The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flo od hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as mostly 0.5m to 
1.0m with some 1.0m -2.0m. Development will be required to include South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
appropriate mitigation.  
Los046   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as 0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Pinchbeck  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure req uirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education - additional capacity is filtering through the primary 
school to 2018, but there is limited capacity available going forward.  
 Secondary education - there is currently capacity at Spalding 
secondary schools, but a new secondary school will be required in the 
second phase of the plan.  
 Sixth form education - there is currently capacity at Spalding secondary 
schools, but a new secondary school will be required in the second 
phase of the plan.  
 Health - currently there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
accommodate additional patients, however County wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff which 
could affect future capacity should demand increas e. 
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).  
 Sewage treatment – the Spalding Water Recycling Centre and foul 
sewerage network has capacity to serve all the sites.  
 Water resources – water resources are adequate to serve the 
proposed growth. However, the supply network would require 
upgrading to accommodate all the sites.  
Pin002   The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information  may be required 
depending on the development.  
 The principle of re -developing this existing nursery site for residential 
use is acceptable in highway terms, however there would need to be 
provision made for pedestrian access.  
 There is filled land to the bo undaries. This should be taken into 
consideration as part of the design and layout.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as a combination of ‘danger for some’ and ‘low hazard’ and 
flood depth in 2115 between 0m and  0.5m. Development will be 
required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Pin019   The County Archaeologist has advised the site has no major 
archaeological issues, but further information may be required 
depending on the development.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 A frontage footway linkin g to Oldham Drive would be required.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
and depth in 2115 as predominantly ‘no hazard’. However, a small part 
of the site (approx. 10%) has a predicted depth of 0m -0.25m. It is 
therefore u nlikely that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Pin065   Access off Herdgate Lane would not be acceptable.  
 A footway link to the existing network will need to be considered.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard  
in 2115  as a combination of ‘low hazard’ and ‘no hazard’ and flood 
depth in 2115 ranging between ‘no depth’ and 0m -0.25m. It is therefore 
unlikely that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Sutterton  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – the village’s primary school is at capacity, and 
extension to 1 Form of Entry (FE) will be required to accom modate 
current demand and additional needs to 2036. This will require the 
provision of 3 additional classrooms, although additional land will not 
be required.  
 Secondary education – Kirton’s secondary school has sufficient 
capacity to accommodate additional  needs to 2036.  
 Sixth form education – there is no capacity in the closest sixth forms 
(Boston).  Needs to 2036 will be met by the provision of a new 
secondary school (including 165 sixth form places) on a site yet to be 
identified close to the South of No rth Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff  
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 The Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate sewage 
flows from this site, but enhancements to the capacity of the foul 
sewerage network will be required.  
 Surface water – all developments  should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Sut009/028   Although the site does not abut heritage assets, the settings of the 
listed church & 2 other listed buildings on Station Road include the site 
and a large road junction on Station Road should be avoided. In order 
to preserve views of the church spire, any scheme will need to be well 
landscaped, low density and no higher than two storey wit h attics.  
 Potential impacts from neighbouring commercial uses will need to be 
mitigated.  
 An existing footpath route across the site will need to be retained within 
any new residential layout.  
 There are 3 potential access points: from Station Rd; from Spald ing Rd 
towards the site's western end (if the footway is extended to the new 
junction); and from Spalding Rd towards the site's eastern end. 
Pedestrian and cycle access onto Love Lane would be desirable & the 
internal road layout should be designed to disc ourage 'rat -running'.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for some’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Reserve Site 
Sut034   Wigtoft Rd is suitable to serve residential development on this site, the 
frontage is large enough to accommodate the required junction & 
visibility splays, & there is an existing frontage footway & the road has 
street lighting. The junction should be located towa rds the eastern end 
of the frontage.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘low hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Sutton Bridge  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
Sub027   Primary education – there is sufficient capacity at the primary school in 
Sutton Bridge for the l evel of development proposed.  
 Secondary education - there is limited secondary capacity from 2016 -
2018, additional capacity would be required but The Peele School has 
sufficient land to expand.  
 Sixth form education - there is a lack of capacity at sixth f orm level at 
University Academy Holbeach.  
 Health - currently there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
accommodate additional patients, however County wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff which 
could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water - all developments should seek to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).  
 Sewage treatment – Sutton Bridge Water Recycling Centre has South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
capacity to serve the site, however the foul sewerage network will 
require upgrading.  
 Water resources – water resources are adequate to serve the 
proposed growth, however the supply network would require upgrading 
for the site.  
 The site is adjacent to the A17 and the road’s proximity  may impact 
upon on the amenities that would be enjoyed by new dwellings at the 
southern end of the site. A noise assessment may be required to 
identify noise levels. If necessary, the amenities of future residents 
should be appropriately protected through , for example: site layout; 
house design; bunding/screening; and/or acoustic vents to bedrooms 
facing the road.  
 The site is on a list of potentially contaminated sites requiring further 
investigation.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identif ies flood hazard 
in 2115 as mostly ‘danger for most’ with some ‘danger for all’ and flood 
depth in 2115 as mostly 0.5m -1.0m with some 1.0m -2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Swineshead  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – the village’s primary school is at capacity, and 4 
additional classrooms to extend the school by 0.5 Forms of Entry (FE) 
to 2FE will be required to accommodate additional needs to 2036. A 
shortage of land on the existing site will require the provision of 
additional playing field land.  
 Secondary education – no capacity is available at the closest 
secondary scho ol (Donington). An additional 200 places will be 
required to meet current demand and that from proposed 
developments. A substantial land shortage will require the provision of 
additional land for education.  
 Sixth form education – there is no capacity in t he closest sixth forms 
(Boston).  Needs to 2036 will be met by the provision of a new 
secondary school (including 165 sixth form places) on a site yet to be 
identified close to the South of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate to serve the sites, but upgrades to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Swineshead Water Recycling Centre has capacity to 
accommodate sewage flows from the sites, but enhancements to the 
capacity of the foul sewerage network will be required.  
Swi015   Potential impacts from neighbouring  commercial uses will need to be 
mitigated.  
 The existing footway on Station Road will need to be extended across 
the site frontage.  
 Vehicular access onto Villa Lane will not be acceptable.  
Swi018   No known site -specific constraints.  
Swi037   No known site -specific constraints.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Bicker  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – there is effectively no capacity at the closest 
primary school (Donington), and 5 additional classrooms to extend the 
school by just over 0.5 Forms of Entry (FE) to 2 FE will be required to 
accommodate additional needs to 2036. The school has sufficient land 
to accommodate this extension.  
 Second ary education - no capacity is available at the closest 
secondary school (Donington). An additional 200 places will be 
required to meet current demand and that from proposed 
developments. A substantial land shortage will require the provision of 
additional  land for education.  
 Sixth form education – there is no capacity in the closest sixth forms 
(Boston).  Needs to 2036 will be met by the provision of a new 
secondary school (including 165 sixth form places) on a site yet to be 
identified close to the South  of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare  staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
Bic004   Potential impacts from the A52 road will need to be mitigated.  
 A frontage footway and associated drainage will be required along South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Donington Road.  
 Vehicular access from the A52 will not be acceptable.  
Bic015   Upgrades to the water supply network may  be required.  
 Realignment of the nearside edge of Drury Lane’s carriageway to the 
south of the site’s access point will be required.  
Bic017   Enhancements to the capacity of the foul sewerage network will be 
required.  
 Vehicular access from St Swithins Close  would be acceptable.  
 A frontage footway will be required to be provided.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Butterwick  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary  education – the Butterwick Pinchbeck Primary School has 
sufficient capacity to accommodate additional needs to 2036.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary schools 
are in Boston where there is no capacity, and 700 school places 
(includ ing 165 sixth form places) will be required to accommodate 
additional needs to 2036. These needs will be met by the provision of a 
new secondary school on a site yet to be identified close to the South 
of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable Urban Extensi on. 
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand  increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate to serve the sites, but u pgrades to the 
water supply network may be required.  
 The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from the sites, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
But002   Sea Lane is the better  road to accommodate the vehicular access, and 
a new frontage footway will be required.  
 If access is provided from Watery Lane, a new frontage footway will be 
required, as well as a formal highway drainage system (road gullies 
and a piped sewer to a suitab le outfall).  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
But004   Development will need to build in protection in its design and layout to 
mitigate against possible disturbance from the commercial use on the 
opposite side of Benington Road.  
 No development will be permitted within 9m of the Internal Drainage 
Board (IDB) watercourse located on the  site’s western boundary 
without the prior consent of the IDB.  
 A footway, formal drainage system and street lighting will need to be 
provided into the village.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for mo st’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
But020   The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0 m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Cowbit  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – there is sufficient primary school capacity 
available for the developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – capacity currently available at 
Spalding secondary schools which are closest to development but it is 
likely that capacity will fill  as children cannot attend schools at 
Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings schools.  Therefore a new 700 place 
secondary school with sixth form required towards middle of phase 2 of 
plan is required.  
 Health – there is some capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to 
acco mmodate additional patients, however County wide there is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other healthcare staff  which 
could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 Water resources - the water supply network has capacity available to 
serve the proposed growth.  
 Sewage Treatment - the proposed housing allocations in this area are 
expected to require improvements to the exi sting Waste Water 
Recycling Centre and the foul sewerage network to enable 
development to come forward on these sites.  
Cow004   The site is within Flood Zone 2 and 3a and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 21 15 as ‘low hazard’ to ‘danger for  most’ and floo d depths in 
2115 as 0 – 1m.  Development will be required to include appropriate South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
mitigation.  
Cow009   The site is within Flood Zone 2 and 3a and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 21 15 as ‘low hazard’ to ‘danger for  most’ and flood depths in 
2115 as 0 – 1m.  Development will be required to include appropriate 
mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Deeping St Nicholas  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, co nstraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – there is some primary school capacity currently 
available.  One additional classroom may be required to extend the 
school to 0.5FE in second phase of plan and the primary school has 
enough land for this. 
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary school is 
The Deepings which is at capacity - 75 additional places required for 
new development. The closest sixth form is The Deepings - Sixth form 
capacity echoes capacity in the secondary schools which they are part 
of (no capacity available)  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.Surface water –  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water resources - the propose d housing allocations in this area are 
expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment - the proposed housing allocations and any 
speculative planning application s in this area will require improvements 
to the existing foul sewerage networks and the Water Recycling Centre 
to enable development to come forward.  
Reserve Site 
Dsn018   There are issues with capacity in the Water Recycling Centre which 
require resolving before planning permission for the site is granted.  
 The site is near to two Water Recycling Centres, one owned by Anglian 
Water and one owned by South Holland DC. Para 7.3.1 includes the 
words ’existing land uses’ and so the design of development on this 
site must take the impact that these 2 facilities may have on the site 
into account.  
 There is a fairly substantial watercourse between the 'New Road' site 
and New Road that would require the construction of a bridge or 
culvert to provide the necessary acces s but New Road itself is suitable 
to provide vehicular access. The position of the site, on the outside of a 
bend, would mean that a junction here would have adequate junction South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
visibility in both directions. A section of footway would be required to 
provide  a pedestrian link between the subject site and the existing 
village footway network.  
 The proposal is of such a size that Sustainable Drainage (SuDS) 
principles should be applied to the management of surface water run -
off.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 2 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Fishtoft  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – the Fishtoft School has sufficient capacity to 
accommodate additional needs to 2036.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary schools 
are in Boston where there is no capacity, and 700 school places 
(including 165 sixth form places) will be required to accommodate 
additional needs to 2036. These needs will be met by the provision of a 
new secondary school on a site yet to be identified close to the South 
of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other h ealthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate, but upgrades to the water supply 
network may be required.  
 The Fishtoft Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows, but enhancements to the capacity of the foul sewerage 
network will be required.  
Fis046   Given that the site abuts a listed building, sensitive design and layout 
will be required, and a green landscaped space will need to be set 
aside adjacent to the listed building's garden.  
 Care in layout and design will be required to ensure that th e value of 
the adjacent scout/kindergarten open space is not undermined.  
 The footway on the eastern side of Gaysfield Road will need to be 
extended up to the site entrance.  
 Although the site is within Flood Zone 3a, the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115  predominantly as ‘no hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
predominantly as ‘no depth’. It is therefore unlikely that flood mitigation 
will be required.  
Reserve Site 
Fis041   In order to avoid harm to the setting of the listed church: any scheme 
must be low dens ity with traditional roof pitches & walling materials; no 
houses should be larger than two storey; the layout adopted should 
allow a public view of the church tower to be captured from within the 
site; and the layout should include a group of native trees within the 
public realm.  
 A footway will need to be provided along the east side of the Church 
Green Road to provide a safe pedestrian link to the centre of the 
village.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘dang er for all’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘1.0m to 2.0m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Fleet Hargate  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements , constraints and mitigation  
Fle003   Primary Education - Fleet Hargate has sufficient primary school 
capacity available for development proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary is 
University Academy Holbeach which currently has  no available 
capacity.  An additional 300 spaces is required for developments 
proposed. The closest sixth form is University Academy Holbeach - 
Sixth form capacity echoes capacity in the secondary schools which 
they are part of (no capacity available).  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future  capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water Resources - the proposed housing allocation is expected to 
require improvements to the existing water supply networks to enable 
development to come forward on this site.  
 Sewage Treatment - the proposed housing allocation in this area is 
expected to require improvements to the foul sewerage networks to 
enable development to come forward on this site.  
 The location of a listed milestone needs to be taken into account when 
designing and positioning the access road.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Gedney Hill  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education - Gedney Hill has sufficient primary school capacity 
available for the developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – The closest secondary is 
University Academy Holbeach which currently has no available 
capacity.  An additi onal 300 spaces is required for developments 
proposed. The closest sixth form is University Academy Holbeach - 
Sixth form capacity echoes capacity in the secondary schools which 
they are part of (no capacity available).  
 Health –  The CCG’s have commented t hat currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water Resources - all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing water suppl y 
network to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment - all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing foul sewerage 
network to enable development to come forward on thes e sites. 
Discussions must be held with Anglian Water and the Environment 
Agency with respect to the provision of a Water Recycling Centre for 
the village. The Environment Agency is concerned about the number of 
private package treatment plants in Gedney Hi ll and the quality of their 
liquid outflow. Two potential solutions appear to exist, which would 
address the environmental concerns raised by the Environment 
Agency. These are:  
o for the site promoter/developers(s) to make an application to 
requisition a ne w sewer from Anglian Water under Section 98 of 
the Act (the requisitioner contributing to the cost of those 
requisitioned sewers);  
o for the site promoter/developers(s) to construct a package 
treatment plant to be put forward for adoption by Anglian Water, 
which meets Anglian Water’s reasonable standards for such 
facilities, and the appropriate land and access is transferred to 
Anglian Water free of charge and free from encumbrances.  
o This issue must be resolved before planning permission is granted.  
Geh003   The County Archaeologist has advised the site is in a significant Iron South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Age Romano British landscape and further information may be 
required dependant on the development.  
 There is a tree Preservation Order on trees to the Hill Gate boundary.  
 The site is wi thin Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Geh004   The Mill is Grade II listed and so the design of the scheme needs to 
conside r this in the historic environment assessment required by the 
Historic Environment Policy.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigati on will be required.  
Geh015   The County Archaeologist has advised on the adjacent site Geh003 
that it is in a significant Iron Age Romano British landscape and further 
information may be required dependant on the development.  
 The site should be developed w ith Geh003 in order to assist in 
providing a Water Recycling Centre and to achieve a coordinated 
development that minimises visual impact.  
  The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is t herefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
 
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Gosberton  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – that there is a small amount of primary school 
capacity available and an extension to 1FE requiring 2 additional 
classrooms required.   
 Secondary and sixth form education – No capacity is currently 
available at the closest secondary (Do nington).  An additional 200 
places required for current demand and that from developments 
proposed - substantial land shortage would require additional land for 
education. The closest sixth form is in Spalding - Sixth form capacity 
echoes capacity in the secondary schools which they are part of (some 
capacity available).  
 Health – The CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage  of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .   South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Water Resources – the proposed housing allocations in this area is 
expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
sewerage networks to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – the majority of sites are expected to require 
improvements to the foul sewerage network to enable the development 
of these sites.  
Gos001   The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Gos003   The building adjacent the access onto the Quadring Road is Grade II 
listed and so the design of the scheme needs to consider this in the 
historic environment assessment required by the Historic Environment 
Policy.  
 The site is mostly withi n Flood Zone 1 and the remainder is mostly 
within Flood Zone 3. The SFRA identifies flood hazard in 2115 as ‘no 
hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that significant flood 
mitigation will be required.  
Gos006   The site is within Flood Zone 3 an d the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Gos023   The western end of the site is just within the 400m buffer Anglian 
Water use to assess if reside ntial development might be affected by 
odour from the water recycling works to the west.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation  will be required.  
Reserve Site 
Gos011   Land for an extension to the cemetery and playing field was offered 
when the site was submitted for consideration. The Open Space 
Assessment shows a deficit for both Amenity Green Space and 
Churchyards and Cemeteries  of 0.28H and 0.29H respectively. The 
Parish Council confirmed in July 2016 they had 18 months space left 
and so providing more cemetery space would be a requirement. This 
would leave a piece of land that could be added to the playing field. 
Overall the de ficits would be resolved.  
 A frontage footway would need to be provided on Belchmire Lane from 
the site to the existing footpath network, which would require a footpath 
being provided across the frontage of existing property. Formal 
drainage and street ligh ting would also be required. A large 
watercourse to the front of the site would need to be crossed.  
 The development of this site must consider the impact it may have on 
the setting of the Conservation area and the setting / views of the 
Grade II listed Chu rch of St Peter and Paul in a ‘Historic Environment 
Assessment’ as required by Section 6 the Historic Environment Policy. 
Sections 1 and 2 are also relevant.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 The site is nearly all in Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’  and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Moulton  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is sufficient primary school capacity 
available for developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – there is secondary school 
capacity currently available at Spalding secondary schools which are 
closest to d evelopment but it is likely that capacity will fill as children 
cannot attend schools at Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings.   Therefore a 
new secondary school is required in second phase of plan. The closest 
sixth form is in Spalding - Sixth form capacity echoes ca pacity in the 
secondary schools which they are part of (some capacity available).  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an incre asing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.   
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 Water Resources – the proposed housing allocations in this area are 
expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
sewerage networks to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – the majority of sites are expected to require 
improv ements to the foul sewerage network to enable the development 
of these sites  
Mou016   The position of the access will be impacted by the existing road 
junctions and that for the new housing estate opposite. A footway link 
to the existing network will need to be considered.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Mou023   The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA  identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Mou035   The Mill is Grade I listed and Mulberry House as well as the Swan PH 
are Grade II listed. The northern sit e boundary is also the boundary of 
the Moulton Conservation Area. It is anticipated that any development 
would be feathered out towards the northern boundary to assist with 
mitigation of any impact on heritage assets and this should be explored South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
in the hist oric environment assessment required by Section 6 of the 
Historic Environment Policy.  
 The land is filled in places and is a former factory and so there may be 
some contamination.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115  as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Moulton Chapel  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – the primary school may need to increase to 0.5FE 
by end of plan period, however, there is sufficient classrooms for this 
without further building work.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – there is capacity currently 
available at Spalding secondary schools which are closest to 
development but it is likely that capacity will fill as children cannot 
attend schools at Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings.  A new secondary 
school is required in second phase of plan.   The closest sixth form is 
on Spalding - Sixth form capacity echoes capacity in the secondary 
schools which they are part of (some capacity available).  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to  accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.   
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk  and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water Resources – all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – all of the proposed housing allocations in this 
area are expected to require improvements to the existing foul 
sewerage networks to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
Mou029   The site is within Flood Zone 1 and 2. The SFR A identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Mou042   The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth ’.  It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Reserve site 
Mou028   The Mill is Grade II listed. The design of the scheme needs to carefully 
consider preserving its setting in the historic environment assessment South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
required b y Section 6 of the Historic Environment Policy.  
 Vehicular access onto Woodgate Road would not be acceptable.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 1 and 2. The SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that signi ficant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Old Leake  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
14.1.1  R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
S
i
t
e
 
O
l
d
0
0
5  Primary education – the Old Leake Primary School has sufficient 
capacity to accommodate additional needs to 2036.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the Giles Academy has no 
capacity, and 125 school places (including sixth form places) will be 
required to accommodate current and ad ditional needs to 2036. This 
will create a severe land shortage, and additional land will be required.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – development  should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 It is likely that archaeological  intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate, but upgrades to the water supply 
network may be required.  
 The Old Leake Skipmarsh Lane Water Recycling Centre has capacity 
to accommodate sewage flows, and enhancements to the capacity of  
the foul sewerage network will not be required.  
 A foul sewer crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then  
early contact with Anglian Water Services is suggested to discuss 
possible diversion, or entering into a build over/near agreement.  
 Given that the site is close to the listed church, a low density scheme 
which retains some form of green at its centre will  be required. 
Traditional materials will be required and the majority should be two -
storey development.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.5m to 1.0m. 
Developmen t will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Quadring  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is no available capacity and an extension to 
1FE required over plan period including 4 additional classrooms.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – There is no capacity currently 
available at closest secondary (Donington).  An add itional 200 places 
required for current demand and that from developments proposed - 
substantial land shortage would require additional land for education. 
The closest sixth form is in Spalding - Sixth form capacity echoes 
capacity in the secondary schools  which they are part of (some 
capacity available).  
 Health – The CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 Water Resources - all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – all of the proposed housing allocations in this 
area are expected to require improv ements to the existing foul 
sewerage networks to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
Qua002   The site is mostly within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that si gnificant flood mitigation will be required.  
Qua003   Vehicular access onto Watergate would not be acceptable. Pedestrian 
access maybe possible and would be beneficial.  
 The site is mostly within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘ no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Qua004   Vehicular access from Caswell Drive.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 2 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’ .  It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Reserve Site 
Qua006   Water Gate is suitable to serve the site and the opening is wide 
enough to provide the required junction radii and visibility.  
 Vehicular access onto the Main Road A152 would not be acceptable. 
Pedestrian access would be acceptable.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be r equired.  
 A foul sewer crosses the site and must remain accessible. The design 
and layout of the site should take this into consideration. If it is not 
possible to accommodate the existing sewer within the design then 
early contact with Anglian Water Servic es is suggested to discuss 
possible diversion, or entering into a build over/near agreement  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Surfleet  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is limited capacity available.  One additional 
classroom is required to extend school to Published Admission 
Number 20 from Published Admission Number 15. (This will give 5 
places in each of the 7 primary years totalling  35 additional primary 
school places) A land shortage would require additional playing field 
land.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – There is capacity currently 
available at Spalding secondary schools which are closest to 
development but it is likely th at capacity will fill as children cannot 
attend schools at Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings.  A new secondary 
school is required in the second phase of plan. The closest sixth form 
is in Spalding - Sixth form capacity echoes capacity in the secondary 
schools which  they are part of (some capacity available).  
 Health – The CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and ot her healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water Resources – the water supply network has capacity  available to 
serve the proposed growth.  
 Sewage Treatment – all of the proposed housing allocations in this 
area are expected to require improvements to the existing foul 
sewerage network to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
Sur003   The s ite is mostly within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Sur006   Development of the site may have an impact on views of the Grade I 
listed St Laurence’s church to the north. The design of the scheme 
needs to carefully consider this in the historic environment assessment South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
required by the Historic Environment Policy to pre serve their setting.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a and the SFRA identifies fl ood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for  most’ and flood depths in 2115 as 0 – 0.5m.   
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Sur016   The provision of a front age footway could be required, although there 
is a footway opposite.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘Low hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m’. 
Development will be required to include appropriat e mitigation.  
Reserve site 
Sur018   The boundary with the A152 must be landscaped with a scheme of the 
same width and planting as that on the A16 boundary.  
 It would be possible to accommodate a suitable adoptable estate road 
junction on the section of Stat ion Road between Kingfisher Drive and 
the A16, but a 'looped' spine road would be advisable. The ideal 
solution would be to also connect to the existing spur off the east side 
of Kingfisher Drive.  
  Access from the A16, the A152 or Coalbeach Lane would not be 
acceptable.  
 There is a public footpath running through this site that would need to 
be preserved.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘Low hazard’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m’. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Sutton St James  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is sufficient primary school capacity 
available for developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – There is limited secondary 
school capacity in the first two years of the plan, but an additional 1 to 
2FE required over the plan period - sufficien t land for expansion. The 
closest sixth form is University Academy Holbeach - Sixth form 
capacity echoes capacity in the secondary schools which they are part 
of (no capacity available).  
 Health – The CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capaci ty at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.   
 Surface water – all development s should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Water Resources – all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – all of the proposed housing allocations in this 
area are expected to require improvements to the existing foul 
sewerage network to enable development to come forward on these 
sites.  
Suj007   The Church is Grade II and the separate tower is grade II*. The design 
of the scheme needs to carefully consider this in the historic 
environment assessment required by the Historic Environment Policy 
to preserve their setting.  
 There is some filled land to the rear of t he site, most likely a former 
dyke.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 2 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Suj012   The site is close to the r emains of the St Ives Cross Scheduled 
Monument and Grade II Listed. The design of the scheme needs to 
carefully consider this in the historic environment assessment required 
by the Historic Environment Policy to preserve its setting.  
 The site is within Flo od Zone 30 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Tydd St M ary 
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
Tyd014   Primary Education – there is sufficient primary school capacity 
available for developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – there is limited secondary 
school capacity in first two years of plan, but an additional 1 to 2FE 
required over plan period - sufficient land for expansion.  The closest 
sixth form is University Academy Holbeach - Sixth form capacity 
echoes capacity in the secondary schools which they are part of (no 
capacity available).  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthca re staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 Water Resources – the proposed housing allocation in this area is South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on this site.  
 Sewage Treatment – the proposed housing allocation in this area is 
expected to require improvements to the existing foul sewerage 
netwo rks to enable development to come forward on this site.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘Danger for Most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.25m to 
0.50m’. Development will be required to include appropriate mit igation.  
 
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Weston  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is primary school capacity currently 
available.  An extension to 0.5FE required in phase 2 of plan period 
requiring one additional classroom - land shortage would require 
additional playing fields.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – secondary school capacity 
currently available at Spalding secondary sc hools which are closest to 
development.  It is likely that capacity will fill as children cannot attend 
schools at Holbeach/Bourne/Deepings. A new secondary school is 
required in second phase of plan. The closest sixth form is in Spalding 
- Sixth form capa city echoes capacity in the secondary schools which 
they are part of (some capacity available).  
 Health – the CCG’s have commented that currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide the re is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.   
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) .  
 Water Resources – all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
is expected to require improvements to the existing water supply 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – all of the proposed housing allocation s in this 
area is expected to require improvements to the existing foul sewerage 
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
Wsn003   The layout of the site, the choice of dwellings types, their design and 
orientation needs to consider the potential noise impact from the A151.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 2 and 3a and the SFRA identifies flood 
hazard in 21 15 as ‘low hazard’ to ‘danger for  most’ and flood depths in 
2115 as 0 – 1m.  Development will be required to include appropriate 
mitigation.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Wsn022   The site is close to the Grade I listed St Mary’s Church. The design of 
the scheme needs to carefully consider this in the historic environment 
assessment required by the Historic Environment Policy to preserve its 
setting.  
 The site is with in Flood Zone 2 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Wsn029   The site is within Flood Zone 3a and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 21 15 as ‘low hazard’ to ‘danger for  most’ and flood depths in 2115 
as 0 – 1m.  Development will be required to include appropriate 
mitigation.  
Reserve site 
Wsn036 
(Made up of 
Wsn010, 012, 
021 and 030)   Following the development of four frontage dwellings on part of the site 
the land owner has improved the existing watercourse adjacent to the 
Highway to improve the drainage system in Weston. The Drainage 
Board are improving and adopting a section of water course which will 
improve the existing drainage system and should assist the drainage 
system for these sites subject to the flows being restricted and 
designed/modeled to ensure the improved watercourse can manage 
any additional flows. Discussions need to be had with the Drainage 
Board to clarify progress on this and its implications for this site and 
drainage issues must be resolved before planning permission is 
granted.  
 The 4 individual sites should be developed as one as separately they 
may have access issues and raised highway infrastructure costs owing 
to their distance from current infrastructure networks. Developing them 
together makes the provision of highway infrastructure as cost effective 
as possible. Access off Broadgate and Beggars Bush Lane is  feasible 
and subject to its position not conflicting with Bay tree’s entrance High 
Road is also possible. Footways, street lighting and highway drainage 
will require upgrading and connecting into existing networks. The 
Highways Authority should be contact ed to discuss these issues.  
 The site includes historic field drains (non -designated heritage assets) 
which should be incorporated into any site layout in order to reveal the 
assets within a scheme. An historic environment assessment is 
required by Section 6 of the Historic Environment Policy and section 3 
is also relevant.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 21 15 as ‘low hazard’ to ‘danger for  most’ and flood depths in 2115 
as 0 – 1m.  Development will be required to inc lude appropriate 
mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Whaplode  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary Education – there is sufficient primary school capacity South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
available for developments proposed.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary school is 
University Academy Holbeach which currently has no available 
capacity.  An additional 300 spaces is required for the developments 
proposed. The closest sixth form is University Academy Holbeach - 
Sixth form capacity echoes capacity in the secondary schools which 
they are part of (no capacity available).  
 Health – The CCG’s have commented tha t currently there is some 
capacity at the local GP surgery(ies) to accommodate additional 
patients, however County wide there is an increasing shortage of GP’s, 
nurses and other healthcare staff  which could affect future capacity 
should demand increase.   
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 Water Resources – all of the proposed housing allocations in this area 
are expected to require improvements to the existing water supply  
networks to enable development to come forward on these sites.  
 Sewage Treatment – the proposed housing allocations in this area are 
expected to require improvements to the existing foul sewerage 
networks to enable development to come forward on these site s. 
Wha002   The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as nearly all ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely 
that significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Wha019   The site is within Flood Zone 1 and the SFRA identifies flood hazard in 
2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Wha029   The site is near to an employment site and therefore potential noise 
disturbance needs to be considere d when designing the layout and the 
dwelling design and orientation.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘no hazard’ and ‘no depth’.   It is therefore unlikely that 
significant flood mitigation will be required.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Wigtoft  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
All sites   Primary education – there is no capacity at the closest primary school 
(Sutterton), and extension to 1 Form of Entry (FE) will be required to 
accommodate current demand and additional needs to 2036. This will 
require the provision of 3 additional classrooms, although additional 
land will not be required.  
 Secondary education – the closest secondary school (Kirton) has 
sufficient capacity to accommodate additional needs to 2036.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
 Sixth form education – there is no capacity in the closest sixth forms 
(Boston).  Needs to 2036 will be met by the provision of a new 
secondary school (including 165  sixth form places) on a site yet to be 
identified close to the South of North Forty Foot (Wes002) Sustainable 
Urban Extension.  
 Health – there is capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface water – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate, but upgrades to the water supply 
network may be required.  
 The Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate sewage 
flows from the sites, but enhancement s to the capacity of the foul 
sewerage network will be required.  
Wig014   The existing street light system will need to be extended to the site.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA identifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘low hazard’ and flood depth i n 2115 as ‘0m to 0.25m. 
Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Reserve Site 
Wig015   The existing street lighting system will need to be extended to the site 
& a footway provided.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA ident ifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for some’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.25m to 
0.50m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation - Housing 
Allocations in Wrangle  
Site 
Reference  Infrastructure requirements, constraints and mitigation  
Wra013   Primary education – Wrangle Primary School has sufficient capacity to 
accommodate additional needs to 2036.  
 Secondary and sixth form education – the closest secondary school 
and sixt h form (The Giles Academy, Old Leake) has no capacity, and 
an additional 125 school places will be required to accommodate 
current and additional needs to 2036. This will create a severe land 
shortage, and additional land will be required.  
 Health – there i s capacity in the short to medium term at local GP 
surgeries to accommodate additional patients but, County -wide, there 
is an increasing shortage of GPs, nurses and other healthcare staff 
which could affect future capacity should demand increase.  
 Surface w ater – all developments should seek  to reduce flood risk and South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems  (SuDS) . 
 It is likely that archaeological intervention/survey will be required.  
 Water resources are adequate to serve the site, but upgrades to the 
water s upply network may be required.  
 The Old Leake Water Recycling Centre has capacity to accommodate 
sewage flows from the site, but enhancements to the capacity of the 
foul sewerage network will be required.  
 The site is within Flood Zone 3a, and the SFRA ident ifies flood hazard 
in 2115 as ‘danger for most’ and flood depth in 2115 as ‘0.25m to 
0.50m. Development will be required to include appropriate mitigation.  
 
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
15. Appendix 6: Parking Standards  
15.1.1  The following minimum standards should be used in accordance with the guidance 
in Policy 36:Vehicle and Cycle Parking . 
Type of Development 
(Use Class)  Car Parking Standard  Cycle Parking Standard  
Residential   
Houses and Flats (C3a)  Within the curtilage:  
 2 spaces for dwellings with up 
to 3 bedrooms  
 3 spaces for dwellings with 4 or 
more bedrooms  
 
A garage can count as one space 
if it is 2.6m x 5.6m internal width, 
with an additional 1m at the end to 
park cycles  
Where it can be justified by the 
character and location of the site 
the standards may be relaxed for 
one bedroom dwellings, including 
flats to one garage or parking 
space per unit and 1 additional 
space per 3 units for visitors.  1 space within each 
residential plot or 1 space 
per unit within a flatted  
development  
 
 
 
 
 
Where it can be justified 
by the character and 
location of the site the 
standards may be 
relaxed.  
Sheltered Housing (C3)  1 space per 2 units  1 space within each 
residential plot or unit 
within a flatted 
development  
Residential care homes 
(C2) 1 space per 3 residents  1 space per 3 employees  
All other residential accommodation will be assessed on a site -by-site basis.  
Non-residential (gross floor space)  
Convenience retail (A1)  1 space per 14m2  1 stand per 250m2  
Comparison retail (A1) 1 space per 20m2  1 stand per 500m2  
Restaurants and cafes 
(A3), drinking 
establishments (A4)  1 space per 3m2 drinking area and 
1 space per 5m2 public dining area  - 
Business (B1)  1 space per 30m2  1 stand per 200m2  
General industrial (B2)  1 space per 65m2  1 stand per 200m2 
Storage or distribution 
(B8) 1 space per 150m2  1 stand per 1 ,000m2 
Nursery, primary or 
secondary schools (D1)  1 space per 2 staff  
 1 space per 3 employees  
Pupils to be assessed on 
a site -by-site basis  
Visitor provision to be assessed on a site -by-site basis  
Higher and Further 
Education (D1)   1 space per 2 staff  
 1 space per 15 students  1 space per 3 employees  
1 space per 15 students  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Visitor provision to be assessed on a site -by-site basis  
Hotels (C1)  1 space per bedroom  
 
Additional facilities such as 
bars/restaurants open to the public 
and conference facilities will be 
assessed separately with the 
appropriate standard  - 
All other types of development will be assessed on a site -by-site basis.  
 
 
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
16. Appendix 7: Local  Plan Implementation  
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
Policy 1: Spatial  Strategy  
Delivery of development 
according to the settlement 
hierarchy  
 
 
 
 
Links to Policies  7 and 11   The amount of services lost 
and/or gained  within each 
settlement boundary  
 Number  of planning 
permissions approved for 
non-countryside uses outside 
settlement boundaries  
Monitoring will consist of an 
assessment of the development 
delivered (net employment l and & 
net dwellings completions) & the 
relationship to settlement 
boundaries/ hierarchy of 
settlements.  Deviation from expected 
delivery of development 
according to the 
settlement hierarchy  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/  deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 
interim position 
statement;  and/or  
 a partial review of 
the Local Plan  1: Housing, 2: 
Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
5: Education, 8: 
Landscape, 9: S oil, 
air and water 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 14: 
Economy  
Policy 2: Development Management  
Seeking to deliver 
proposals that accord with 
sustainable development 
principles  
 
 
Links to Policies  3,  4,  5 , 
28,  29,  30, 31,  32, 33 and  
36   Number  of planning 
applications refused on flood 
risk grounds  
 Number  of planning 
applications refused due to 
inappropriate design  
Monitoring will consist of an 
assessment of indicators utilised 
for related detailed policies 
identified . Decision monitoring  Review  
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  All 
Policy 3: Design of New Development  
Promotion of high quality  Number  of planning Decision monitoring  Review All South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
and inclusive design and 
layout in development 
proposals  applications refused owing to 
inappropriate design   circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  
Policy 4:  Approach to Flood Risk  
Ensuring that development 
proposals take proper 
account of flood risk issues, 
and that new development 
will be resilient to the 
potential consequences of 
flooding.   Provision of new strategic 
flood mitigation infrastructure  
 Number  of planning 
permissions granted contrary 
to Environment Agency 
advice on the grounds of 
flooding / or water quality  
 Number  of residential  
planning permissions granted 
in   ‘danger for some’, ‘danger 
for most’ and ‘danger for all’ 
hazard zones  
 Number  of development 
proposals within 50m buffer 
from the toe of the Haven 
banks  Decision monitoring and 
annual analysis of 
housing 
completions/permi ssion
s to assess 
development in ‘danger 
for some’, ‘danger for 
most’ and ‘danger for all’ 
hazard zones.  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  6: Green 
infrastructure, 9: 
Air, water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk, 12: 
Climate change  
Policy 5: Meeting Physical Infrastructure and Service Needs  
Ensuring the delivery of 
necessary infrastructure 
requirements related to 
development proposals.   Number  of infrastructure -
related planning conditions 
discharged  
 Number  of infrastructure 
related obligations within a  
Section 106 agreement 
delivered   Annual review of the 
IDP and open space 
standards via the 
AMR to consider if 
delivery of 
infrastructure is 
consistent with 
objectives of the Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
5: Education, 6: 
Green 
infrastructure, 9: 
Air, water and soil  
quality, 11: Flood 
risk South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
 Number of schools delivered  Local Plan  
 Decision monitoring 
with respect to s106 
and delivery of 
infrastructure  
Policy 6: Developer Contributions  
Application of developer 
contributions to 
developments above 
national prescribed 
thresholds   Number  of s106 agreements 
complet ed  per annum  
 Level of developer 
contributions funding secured  
per annum  
 Number  of schemes where 
site–specific viability 
assessment leads to 
developer contributions not 
being sought  Annual review of 
approach to developer 
contributions  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and wel l-
being, 3: Transport, 
5: Education, 6: 
Green 
infrastructure, 9: 
Air, water and soil 
quality, 11: Flood 
risk 
Policy 7: Improving  South East Lincolnshire’s Employment Land Portfolio  
Delivery of a portfolio of  
employment land supply 
across a range of sites   Enterprises by industry  
 Land  in B1, B2 and B8 use 
per annum  
 Total amount of additional 
(net & gross) employment 
floor space by type  
 Available allocated 
employment land with and  
without planning permission  
 Loss of employment land by Annual monitoring of 
take-up of B Class 
development with 
additional intelligence 
on general economic 
trends  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation o f an 
interim position 
state ment; and/or  
 partial review of 3: Transport, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 5: 
Education, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste. 13: 
Economy  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
type Local Plan  
Policy 8: Prestige Employment Sites  
Delivery of six Prestige 
Employment Sites including 
attendant infrastructure  For each site:  
 Completion of masterplan  
 Total amount of additional 
(net and gross) employment 
floor space by type  
 Available employment land 
with and without planning 
permission  Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 
interim position 
statement; and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  3: Transport, 4: 
Social inclusiv ity, 5: 
Education, 6: 
Green 
Infrastructure, 7: 
Heritage, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood Risk, 13: 
Economy  
Policy 9: Promoting a Stronger Visitor Economy  
 Delivery of tourism and 
visitor economy 
facilities;  
 Specific policy approach 
to Springfields Shopping 
and Festival Gardens   Expenditure in the visitor 
economy per annum   Annual monitoring of 
tourism/ visitor 
economy 
developments  
 Specific 
consideration of any 
proposals at 
Springfields 
Shopping and the 
Festival  Gardens to 
determine policy 
success  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  3: Transport, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 5: 
Education, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 13: 
Economy  
Policy 10: Meeting  Assessed Housing Requirements  
Provision of 19,425  Number  of housing Annual updates via the Depending on the 1: Housing, 4: South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
dwellings (7,744 in Boston 
BC and 11,681 in South 
Holland DC) over the plan 
period.  completio ns per annum for 
the Plan area and  by LPA  
 Assessment of Five Year 
Housing Land Supply  AMR on completions 
and permissions  
 scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 
interim position 
statement;  and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  Social inclusivity  
Policy 11: Distribution of New Housing  
Delivery of housing targets 
set out by settlement   Number  of housing 
completio ns per annum for 
the Plan area and  by 
settlement  
 Housing c ommitments 
derived from extant and  
submitted planning 
applications, by settlement 
per annum  
 Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation o f an 
interim position 
statement; and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk  
Policy 12: Reserve Sites  
Delivery of Reserve 
Housing Sites if 
completions on allocated 
sites and other housing  Number  of housing 
completions per annum by 
LPA 
 Number  of housing Annual updates of the 
Housing Delivery Test  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
commitments stall. completions on released 
Reserve Sites  
 actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders  to 
release Reserve 
Sites  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  quali ty, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk  
Policy 13: South West Quadrant Sustainable Urban Extension (Sou006)  
Delivery of the specific 
development as an urban 
extension to Boston, 
including its attendant 
infrastructure   Number of housing 
completions within the 
sustainable urban extension 
per annum  
 Area of land in B1, B2 and B8 
use within the sustainable 
urban extension per annum  
 Area of land in open space 
use (by type) within the 
sustainable urban extension 
per annum  
 Length (Kilometres)  of the 
Boston Distrib utor Road 
delivered within each five 
year period  (by phase)  Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
  preparation  of an 
interim position 
statement; and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  1: Housing, 3: 
Transport, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 7: Green 
infrastructure, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk, 13: 
Employment  
Policy 14: South of the North Forty Foot Sustainable Urban Extension (Wes002)  
Delivery of the specific 
development as an urban 
extension to Boston, 
including its attendant 
infrastructure   Number of housing 
completions within the 
sustainable urban extension 
per annum  
 Area of land in open space Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Dependi ng on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  1: Housing, 3: 
Transport, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 7: Gre en 
infrastructure, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
use (by type) within the 
sustainable urban extension 
per annum  
 Length (Kilometres) of the 
Boston Distributor Road 
delivered within each five 
year period (by phase)   engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 
interim position 
statement; and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk  
Policy 15: Vernatts Sustainable Urban Extension  
Delivery of the specific 
development as an urban 
extension to Spalding 
including its attendant 
infrastructure   Number  of housing 
completions within the 
sustainable urban extension 
per annum  
 Length (Kilometres) of the 
northern phase of the SWRR 
delivered within each five 
year period  Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Depending o n the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 
interim position 
statement;  and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  1: Housing, 3: 
Transport, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 7: Green 
infrastructure, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk  
Policy 16: Holbeach West Sustainable Urban Extension  
Delivery of the specific 
development as an urban 
extension to Holbeach 
including its attendant 
infrastructure   Number  of housing 
completions per annum  
 Delivery of Peppermint 
Junction highways 
improvements  Annual updates via the 
AMR on completions 
and permissions  Depending on the 
scale and nature of 
the potential under -
delivery/deviation, 
actions may include:  
 engaging with 
stakeholders;  
 preparation of an 1: Housing, 3: 
Transport, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 7: Green 
infrastructure, 8: 
landscape, 9: Air, 
water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and wast e, 11: South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
interim position 
statement;  and/or  
 partial review of 
Local Plan  Flood risk  
Policy 17: Providing a Mix of Housing  
Delivery of a mix of housing 
as defined by the policy   Number  of homes completed 
by size to meet market and 
affordable housing needs per 
annum  Annual review of the mix 
of housing delivered  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity  
Policy 18: Affordable Housing  
Delivery of affordable 
housing as defined by the 
policy   Number  of affordable homes 
completed per annum  Annual review of the 
affordable housing 
delivery  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity  
Policy 19: Rural Exception Sites  
Delivery of specific rural 
exceptions sites.   Number  of affordable and 
market homes committed on 
Rural Homes Exception Sites  Annual review of rural 
exceptions housing 
delivery  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
Landscape  
Policy 20: Accommodation for Gypsy, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
Delivery of the identified 
requirement for Gypsy and 
Traveller pitches, and 
Travelling Showpeople plots   Net additional residential 
pitches for gypsies and 
travellers  
 Net additional residential  plots 
for travelling showpeople   
 Net additional transit pitches  
 Number of unauthorised Annual review of pitches 
and plots delivered  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
Landscape  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
encampments  
Policy 21: Houses in Multiple Occupation and the Sub -Division of Dwellings  
Ensuring a suitable mix of 
housing is available within 
the Local Plan area   Number  of HMOs and flat 
conversions refused  
 The mix of sizes of housing 
completed compared with the 
Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  Annual review of the mix 
of housing delivered  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity  
Policy  22:  Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
Delivering replacement 
dwellings in the countryside   Number  of replacement 
dwellings completed in the 
countryside  Annual review of the 
delivery of new 
replacement dwellings  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
Landscape  
Policy 23: The Re -Use of Buildings in the Countryside to Residential Use  
Making provision for the 
conversion and reuse of 
rural buildings to dwellings.   Number  of new dwellings 
completed by converting 
redundant rural buildings to 
residential use  Annual review of the 
delivery of dwellings 
converted from 
redundant rural 
buildings  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  1: Housing, 4:  
Social inclusivity  
Policy 24: The Retail Hierarchy  
 Establishing a retail 
hierarchy for the Local 
Plan area.  
 Setting a thresholds for 
Retail Impact 
Assessments  
 New allocations for 
Local Centres at urban 
extensions in Spalding  Amount of floor space for 
town centre uses within the 
town centre boundaries  
 Vacancy rates for retail use in 
the town centre  boundaries  
 Amount of floor space 
completed for town centre 
uses by type, by centre and Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical sur veys of 
relevant centres to 
determine vitality and 
viability Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
5: Education, 13: 
Economy  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
and Boston  for the Local Plan area  
Policy 25: Supporting the Vitality  and Viab ility of Boston and Spalding Town Centres  
Ensuring that Boston and 
Spalding town centres 
remain the focus for retail, 
entertainment, and 
commercial activity   Amount of floor space for 
town centre uses within the 
town centre boundaries  
 Vacancy rate s for retail uses 
within the town centre 
boundaries  
 Amount of floor space 
completed for town centre 
uses by type, by centre and 
for the Local Plan area  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
relevant centres to 
determine vitality and 
viability Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
5: Education, 13: 
Economy  
Policy 26: Primary Shopping Frontages  
Establishing primary 
shopping frontages for 
Spalding and Boston   Amount of floor space for 
retail use within the primary 
shopping frontages  
 Vacancy rates by unit in the 
primary shopping frontages  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
relevant centres to 
determine vitality and 
viability Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
13: Economy  
Policy 27:  Additional Retail Provision  
Setting out the expected 
additional retail floorspace 
(comparison and 
convenience) required over 
the Local Plan period.   Amount of floor space 
completed for town centre 
uses by type, by centre and 
for the Local Plan area  
 Amount of comparison goods 
floorspace completed at 
Springfields Shopping and 
Festival Gardens  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical survey s of 
relevant centres to 
determine vitality and 
viability Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Soil, air and water 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste , 13: 
Economy  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
Policy 28: The Natural Environment  
 Application of HRA 
requirements with 
respect to major 
development proposals 
in the Local Plan area.  
 General application of 
protection to national 
and locally -designated 
habitats and species  
 Addressing gaps  in the 
ecological network in 
the Local Plan area   Number  of applications 
refused  owing to their impact 
on the natural environment  
 Number  of hectares of 
mitigation where planning 
permission granted on 
protected sites  
 Number  of hectares of 
restoration, enhan cement or 
connection of habitats and 
ecological networks  
 Number  of hectares of 
Suitable Alternative Natural 
Greenspace  
 Number  and type of 
biodiversity enhancement  
features incorporated into 
buildings  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
state and qua lity of 
natural environment 
features (working with 
relevant nature 
conservation bodies)  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 6: Green 
infrastructure, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Soil, 
air and water 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk, 12: 
Climate change  
Policy 29: The Historic Environment  
 Policy approach with 
respect to Listed 
Buildings and 
Conservation Areas 
within the Local Plan 
area 
 The role of enabling 
development in securing 
improvements/  Number  of planning 
applications refused for not 
conserving or enhancing 
designated or undesignated 
assets  
 Number  of planning 
applications refused for 
having an adver se impact on 
listed buildings or sites of Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
state and quality of 
historic environment 
features (working with 
relevant heritage 
bodies)  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate re view 
policy and 
alternatives  7: Heritage, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Soil, 
water and air 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
enhancements to 
heritage assets  special historic or 
archaeological interest  
 Number  of planning 
permissions granted for the 
demolition of listed 
buildings/buildings in 
conservation areas  
 Number  of planning 
applications refused for 
having an adver se impact 
upon the dominance of 
church towers, spires and 
traditional windmills  
Policy 30: Pollution  
Criteria based policy setting 
out approach to pollution 
impacts of development 
proposals   Number  of applications 
refused owing to 
environmental impact  
 Number  of AQMAs in South 
East Lincolnshire  
 Number of contaminated sites 
developed  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
state & quality of AQMA 
& contaminated land 
sites (working with 
environmental services 
teams in Boston and 
South Holland)  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Air, water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: 
Flood risk, 12: 
Climate change  
Policy 31: Climate Change and Renewable and Low Carbon Energy  
 Setting out the 
approach to evaluating 
proposals with respect 
to their potential impacts 
on climate change  
 Providing criteria to  Number  of planning 
perm issions approved for 
renewable and  low carbon 
energy  
 Number  of developments  that 
are designed to minimise and  Decision monitoring  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Air, water and soil 
quality, 10: Land 
and waste, 11: South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
consider proposals for 
renewable energy  mitigate the impacts of 
climate change  
 Number of residential 
schemes that are designed to 
meet Building Regulations 
Water Efficiency Standard of 
110 litres per person per day  Flood risk, 12: 
Climate change  
Policy 32: Community, Health and Well -being  
Broad ranging policy 
covering various factors that 
require consideration when 
determining planning 
proposals including rights of 
way; encouraging healthy 
lifestyles; and provision of  
new or enhancement to 
existing community facilities   Planning permission granted 
for the extension of Cemetery 
and open space at Gosberton  
 Number  of planning 
applications refused because 
they have an unacceptable 
impact on the criteria  
 Number  of planning 
permissions granted for new 
community facilities and/or 
the enhancement of existing 
community facilities  
 Number , area, and 
area/1,000 people by open 
space type  Decision monitoring  
 
Periodical surveys of 
open spaces to 
determine level of 
access (likely to b e an 
external consultancy 
commission)  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 4: Social 
inclusivity, 5: 
Education, 6: 
Green 
infrastructure, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Land 
and waste  
Policy 33: Delivering a More Sustainable Transport Network  
 Identification of specific 
new road infrastructure 
and road improvements 
(Spalding Western 
Relief Road; Boston  CO2 emissions per head  
 Number of AQMAs  
 Number  of planning 
permissions granted with Decision monitoring  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Air, soil and water South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
Distributor Road; and 
Peppermint Junction 
(Holbeach)  
 Seeking general 
improvements to the rail 
network.  
 Setting out the general 
approach to protecting 
and improving 
pedestrian and cycle 
networks  
 Requiring Transport 
Assessments and 
Travel Plans where 
appropriate  approved Travel  Plan 
 Number  of electric vehicle 
charging points provided in 
association with new 
development  
 Number  of permissions 
granted with new or improved 
access facilities for the 
disabled  quality, 12: Climate 
change  
Policy 34:  Delivering the Boston Distributor Road  
Identification of specific new 
road infrastructure   Length (kilometres) of the 
Boston Distributor Road 
delivered within each five 
year period (by phase)  
 Progress with funding 
applications for the delivery of 
the Boston Distributor Road  Updates via the AMR on 
completions and 
permissions  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Air, soil and water 
quality, 12: Climate 
change  
Policy 35: Delivering the Spalding Transport Strategy  
Identifies the mechanism for 
securing the delivery of 
transport initiatives and the 
SWRR to mitigate the 
adverse impacts of new  Number  of Spalding 
Transport Strategy projects 
completed  Annual review of 
developer contributions 
secured  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  2: Health and well -
being, 3: Transport, 
4: Social inclusivity, 
8: Landscape, 9: 
Air, soil and water South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Objective  Monitoring Indic ator (s)  Trigger  Actions  SA Objective (s)  
housing in Spalding  quality, 12: Climate 
change  
Policy  36: Vehicle and Cycle Parking  
 Setting out standards 
for vehicle and cycle 
parking  
 Criteria for evaluating 
planning proposals with 
respect to parking   Number  of Council car 
parking bays in the Town 
Centres, by short stay (time 
limited), short stay unlimited 
and long stay (annual 
frequency)  
 Number of electric vehicle 
charging points provided in 
association with new 
development  
 Number of planning 
permissions granted with new 
or improved parking facilities 
for the disabled  Decision monitoring  Review 
circumstances and if 
appropriate review 
policy and 
alternatives  3: Transport, 4: 
Social inclusivity, 8: 
Landscape, 9: Air, 
soil and water 
quality, 12: Climate 
change  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
17. Appendix 8: Developer Contributions for Education 
Facilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
17.1.  Introduction  
17.1.1  Education facilities are an integral component of balanced sustainable 
communities, and it is widely accepted that the provision of appropriate education 
facilities is a fundamental infrastructure requirement of sust ainable growth. Local 
Plan Policies 5, 6 provide the policy links to successful delivery.  
17.1.2  Lincolnshire County Council (LCC) has a statutory duty to provide school places for 
children living in the Local Plan Area who are of school age and whose parents 
want their child educated in the state sector. Therefore, LCC needs to ensure that 
sufficient places are provided at Maintained Schools, Academy Schools and Free 
Schools to meet local needs.  
17.1.3  Development of new homes may create a need for additional school places at 
primary, secondary and sixth -form education levels. Recent demographic changes 
in South East Lincolnshire and the cumulative impact of the growth of the area 
mean that there is, and  will continue to be, a need for additional capacity in 
education facilities through the plan period. The evidence in relation to projected 
school capacity is identified in the South East Lincolnshire Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan ( IDP) and will be kept und er annual review by LCC.  
Needs and Priorities  
17.1.4  The IDP identifies that ‘there is an overall requirement for approximately £75m 
worth of investment in education infrastructure to meet planned needs.’ LCC has 
confirmed that there are capacity issues at prima ry, secondary and sixth form 
facilities across South East Lincolnshire, but this varies by settlement and across 
the plan period. The IDP also identifies when capacity may be a concern, which 
schools are likely to be extended or where a new school is likel y to be required. 
This includes new primary schools in Boston, Spalding and Holbeach and new 
secondary schools (with sixth form) at Boston and Spalding. Secondary schools 
usually have a catchment wider than the settlement boundary so new development 
in Qua dring may have an adverse impact upon Donington Secondary School (the 
nearest school) for example.  
17.1.5  The needs and priorities are based on LCC’s current knowledge of existing capacity 
and where there is a need for additional infrastructure. Priorities are t herefore 
based on up -to-date evidence of where infrastructure is likely to be required to 
mitigate consented schemes as well as knowledge of planned growth.  
17.1.6  LCC secures Basic Needs Funding from the Department of Education to support 
the delivery of educat ion facilities. However, the level of funding is only known for 
the short term (to 2019): the IDP estimates that £9.1m will be available to address 
facilities required as a result of population growth. But this will not be enough to South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
provide the facilities required as a consequence of new development. The IDP 
assumes that 50% of the cost of education facilities over the plan period will be 
funded from mainstream sources such as Basic Needs and other funding, and 50% 
from developer contributions.  
17.2.  Requirement  
17.2.1  The number of pupils living in a new development is linked to the number and size 
of dwellings proposed. In general terms, the greater the number of bedrooms the 
greater the number of pupils there is likely to be. This will inform any requirement 
sought.  
17.2.2  In most cases, it is expected that new development will provide a financial 
contribution towards the cost of providing and/or enhancing education facilities. 
New schools are only likely to be required on site as part of a sustainable urban 
extension.  
17.3.  When will developer contributions be sought?  
17.3.1  Developer contributions for additional school capacity will only be sought from 
relevant dwellings likely to accommodate children. So contributions will not be 
sought from specialist older persons housing schemes or 1 -bedroom dwellings.  
17.3.2  For each developme nt, LCC will first consider the projected permanent surplus 
capacity at the nearest accessible school(s), planned and funded expansions and 
other planned residential development with planning permission or already being 
considered via a planning applicatio n, subject to planning permission being granted . 
If there is no capacity, or there is not likely to be when the pupils generated by the 
development are likely to be entering the facility, a contribution towards expansion 
or to help provide for a new school  will be sought.  
17.4.  Calculation of contributions  
17.4.1  Contributions are based on the pupil product ratio (PPR) calculated by the 
Lincolnshire Research Observatory and cost per pupil place derived from the 
Department of Education. Currently, these are:  
House Type  PPR 
Primary  PPR 
Secondary  PPR Sixth 
Form  
2 bed  0.09 0.09 0.018  
3 bed  0.17 0.17 0.034  
4 bed+  0.33 0.27 0.054  
 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Assumption  Primary  Primary new 
build  Secondary  Secondary new 
build  
Cost per pupil 
place (£)  £13,755  £19,904  £14,102  £19,904  
Yield (pupils 
per  
dwelling)  0.2 - 0.19 0.038  
Table 7: Education infrastructure requirement assumptions  
17.4.2  The following method will be used for the purpose of calculating education 
contributions:  
PPR X no of homes of each size = no of pupils generated x cos t multiplier per 
pupil place x 0.92* = contribution  
*local multiplier: used to take into account the lower average build cost in 
Lincolnshire compared with the national average  
17.4.3  The total cost of providing a child with a school place is based on a pupil be ing in a 
class of 30 and includes the cost of providing communal space for each pupil; e.g. a 
sports hall and kitchen/dining area. The cost of provision from all relevant dwellings 
will be totalled and rounded down to the nearest whole pupil.  
17.4.4  About 50% of  post-16 students will attend a sixth form within a school - this uses 
capacity within schools. LCC will seek contributions where necessary based on a 
‘pupil productivity ratio’ of 1/5th of the secondary school rate. LCC is not 
responsible for, nor does it  negotiate, financial contributions for colleges.  
Provision of a New School  
17.4.5  Where a new school is appropriate as part of a significant development, developers 
will be expected to set aside sufficient fully serviced -land (see Table 8  below for a 
guide) to accommodate the school and associated outdoor space, in an appropriate 
location, at nil cost, together with a financial contribution to cover all or part of the 
construction costs. The cost of provision will vary in accordance with t he size of the 
facility (see IDP for further information), so developers are advised to consult LCC 
and the LPA at the pre -application stage should a new school be required as a 
consequence of a proposed residential scheme.  
 
School size  Number of dwelling s  Area (ha)  
1 FE primary  1,000 1.1 
2 FE primary  2,000 1.8 
3 FE primary  3,000 2.7 
800 place secondary  4,200 4.9 – 6.1 
1,000 place secondary  5,000 5.9 – 7.4 
1,200 place secondary  6,000 6.9 – 8.6 South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
All through – 2FE primary & 
800 place secondary  2,000 for primary, 4 ,200 for 
secondary  6.5 – 8.1 
All through – 2FE primary & 
1,000 place secondary  2,000 for primary, 5 ,000 for 
secondary  7.5 – 9.4 
All through – 2FE primary & 
1,200 place secondary  2000 for primary, 6 ,000 for 
secondary  8.5 – 10.6 
Table 8 : Land Take for New Schools  
FE = Form entry  
17.4.6  New provision (primary and secondary) will be based on the national Building 
Bulletin 103: Area Guidelines for New Schools2, and should be constructed to a 
design and specification agreed with the LPA and LCC.  
17.4.7  In exceptional circumstances, LCC may be willing to accept a parcel of free, 
serviced land on site for a new school, with the school built by the developer.  
17.4.8  In certain circumstances, it may be more appropriate to have a school located in an 
alternative locat ion, off site. In such circumstances, where a significant proportion of 
the need for infrastructure is generated by the proposal, a proportionate financial 
contribution to purchase the land elsewhere will be required.  
Types of facilities that may be requi red  
17.4.9  Contributions could be sought to provide additional capacity at the nearest affected 
school and/or to secure the necessary provision of new school places at primary, 
secondary and school based post -16 education facilities. Where appropriate it may 
include early years’ provision as well. New build fa cilities may also be provided .  
17.5.  Delivery mechanism  
17.5.1  Education facilities should be provided through the use of obligations which are 
secured by a Section 106 agreement.  
17.5.2  The contributions could be held by the relevant LPA or LCC and will only be spent 
by LCC to provide or improve facilities at the school(s) named in the S106 
agreement.  
1.1.1                                              
2 Building Bulletin 103: Area Guidelines for New Schools; Department for Education, June 2014  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
18. Appendix 9: Developer Contributions for Health care 
Facilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
18.1.  Introduction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
18.1.1  Local Plan Polic ies 5, 6 and 32 recognise the need to help make provision for 
health care facilities to meet local needs, thus contributing to the health and well -
being of residents. In respect of these policies, the focus is on primary care facilities 
(the treatment of m inor injuries and illnesses, minor surgery and the ongoing 
management of chronic conditions). A range of social benefits can be secured 
through the provision of quality health care facilities.  
18.1.2  The South Lincolnshire Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) serve s a registered 
population of approximately 162,000 within South East Lincolnshire. The CCG is 
made up of two localities: South Holland and Boston (which includes part of South 
Holland District). The South Holland locality has eight GP practices and the Bos ton 
locality has nine GP practices. New housing developments can put pressure on 
these existing health care facilities and cumulatively create the need for additional 
facilities, space and services.  
Needs and Priorities  
18.1.3  The South East Lincolnshire Infrast ructure Delivery Plan (IDP) identifies that ‘an 
estimated 15 additional GP’s surgeries are likely to be required to meet the 
(unconsented) plan period growth. The estimated cost to provide this level of 
additional service is approximately £11m’. The CCG ha s commented that there ‘is 
some capacity at the local GP surgeries to accommodate additional patients in the 
short -medium term in Spalding and Boston. There are some issues around capacity 
in Holbeach where there is a current grant -funding application to a ddress capacity 
issues, and one other practice in Spalding has applied to expand. Similarly, 
Westside surgery and Stuart House surgery in Boston have submitted project 
initiation documents to expand their current premises to cope with current and 
consented  growth. The critical issue for service delivery County -wide however, is an 
increasing shortage of GP’s, nurses and other health care staff which could affect 
future service delivery should demand increase’. Although developer contributions 
can help provid e additional space, funding cannot be used to secure additional 
staff.  
18.1.4  These needs and priorities are based on the CCG’s current knowledge of existing 
capacity and demand for additional infrastructure. Options are currently being 
explored to maximise the u se of facilities and reduce running costs. Developer 
contributions can be used to help maximise efficiency at each practice.  
18.1.5  The CCGs are able to secure some national grant funding to support the delivery of 
infrastructure, and other one -off funding packag es may become available over the 
plan period. At this stage, the IDP assumes that 50% of the cost of health care South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
infrastructure over the plan period will be funded from such sources, and 50% from 
developer contributions.  
18.2.  Requirement  
18.2.1  The number of resident s living in a development is linked to the number and size of 
dwellings proposed. In general terms, the greater the number of bedrooms, the 
greater the number of residents there is likely to be and therefore a greater impact 
on health care facilities could  be seen. This will inform any requirement sought.  
18.2.2  In most cases, it is expected that new development will provide a financial 
contribution towards the cost of providing and/or enhancing health care facilities. 
New health care facilities are only likely to  be required on site as part of a 
sustainable urban extension.  
18.3.  When will developer contributions be sought?  
18.3.1  Developer contributions for new or improved health care facilities will be sought 
from relevant residential developments (Use Class C3 and C4). Appl ications for the 
development of residential care homes and nursing homes (Use Class C2) will be 
assessed on a case by case basis.  
18.3.2  For each development, the CCG will first consider the capacity at the nearest 
accessible GP surgery (surgeries), planned and funded expansions and other 
planned residential development with planning permission or already being 
considered via a planning application , subject to planning permission being granted . 
It will also take into account the availability of mainstream NHS fun ding and any 
time lag between that funding stream availability and the ‘on the ground’ provision 
of the facility to support the new development. If there is no capacity, or is not likely 
to be when the residents generated by the development are likely to b e using the 
facility, a contribution towards expansion or to help provide for a new surgery will be 
sought.  
18.4.  Approach to providing health care facilities  
18.4.1  The methodology used by the CCG is informed by the calculation in the Department 
of Health document tit led HBN11 -01: Facilities for Primary and Community Care 
Services71. It is based upon the average occupancy rate for dwellings in South 
Holland and Boston (2.4  people per household14) and the consequent increase in 
patient population generated by a new development. The occupancy rate may be 
reduced if there is a high proportion of specialist older persons’ accommodation or 
1-bedroom dwellings. Any future increase in population inevita bly impacts on 
existing facilities; and  this approach shows the likely impact that additional residents 
will generate in terms of additional consultations by clinicians (a GP and a Practice 
Nurse) in terms of demand for consulting/treatment rooms, which ma y lead to a 
need for more space. The Appendix reproduces the form used by the CCG to justify 
the financial or other contribution requested.  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
18.4.2  The CCGs will not typically seek to support 'single -handed' GP services which are 
run by single GPs, although this m ay be considered in exceptional circumstances. 
This is because of sustainability and resilience reasons.  
18.4.3  In the majority of cases a financial contribution will be used towards:  
 new health care facilities (these may be co -located with other health or soci al 
care providers); and  
 construction costs for additional facilities/extensions, adaptations or alterations 
which are required to meet the needs of the development.  
Provision of New Health care Facilities  
18.4.4  Where a new GP surgery is appropriate as part of a  significant development, 
developers will be expected to set aside sufficient land to accommodate the surgery 
and associated car parking. It should be constructed to a design and specification 
agreed with the LPA and CCG.  
18.4.5  In exceptional circumstances, the  CCG may be willing to accept a parcel of free, 
serviced land on a site for a new surgery, together with a financial contribution to 
cover the construction costs.   
18.5.  Delivery mechanism  
18.5.1  Health care facilities should be provided through the use of obligations which are 
secured by Section 106 agreement.  
18.5.2  The contributions would be held by the LPA and only spent by the CCG to provide 
or improve facilities at the health care facility named in the S106 agreement.  
Appendix  
  
 
 NHS England  
Application Number: ……….  
Location: ………..  
Impact of new  
development on  GP 
practice   
GP practice(s)  most likely 
to be  affected by the  
Housing  development   
Issues to be  addressed 
to 
ensure the  development   
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
acceptable   
Fairly and  reasonably  
related in sca le and kind 
to the developmen t  
Financial  Contributio n 
requested   
High quality care for all, now and for future generations  
            
  South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
19. Appendix 10: Indicative Plans/Diagrams  
19.1.  Prestige Employment Sites  
Q2: The Quadrant  
19.1.1  See the Marina Hub in Sustainable Urban Extensions, Boston Sou006 below.  
Holbeach Food Enterprise Zone  
 
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Kirton Distribution Park  
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Bridge Road, Long Sutton  
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Lincs Gateway, Spalding  
 
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Clay Lake, Spalding  
 
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
19.2.  Sustainable Urban Extensions  
Boston Sou006  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Boston Wes002  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Spalding Vernatts  
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Holbeach West  
 
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
19.3.  Proposed Highways  
Boston Distributor Road  
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Spalding Western Relief Road : Delivery Sections 1 -5. 
  
South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2011 -36 
Policy 4 Approach to Flood Risk - Witham Haven Banks Buffer 
Map 
 
 
 
 
