South Cambridgeshire Local Plan  
 
 
 
Adopted September 2018  
Cambourne, South CambridgeshireCambourne, South Cambridgeshire    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 
 
Adopted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by South Cambridgeshire District Council 
 
© Published September 2018 
 
SCDC/LP/27.09.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Cambridgeshire District Council adopted this Local Plan  
at its meeting of Council on 27 September 2018. 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
i 
 CONTENTS  
 
Chapter 1 Introduction  1 
About South Cambridgeshire  3 
What the Plan Does and How it was Prepared  3 
What the Plan Looks Like  5 
What Comprises the Developmen t Plan for South Cambridgeshire  6 
Strategic policies and neighbourhood planning  7 
Chapter 2  Spatial Strategy   9 
Key Facts  12 
Evolving t he Strategy and Overview  12 
The Development Strategy 1999 to 2016  13 
Objectively Assessed Needs for New Jobs and Homes  14 
Duty to Cooperate  15 
The Joint Spatial Approach for Cambridge and  
South Camb ridgeshire  16 
The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire  20 
Comparing the Development Strategy to 2031 with the  
Structure Plan  20 
Vision and Objectives  22 
Sustainable Development  23 
Cambridge Green Belt  24 
Provision of New Jobs a nd Homes  25 
The Development Strategy t o 2031  28 
Development Frameworks  32 
Strategy for t he Rural Area  33 
Rural Centres  33 
Minor Rural Centres  34 
Group Villages  35 
Infill Villages  36 
Phasing, Delivery and Monitoring  37 
Phasing  38 
Delivery  38 
Moni toring  39 
Chapter 3  Strategic Sites  43 
Edge o f Cambridge  46 
Orchard Park  46 
Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road  49 
Cambridge East  55 
Cambridge Northern Fringe East   57 
New Settlements  64 
Northstowe Extension  64 
Waterbeach New Town  64 
New Village at Bourn Airfield  72 
Sustainable Villages  78 
Cambourne West  78 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
ii 
 Chapter 4  Climate Change  85 
Key Facts  88 
Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change  88 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  90 
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy in New D evelopments  91 
Water Efficiency  92 
Sustainable Show Homes  93 
Construction Methods  94 
Water Quality  95 
Sustainable Drainage Systems  96 
Managing Flood Risk  97 
Chapter 5  Delivering High Quality Places  101 
Key Facts  103 
Securing High Quality Design  103 
Public Art  106 
Chapter 6  Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic 
Environment  109 
Key Facts  111 
Conservation Area and Green Separation at Longstanton  112 
Protecting and Enhancing Landscape Character  113 
Protecting Agricultural Land  114 
Biodiversity  115 
Green Infrastructure  119 
Ancient Woodlands and Veteran T rees 121 
The Green Belt  122 
Redevelopment in the Green Belt  122 
Green Belt and Recreation Uses  123 
Protecting Village Character  124 
Heritage Assets  126 
Heritage A ssets and Adapt ing to Climate C hange  129 
Chapter 7 Delivering High Quality Homes  131 
Key Facts  133 
Allocations For Residential Development At Villages  134 
Bayer CropScience Site, Hauxton  138 
Fulbourn and Ida Darwin Hospitals  140 
Papworth Everard West Central  142 
Fen Drayton Former Land Settlement Association Estate  143 
South of A1307, Linton  144 
Residential Moorings  144 
Housing Density  145 
Housing Mix  145 
Affordable Housing  148 
Rural Exception Site Affordable Housing  150 
Residential Space Standards  151 
Extensions to Dwellings in the Countryside  153 
Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  154 
Countryside Dwellings of Exceptional Quality  155 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
iii 
 Development of Residential Gardens  156 
Reuse of Buildings in the Countryside for Residential Use  157 
Working at H ome 157 
Dwellings to Support a Rural -based Enterprise  158 
Provision for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  160 
Gypsy and Traveller Provision at New Communities  162 
Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople Sites 
on Unall ocated Land  Outside Development Frameworks  164 
 
Design of Gypsy and Traveller Sites, and Travelling Showpeople 
Sites  166 
Chapter 8 Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  169 
Key Facts  172 
New Employment Provision  172 
New Settlements at Waterbeach a nd Bourn Airfield  173 
New Employment Provision near Cambridge  173 
New Employment Provision at Villages  177 
Papworth Hospital  178 
Imperial War Museum at Duxford  180 
Mixed -use development  in Histon & Impington Station A rea 181 
Promotion of Clusters  183 
Shared Social Spaces as part of Employment Areas  184 
Large Scale Warehousing and Distribution Centres  184 
New Employment Development in Villages  185 
New Employment Development on the Edges of Villages  185 
Loss of Employment to Non -Employment Uses  186 
Established Employment Areas  187 
Expansion of Existing Businesses in the Countryside  188 
Conversion or Replacement of Rural Buildings for Employment  189 
Farm Diversification  190 
Tourist Facilities and Visitor Attractions  191 
Tourist Accommodation  192 
Retail  192 
Retail Hierarchy  192 
Applications for New Retail Development  193 
Retailing in the Countryside  195 
Chapter 9 Promoting Successful Communities  197 
Key Facts  199 
Allocation for Open Space  200 
Health Impact Assessment  201 
Protection of Vi llage Services and Facilities  201 
Meeting Community Needs  202 
Community Healthcare Facility  Provision  206 
Indoor Community Facilities   206 
Outdoor Play Space, Informal Open Space and New 
Developments  207 
Protecting  Existing Leisure and Recreation Facilities  within 
Villages including Allotments and Community O rchards  211 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
iv 
 Artificial Lighting  212 
Noise  Pollution     213 
Land  Contamination  215 
Air Quality  216 
Hazardous Installations  218 
Odour Pollution  219 
Chapter 10 Promoting and Delivering Susta inable Transport 
and Infrastructure  221 
Key Facts  225 
Rail Station and Interchange  225 
Planning for Sustainable Travel  226 
Parking Provision  229 
Rail Freight  234 
Aviation -Related Development Proposals  235 
Cambridge Airport  237 
Air Safeguarding Zon es 237 
Lord’s Bridge Radio Telescope  241 
Provision of Infrastructure and Services   242 
Waste Infrastructure  244 
Education  244 
Broadband  246 
  
Appendices  247 
Appendix A : Five-Year Housing Land Supply  249 
Appendix B: Local Development Framework P olicies referred to in 
Area Action Plans superseded by Local Plan Policies,  
as referenced in Policy LP/1  255 
Appendix C: List of Local Green Space Sites  
(shown on the Policies Map)  259 
Appendix D: Glossary  261 
Appendix E: Strategic policies in South C ambridgeshire  285 
Appendix F: Monitoring Indicators  293 
Appendix G: Superseded Documents and Policies  321 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
v 
 LIST OF FIGURES  
 
  
Figure 1:  Key Diagram for South Cambridgeshire  29 
Figure 2:  Key Diagram for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire  30 
Figure 3 : Illustration of Major Development Areas at  
West Cambridge, Darwin Green, North West Cambridge 
and Orchard Park  60 
Figure 4:  Illustration of Major Development Sites at  
Cambridge Biomedical Campus and Southern Fringe  61 
Figure 5:  Illustration of Major Development Area and  
Safeguarded Land at Cambridge East  62 
 
Figure 6: Illustration of Major Development Areas at Cambridge 
Northern Fringe East and Cambridge North railway  station  63 
 
Figure 7: Green Infrastructure Strategy Network  120 
Figure 8: Minimu m gross internal floor areas and storage (m2) 152 
Figure 9: Gypsy and Traveller need in South Cambridgeshire  161 
Figure 10:  Guide for On -site Provision of Open Space  210 
Figure 11:  Parking Provision  231 
Figure 12 : Cambridge Airport Air Safeguarding Zon e 239 
Figure 13 : Imperial War Museum Duxford Air Safeguarding Zone  240 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
vi 
 INDEX OF POLICIES  
 
LP/1 : Superseded Policies referred to in Adopted Area Action Plans  6 
S/1: Vision  22 
S/2: Objectives of the Local Plan  22 
S/3: Presumption in F avour of Sustain able Development  23 
 S/4: Cambridge Green Belt  34 
S/5: Provision of N ew Jobs and Homes  26 
S/6: The Development Strategy to 2031  28 
S/7: Development Frameworks  32 
S/8: Rural Centres  33 
S/9: Minor Rural Centres  34 
S/10: Group Villages  35 
S/11: Infill Villages  36 
S/12: Phasi ng, Delivery and Monitoring  37 
S/13: Review of the Local Plan  40 
SS/1 : Orchard Park  46 
SS/2 : Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road  49 
SS/3 : Cambridge East  55 
SS/4 : Cambridge Northern Fringe East and Cambridge North rail way 
station  57 
SS/5 : Northstowe Extension   64 
SS/6 : Waterbeach New Town  64 
SS/7 : New Village at Bourn Airfield  72 
SS/8 : Cambourne West  78 
CC/1 : Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change  88 
CC/2 : Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  90 
CC/3 : Renewable and Low Carbon Energy in New Developments  91 
CC/4 : Water Efficiency  92 
CC/5 : Sustainable Show Homes  93 
CC/6 : Construction Methods  94 
CC/7 : Water Quality  95 
CC/8 : Sustainable Drainage Systems  96 
CC/9 : Managing Flood Risk  97 
HQ/1 : Design Pri nciples   103 
HQ/2 : Public Art and New Development  106 
NH/1 : Conservation Area and Green Separation at Longstanton  112 
NH/2 : Protecting and E nhancing Landscape Character  113 
NH/3 : Protecting Agricultural Land  114 
NH/4 : Biodiversity  115 
NH/5 : Sites of Biodiversity or Geological Importance  117 
NH/6 : Green Infrastructure  119 
NH/7 : Ancient Woodlands and Veteran T rees 121 
NH/8 : Mitigating the Impact of Development in and adjoining the Green 
Belt 122 
NH/9 : Redevelopment of Previously Developed Sites and Infilling in the 
Green Belt  122 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
vii 
 NH/10 : Facilities for Recreation in the Green Belt  123 
NH/11 : Protected Village Amenity Areas  124 
NH/12 : Local Green Space  124 
NH/13 : Important Countryside Frontage  125 
NH/14 : Heritage Assets  126 
NH/15 : Heritage A ssets and Adapting to Climate Change  129 
H/1: Allocations for Residential Development at Villages  134 
H/2: Bayer CropScience Site, Hauxton  138 
H/3: Fulbourn and Ida Darwin Hospitals  140 
H/4: Papworth Everard West Central  142 
H/5: Fen Drayton Former Land S ettlement Association Estate  143 
H/6: South of A1307, Linton  144 
H/7: Residential Moorings  144 
H/8: Housing Density  145 
H/9: Housing Mix  145 
H/10 : Affordable Housing  148 
H/11:  Rural Exception Site Affordable Housing  150 
H/12 : Residential Space Stand ards  151 
H/13 : Extensions to Dwellings in the Countryside  153 
H/14 : Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  154 
H/15 : Countryside Dwellings of Exceptional Quality  155 
 H/16 : Development of Residential Gardens  156 
H/17 : Re-use of Buildings in the Cou ntryside for Residential Use  157 
H/18 : Working at Home  157 
H/19 : Dwellings to Support a Rural -based Enterprise  158 
H/20 : Provision for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  160 
H/21: Gypsy and Traveller Provision at New Communities  162 
H/22 : Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Sites on Unallocated Land Outside Development Frameworks  164 
 
H/23 : Design of Gypsy and Traveller Sites, and Travelling Showpeople 
Sites  166 
E/1: New Employment Provision near Cambridge – Camb ridge Science 
Park 173 
E/2: Cambridge Biomedical Campus Extension  174 
 E/3: Fulbourn Road East (Fulbourn)  6.9 hectares  177 
 E/4: Allocations for Class B1 Employment Uses  177 
 E/5: Allocations for Class B1, B2 and B8 Employment Uses  177 
 E/6: Papworth Hospital  178 
 E/7: Imperial War Museum at Duxford  180 
 E/8: Mixed -use development  in Histon & Impington Station A rea 181 
 E/9: Promotion of Clusters  183 
 E/10: Shared Social Spaces in Employment Areas  184 
 E/11: Large Scale Warehousing and Distributio n Centres  184 
 E/12: New Employment Development in Villages  185 
 E/13: New Employment Development on the Edges of Villages  185 
 E/14: Loss of Employment Land to Non Employment Uses  196 
 E/15: Established Employment Areas  187 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Conte nts 
 
viii 
  E/16: Expansion of Existi ng Businesses in the Countryside  188 
 E/17: Conversion or Replacement of Rural Buildings for Employment  189 
E/18: Farm Diversification  190 
E/19:  Tourist Facilities and Visitor Attractions  191 
 E/20: Tourist Accommodation  192 
E/21: Retail Hierarchy  192 
 E/22: Applications for New Retail Development  192 
 E/23: Retailing in the Countryside  193 
 SC/1 : Allocation for Open Space  200 
 SC/2 : Health Impact Assessment  201 
 SC/3 : Protection of Village Services and Facilities  201 
 SC/4 : Meeting Community Nee ds 202 
 SC/5 : Community Healthcare  Provision  206 
 SC/6 : Indoor Community Facilities   206 
 SC/7 : Outdoor Play Space, Informal Open Space and New 
Developments  207 
SC/8 : Protection of Existing Recreation Areas, Allotments and 
Community Orchards  211 
 SC/9: Lighting Proposals  212 
 SC/10 : Noise Pollution   213 
 SC/11: Contaminat ed Land  215 
 SC/12 : Air Quality   216 
 SC/13 : Hazardous Installations  218 
 SC/14 : Odour and Other Fugitive Emissions to A ir 219 
TI/1: Chesterton Rail Station and Interchange  225 
TI/2: Planning for Sustainable Travel  226 
 TI/3: Parking Provision  229 
TI/4: Rail Freight and Interchanges  234 
 TI/5: Aviation -Related Development Proposals  235 
 TI/6: Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone  237 
TI/7: Lord’s Bridge Radio Telescope  241 
TI/8: Infrastructure and New Developments   242 
TI/9: Education facilities  244 
TI/10 : Broadband  246 
 
© Crown copyright and database right 2018. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100022500  
 
The Ordnance Survey mapping included within this document is prov ided by South 
Cambridgeshire District Council under licence from the Ordnance Survey in order to 
fulfil its public function to make available Council h elp public domain information. 
Persons viewing this mapping should contact Ordnance Survey copyright for advice 
where they wish to licence Ordnance Survey mapping/map data for their own use. 
The OS web site can be found at www.ordsvy.gov.uk . Chapter 1Chapter 1   
IntroductionIntroduction   
Histon, South CambridgeshireHiston, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 1        Introduction  
 
3 
 Chapter 1  Introduction  
 
1.1 This is the Local Plan for South Cambridgeshire. It updates and replaces the 
South Cambridgeshire Local Development Framework which was adopted 
between January 2007 and January 2010 and covered the period up to 2016. 
The Local Plan’s policies and proposals cover the period 2011 to 2031. The  
Local Plan is founded on an extensive evidence base of studies and two 
rounds of public consultation on issues and options w hich were held between 
mid-July and end -September 2012 and mid-January  to end -February 2013.  
Consultation on the Proposed Submission Local Plan was undertaken in 
summer 2013, before the pla n was Submitted for Examination in March 2014. 
Further consultation  was carried out on proposed modifications in 2015  and 
2018 . The Local Plan  has been prepared in close co operation with Cambridge 
City Council and Cambridgeshire County Council and its policies and 
proposals have been subject to sustainability appraisal th rough all stages of 
preparation. The Council has also worked with the local authorities in 
Cambridgeshire, Suffolk and Norfolk to produce a Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (SHMA) to determine the amount of housing and jobs growth that 
will need to be a ccommodated by 2031 and agreed a memorandum of 
cooperation about how that need will be met.  
 
1.2 The Local Plan affects all of us that live, work or study in South 
Cambridgeshire, or who come here to enjoy all that the area has to offer.  
 
About South Cambridgeshire  
 
1.3 South Cambridgeshire is consistently recognised as one of the top places to 
live and work in the country due to our thriving economy and quality of life. Our 
successful local economy is important on a national stage and South 
Cambridgeshire  is one of the fastest growing areas in the country.  
 
1.4 South Cambridgeshire is located centrally in the East of England region at the 
junction of the M11 / A14 roads and with direct rail access to London and to 
Stansted Airport. It is a largely rural distri ct which surrounds the city of 
Cambridge and comprises over 100 villages, none currently larger than 8,000 
persons. It is surrounded by a ring of market towns just beyond its borders, 
which are generally 10 –15 miles from Cambridge. Together, Cambridge, 
South Cambridgeshire and the Mark et Towns form the Cambridge  
Sub-Region. South Cambridgeshire has long been a fast growing district and 
in 2011 had a population of 146,800 persons (bigger than Cambridge itself) 
and has become home to many of the clusters of  high technology research 
and development in the Cambridge Sub -Region.  
 
What the Plan Does and How it was P repared  
 
1.5 The P lan aims to strike the right balance between growth and conservation, 
valuing w hat makes the area unique.  It is about making sure jobs are created, 
and new homes provided, in the right areas, and that all transport needs are South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 1        Introduction  
 
4 
 considered and people have a choice about where to live so they do not have 
to rely on cars for all of their journeys . 
 
1.6 The Local Plan sets the levels of employment and housing development that 
should be provided over the plan period to best meet the needs of the area 
and establish a clear strategy for meeting development needs in the most 
sustainable way that protects the quality of life of existing and future reside nts. 
Its policies aim to ensure that development is of high quality and will meet the 
challenges we face with an ageing p opulation and changing climate.  It will 
ensure that new development comes with the necessary schools, health 
facilities, shops, leisure  facilities and open spaces that residents need to 
provide a good quality of life.  
 
1.7 The Local Plan sets a strong framework for new development to meet the 
needs of the area and provide a clear statement for local residents, 
businesses, service providers an d the development industry of what they can 
expect to happen in terms of change in the built and natural environment over 
the next couple of decades.  
 
1.8 The updated Local Plan responds to the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF , 20121), the Localism Act  2011 and to proposed changes to the ways 
in which developers will contribute to funding supporting services and 
infrastructure through Section 106 contributions an d the Community 
Infrastructure L evy (CIL) . 
 
1.9 Underpinning the whole of the P lan is the Government’s commitment to 
sustainable development. Taking account of local circumstances, the new 
Local Plan’s development and other proposals aim to meet the 3 overarching 
principles of sustainability:  
• Economic – contributing to building a strong, respons ive and 
competitive economy by ensuring that sufficient land of the right type is 
available in the right places and at the right time to support growth and 
innovation; and by identifying and coordinating development 
requirements, including the provision of  infrastructure;  
• Social – supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by 
providing the supply of housing required to meet the needs of present 
and future generations; and by creating a high quality built environment, 
with accessible local services that reflect the community’s needs and 
support its health, social and cultural wellbeing ; and  
• Environmental – contributing to protecting and enhancing our natural, 
built and historic environment; and, as part of this, helping to improve 
biodiversity, prude nt use of natural resources, minimising waste and 
pollution, and mitigating and adapting to climate change including 
moving to a low carbon economy.  
                                                
1 The updated National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF)  (published in July 2018) states  that the 
policies in the previous framework (i.e. NPPF 2012) apply where the Local Plan was submitted to the 
Secretary of State for examination before 24 January 2019 (NPPF 2018, par agraph 214). The South 
Cambridgeshire Local Plan was submitted in March 2 014 and  references to the NPPF in this Local 
Plan refer to the NPPF 2012 and not the NPPF 2018.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 1        Introduction  
 
5 
 1.10 The overarching objective in national policy to secure sustainable 
development strongly influenced the deve lopment of t he Plan. The Council 
prepared a Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report that has helped us identify 
the key issues and sustainability objectives for the new Local Plan. An Initial 
Sustainability Report was also prepared, which tested the sustai nability merits 
of the issues and options which were consider ed and tested in producing the 
Plan. The draft Final Sustainability Report also includes an analysis of the 
issues identified, the options available to address them, the results of 
consultation o n reasonable options, and how the proposed policies were 
arrived at.  A Sustainability  Appraisal Addendum was produced in 2015 , to take 
account of new evidence prepared in response to the Inspectors’ Letter during 
the Local Plan Examination. Following the E xamination Hearings proposed 
modifications  were  also subject to sustainability appraisal.  
 
What the Plan Looks L ike 
 
1.11 The P lan includes a vision, strategic objectives and specific chapters relating 
to the future spatial strategy and other matters which will affect how we live 
and work over the next two decades.  Each chapter provides key facts about 
the topic. The chapters are as follows:  
• Chapter 1: Introduction  which describes the overall purpose of the 
document.  
• Chapter 2 : Spatial Strategy sets out the vision and objectives and 
development needs for South Cambridgeshire to 2031 together with the 
spatial strategy which focuses development on the edge of Cambridge, 
at new towns/new villages; and in selected villages. It also has policies 
for small scale development in villa ges. It includes a policy about 
phasing, de livering and monitoring of the P lan to ensure that it 
continues t o meet its objectives.  
• Chapter 3 : Strategic  Sites  contains the strategic sites that will 
contribute most to the delivery of sustainable development in South 
Cambridgeshire.  
• Chapter 4 : Climate Change  is concerned with sustainab le 
development, climate change, water  resources and flooding.  
• Chapter 5 : Delivering High Quality Places  is concerned with design, 
landscape, and public realm.  
• Chapter 6 : Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic 
Environment  contains proposals to protect and enhance the historic 
built and the natural environment.  
• Chapter 7 : Delivering High Quality Homes  is concerned with 
delivering high quality housing and includes village housing sites.  
• Chapter 8 : Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  deals with 
building a strong and competitive economy, including sections on 
employment, retail and tourism and development sites.  
• Chapter 9: Promoting Successful Communities  is concerned with 
creating successful communities, including the provision of open space, 
leisure facilities and community facilities.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 1        Introduction  
 
6 
 • Chapter 10 : Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and 
Infrastructure  deals with promoting and delivering sustainable 
transport and other kinds of infrastructure.  
 
1.12 Responding to the introduction o f Neighbourhood Development Plans under 
the Localism  Act 2011 , the Local Plan includes Parish Council proposals 
where there is clear local support, as an alternative to the pre paration of 
Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
What C omprises the Development Plan for South Cambridgeshire  
 
1.13 In the past, strategic planning for South Cambridgeshire was undertaken at a 
‘higher plan ‐making level’, most recently through the Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Structure Plan 2003 and the Regional Spatial Strategy (the East 
of England Plan 2008). Both these documents have now been revoked and 
strategic planning is now undertaken at a local lev el, coordinated by a 
statutory ‘ duty to cooperate ’. This cooperation has in part been through the 
oversight provided by Cambridgeshire and Peterbo rough Joint Strategic 
Planning Unit which was set up to help coordinate the development of strategy 
with South Cambridgeshire District Council, Cambridgeshire County Council 
and other local planning authorities and stakeholders in the area.  
 
1.14 On adoption of  this P lan, the statutory development plan for South 
Cambridgeshire will comprise:  
• South Cambridgeshire Local Plan; 
• Northstowe Area Action Plan 20 07 (excluding Policy NS/3(1g), which 
is replaced by Policy SS/ 5: Northstowe Extension);  
• Cambridge Southern Fri nge Area Action Plan 2008 ; 
• Cambridge East Area Action Plan 2008 (excluding policies CE/3 and 
CE/35, which are replaced by Local Plan Policy SS/3 : Cambridge 
East);  
• North West Cambridge Area Action Plan 2009; and  
• Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and  Waste Local 
Development Framework  – Core Strategy and Proposals Map C 2011, 
Site Specific Proposals Plan and Proposals Map A and B 2012.  
 
 
1.15 The adopted Area Action Plans remain part of the development plan, and in 
places make reference to policies in other parts of the Local Development 
Framework, in particular the Core Strategy DPD and Development Control 
Policies DPD. For clarity on the poli cies to be applied in decision making Policy LP/1: Superseded Policies referred to in Adopted Area Action 
Plans  
 
Where policies of the Local Development Framework referred to in adopted 
Area Action Plans are superseded by policies of this Local Plan, the more up 
to date Local Plan polices will be applied, as set out in Appendix B.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September 2018  
Chapter 1        Introduction  
 
7 
 involving the Area Action Plan sites, where reference is made in an Area 
Action Plan to a policy elsewhere in the Local Development Framework, the 
replacement policy in the Local Plan will apply. A schedule is included in 
Appendix B of the plan, identifying the relevant references in the adopted Area 
Action Plans that are superseded by the Local Plan and the Local Plan 
policies that will be applied. 
 
1.16 Also on adoption of the Local Plan, the South Cambridgeshire Local 
Development Framework Core Strategy 2007, Development Control Policies 
DPD 2007, Site Specific Policies DPD 2010 and saved Policy CNF6 from the 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2004 will be revoked in their entirety and will 
no longer form part of the development plan. 
 
1.17 The Local Plan proposes the preparation of new Supplementary Planning  
Documents and an Area Action Plan to guide development in three areas of 
large scale development: 
 Bourn Airfield new village Supplementary Planning Document; 
 Waterbeach new to wn Supplementary Planning Document; and 
 Cambridge Northern Fringe East Area Action Plan – prepared jointly 
with Cambridge City Council. 
 
1.18 These documents will be prepared after the Local Plan is adopted. 
 
Strategic policies and neighbourhood planning 
 
1.19 There is a list of basic conditions in the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 
that must be met by a Neighbourhood Plan before it can be successful at 
independent examination and ultimately adopted by a Local Planning 
Authority. One of these is that any draft Neighbourhood Plan must be in 
“general conformity” with the strategic policies contained in the development 
plan for the district. According to the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF, 2012) a local planning authority should set out clearly the strategic 
policies for their area (paragraph 184).  
 
1.20 The Council has therefore used the guidance provided within the NPPF (2012) 
and in the National Planning Practice Guidance to define the strategic policies 
in the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan. Appendix E includes a list of the 
identified strategic policies to provide clarity for neighbourhood plan purposes. 
 
  Chapter 2
  
Spatial Strategy
   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
11 
 Chapter 2     Spatial Strategy  
 
2.1 A number of factors contribute to quality of life and help make South 
Cambridgeshire such a good  place to live, work and study.  The successful 
economy, attractive villages, high quality new developments, and the quality of the 
local environment all come together to give the district its particular character. The 
relationship with Cambridge and the focus it provides for shopping, e ntertainment, 
culture and services for residents of South Cambridgeshire is also significant and a 
number of major new developments in the district  lie on the edge of Cambridge. 
Parts of the area also look to surrounding market towns for services and 
emplo yment.  
 
2.2 For the success of the district to continue, it is important to make sure the Local 
Plan provides for the appropriate levels of growth with the right strategy that will 
deliver sustainable development. The Local Plan must provide for appropriate le vels 
of employment so the Cambridge area can continue to develop as part of the home 
of one of the largest clusters of research and development activity in Europe, with 
housing in the right locations to support the local economy  and provide for housing 
needs. It must do this w hilst maintaining the  quality of life for residents in existing 
and new communities, as well as the quality of the  natural and built environment.  It 
must also continue to provide an attractive rural hinterland and setting for the 
historic city of Cambridge, with those parts closer to Cambridge being protected by 
the Cambridge Green Belt.  
 
2.3 This chapter sets out the vision and objectives for the Local Plan, including an 
overarching emphasis on deli vering sustainable development.  It establishes the 
number of jobs and homes to meet the objectively assessed needs of the di strict for 
the period to 2031. Key to the continued success of South Cambridgeshire is 
bringing together the three strands of economy, social and environment to en sure a 
sustainable future for the district over the period to 2031 and beyond. There will be 
considerable change, not least with significant developments already planned at the 
new town of Northstowe and on the Cambridge fringes as well as in surrounding 
areas s uch as at Alconbury Enterprise Z one, and this chapter plans for further major 
new developments to meet additional needs to 2031. The objective is that these 
new developments will become successful, vi brant, healthy new communities.  As 
part of a seque ntial policy of encouraging a more sustainable pattern of living, only 
limited development to meet local needs will take place within villages in the district, 
with most of that limited development focussed into the larger, more sustainable 
villages. The e mphasis will be on providing quality homes for all, including 
affordable housing to meet local needs, located where it has good access to 
services and facilities by sustainable modes of transport, to ensure the creation of 
sustainable and balanced communit ies. 
 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
12 
  
Evolving the Strategy and Overview  
 
2.4 A range of issues have been considered in evolving the development strategy for 
the Local Plan for the period 2011 to 2031, including:  
• the previous development strategy for 1999 to 2016 contained in the Local 
Development Framework (adopted between 2007 -2010), how it came about 
and progress in delivering the strategy;  
• identifying objectively assessed needs for the area for the plan period 
2011 -2031, working jointly with other authorities in the housing market area;  
• the Duty to Cooperate introduced by the Lo calism Act 2011;  
• considering the appropriate strategy jointly with Cambridge City Council for 
the Councils’ respective Local Plans given the close relationship between the 
two areas, in particular:  
o whether the previous development sequence remained the mos t 
appropriate;  
o whether there was a case for a f urther review of the Green Belt ; 
o undertaking a further Green Belt review;  
o considering any reasonable options for development on the edge of 
Cambridge;  
o considering allocation of further new settlements and stra tegic scale 
village development;  
• the emerging Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire;  
• a comparison between the evolving development strategy and the previous 
strategy.  Key Facts:  
• The Cambridge area has proved relatively resilient to the impacts 
of the downturn, with significant jobs growth forecast over the plan 
period, although significantly lower than had been anticipated by 
the East of England Plan 2008.  
• There is a high level of housing required in the district; some to 
support natural growth but mainly to support the growing 
economy . 
• Around 25% of the district around Cambridge is designated as 
Green Belt.  
• Previous plans shifted the balance of development aw ay from 
villages towards the edge of Cambridge (through review of the 
Green Belt), the new town of Northstowe and larger villages.  
• Settlements have a varied and distinct local character, ranging 
from compact hamlets to larger villages.   
• Access to services  and jobs for many is inconvenient, due to 
limited public transport in villages away from main transport 
corridors. 56% of our population live in villages without a doctors’ 
surgery, primary school and food shop.  
• The proportion of people that feel they can  influence local decisions is 
higher in South Cambridgeshire than the national average.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
13 
 The Development Strategy 1999 to 2016  
 
2.5 The strategy for the Cambridge  area between 1999 and 2016 stemmed from work 
undertaken by Cambridge Futures (an influential group of local stakeholder 
organisations), which influenced the Regional Plan for East Anglia 2000 and the 
Cambridgeshire and Peterb orough Structure Plan 2003.  Prior to that, development 
in Cambridge had been constrained by the Green Belt. One of the effects of this 
constraint was that housing development that would otherwise have taken place in 
Cambridge was dispersed to towns and villages beyond the outer boundar y of the 
Green Belt, with people commuting back to jobs in Cambridge contributing to 
congestion, greenhouse gas emissions, air quality problems an d other quality of life 
issues.  The change in strategy introduced in the Regional Plan and the Structure 
Plan recognised that a significant change in the approach to development  in and 
close to the city was required in order to help redress an imbalance between homes 
and jobs in and clo se to Cambridge, whilst maintaining the special qualities of 
Cambridge and the surrounding area which  are protected by a Green Belt.  It also 
responded to the need to provide for the long -term growth of the University of 
Cambridge and Addenbrooke’s Hospital , whilst minimising increases in congestion 
on radial routes into the city.  
 
2.6 The Cambridge Local Plan (2006) and South Cambridgeshire Local Development 
Framework (adopted between 2007 and 2010) introduced a step change in levels of 
planned growth, unmatche d since the interwar years, as the economy performed 
strongly in the e arly years of the new century. The Plans released significant land 
from the Cambridge Green Belt as identified in the Structure Plan, and allocated a 
number of urban extensions to the ci ty in the south, north west, north east and east 
as well as the new town of Northstowe. Very little new development was proposed 
in the rural area, although a significant amount of housing already planned in 
villages under previous plans was still being bu ilt. 
 
2.7 The main change that has taken place since the Local Development Framework 
was adopted is that the full development at Cambridge East, comprising 10,000 -
12,000 new homes, along with employment, shops and services in both Cambridge 
and South Cambridge shire would  not come forward in the plan pe riod. It had been 
envisaged that around 7,500 new homes would be built in South Cambridgeshire.  
Marshall announced in April 2010 that it intends to remain at Cambridg e Airport until 
at least 2031. Two areas of la nd in South Cambridgeshire are still intended to come 
forward in the plan period and the existing Area Action Plan provides a policy 
framework for those proposals, as confirmed by Policy SS/3 of the Local Plan.  
 
2.8 Significant progress had already been made i n delivering the strategy from the 
Local Development Framework at the tim e of preparing the Local Plan. The major 
existing sites in South Cambridgeshire that remain available and deliverable and 
which were found to be sound  / sustainable locations for deve lopment by 
independent inspectors who examined the Local Development Framework are 
carrie d forward into the Local Plan. Whilst there was a slowdown  in the delivery of 
these sites at the start of the recession, good progress is now being made. The 
major sit es are:  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
14 
 Edge of Cambridge:  
• Trumpington Meadows – 600 homes, with  planning permission as part of a 
wider development of 1,200 which includes land in Cambridge City Council’s 
area. 
• North West Cambridge – 1,155 homes in South Cambridgeshire with 
planning permission as part of a wider development of 3,000 homes which 
includes land in Cambridge City Council’s area, to meet the needs of 
Cambridge University . 
• Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road – named Darwin Green, 
originally allocated for 1,100 home s but the capacity assumption has been 
revised to 900 dwellings in the light of pre -application discussions to allow a 
more appropriate density of development . Policy SS/2 identifies a larger site 
boundary than in the Site Specific Policies DPD, bringing c apacity to 
approximately 1,000 dwellings.    
• Land north of Newmarket Road – Outline Planning permission granted in 
2016 for development of approximately 1,300 homes . 
• Land north of Cherry Hinton – The Cambridge East AAP identified that it may 
be possible fo r this area to come forward ahead of relocation of the airport. 
Policy SS/3 identifies 420 homes in South Cambridgeshire as part of a wider 
development of 1,200 homes which includes land in Cambridge City 
Council’s area.  
 
New settlement:  
• Northstowe – new t own of  10,000 homes, first phase of which was granted 
planning permission in 2014  for 1,500 homes and a development framework 
plan for the whole new settlement agreed at the same time. Phase 2, 3,500 
homes, was granted outline planning permission in 2017.  
 
Objectively Assessed Needs for N ew Jobs and Homes  
 
2.9 A key role of the Local Plan is to provide for the development needs of the district  
over the plan period to 2031. Population growth and the continued success of the 
Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire economies are important drivers for further 
growth. There is a strong link between jobs and homes and it is important that the 
Local Plan provides an appropriate balance that will provide jobs for the whole 
community as well as supporting the nationally an d internationally successful local 
economy with its focus on the high technology and research sectors, while at the 
same time delivering homes to m eet the overall housing needs. This must be done 
while protecting the environment and what makes the area a s uccessful and 
attractive place.   
 
2.10 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF , 2012 ) requires that Local Plans 
should meet the objectively assessed housing, business and other development 
needs of an area in a positive and flexible way, unless any advers e impacts of doing 
so would significantly and demon strably outweigh the benefits. This must involve 
using an evidence base to ensure that the Local Plan meets the full, objectively 
assessed needs for market and affordable housing in the local housing marke t area 
as far as is consis tent with the policies set out i n the NPPF  (2012) . Councils should 
work with neighbouring authorities where housing market areas cross administrative South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
15 
 boundaries and the NPPF requires the preparation of a Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (SHMA) to assess full housing needs.  
 
2.11 The local a uthorities in the Cambridge Sub Region Housing Market Area have been 
working together for some time on a range of planning and housing issues and have 
prepared a joint SHMA, which was updated to i nform the new Local Plans being 
prepared by Councils  in the area. The Cambridge Sub Region SHMA 2012 
identifies the objectively assessed need for housing in South Cambridgeshire and 
all other districts in the Cambridge Sub Region housing market area for th e period 
2011 -2031 (Chapter  12). The SHMA considers jobs forecasts as a key part of the 
analysis of the overall number of homes required to meet the development needs of 
the ar ea for the period 2011 to 2031.  It identifies the need for 22,000 additional job s 
and 19, 000 new homes in South Cambridgeshire.  Additional independent technical 
evidence was prepared in 2015 to further consider need for new housing taking 
account of national guidance published after the plans were prepared. This 
identified the full Ob jectively Assessed Need for South Cambridgeshire as 19,337 
homes. This has been rounded to 19,500 in the housing target for the plan period.  
 
Duty to Cooperate  
 
2.12 The Localism Act 2011 establishes a ‘Duty to Cooperate ’ for local planning 
authorities in the pre paration of their local plans. A key aspect of cooperation is 
around provision of jobs and homes to ensure that all the objectively assessed 
needs of the housin g market area are met in full. The Cambridgeshire Auth orities, 
together with Peterborough given the overlap between the two housing market 
areas, agreed a Memorandum of Cooperation (May 2013) that demonstrates that 
the full objectively asse ssed ne eds of the Cambridge Sub Region housing market 
area will be a ddressed. It confirms that South Cambridgeshire and Cambridge are 
both planning to meet their objectively assessed needs in full within their 
administrative areas in their new Local Plans.  
 
2.13 A Memorandum of Understanding was also agreed between Cambridge Cit y 
Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council in September 2014, which 
agrees that the housing trajectories for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire, as 
updated each year in the Annual Monitoring Report, will be considered together for 
the purposes of phasing of housing delivery, including for calculating 5 -year housing 
land supply in development management decisions that concern housing 
development.  
 
2.14 The Duty to Co operate also applies to county councils and a range of key public 
bodies with an interest  in planning, including the Environment Agency, Historic 
England , Natu ral England,  and the Highways England . The Council has engaged 
with relevant bodies throughout the issues and options stage and in the preparation 
of the Local Plan, in particular on assessment of site options for development.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
16 
 The Joint Spatial Approach for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire   
 
2.15 Interdependencies between the two administrative areas of Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire are well established through the location of key employment sites, 
patterns of travel to work and acce ss to services and facilities. Both Councils have 
prepared  new development plans that add to the development proposals from the 
Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and South Cambridgeshire Local Development 
Framework 2007 -2010 to meet the needs of the Cambridge area for the period to 
2031. The Councils have a long history of joint working reflecting the strong 
interaction between the two administrative areas and the two authorities have 
worked closely together on the preparation of their Local Plans, including joint 
consultation on issues and options of shared interest.   
 
2.16 For the review of their development plans, the Council s considered whether the 
strategy for 1999 to 2016 remained the most appropriate development strategy to 
2031, or whether circumstances re quired an alternative approach. The 
interrelationship between Ca mbridge and South Cambridgeshire means that 
decisions cannot be taken in isolation and the approach in the Local Plans needed 
to remain joined up, as it has been in the past.   
 
2.17 The Council s reviewed jointly how far the sustainable development strategy for  
1999 to 2016 had progressed, what evidence there was that it was achieving its 
original objectives and what a new sustainable development strategy would  look like 
in view of changes in eco nomic and other circumstances. The objective to locate as 
many jobs  and homes in and on the edge of Cambridge had to be considered within 
the context of a  recently reviewed  tightly drawn Green Belt, which aims to protect 
the unique character of Cambridge as a compact, dynamic city with a thriving 
historic centre, maintain  and enhance the quality of the city’s setting, and prevent 
the city merging with the ring of necklace villages.  
 
2.18 A number of factors influenced the joint work on the evolution of the development 
strategy to 2031:  
• As part of the review of the East of Engla nd Plan 2008 (the Regional Spatial 
Strategy for the East of England), which was subsequently abandoned, the 
Cambridgeshire authorities commissioned consultants to prepare the 
Cambridgeshire Development Study 2009. The study looked at how well the 
development strategy was working, forecasts for economic growth taking 
account of the beginning of the downturn, and how the strategy could be 
developed  if further growth was needed. The study identified a range of 
challenges for growth. These included tha t significant additional expansion to 
Cambridge (where the economy is stronger) would impact on the integrity of 
the Green Belt and the concept of Cambridge as a compact city. The study 
also concluded that without deliverable solutions for transport and la nd 
supply, Cambridge -centered  growth would be difficult to achieve, and would 
require a fundamental step change i n traffic management and travel 
behaviour.  
 
The study recommended a spatial strategy for Cambridgeshire that was 
based on delivering the strate gy in  the Cambridge Local Plan 2006  and South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
17 
 South Cambridgeshi re Local Development Framework 2007 -2010  but with 
further balanced expansion through regeneration in selected market towns, 
and focused on making best use of existing infrastructure. However, it did  
indicate that some additional growth could be located on the edge of 
Cambridge incorporating a limited review of the Green Belt boundary, and 
potential for a further new settlement to attract employment opportunities and 
be supported by adequate transport ation and social infrastructure, although 
highlighted the challenges associated with this .   
 
• As part of the plan making process, the two Councils jointly commissioned a 
review of the development strategy by the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough 
Joint Strate gic Planning Unit to help test whether the development sequence 
remained the most appropriate for the Councils’ respective new Local Plans.   
 
The Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Sustainable Development 
Strategy 2012 provided a broad overview of the sus tainability of different 
spatial options. Its findings were that the most sustainable focus for 
development was within and on the edge of Cambridge; development in 
market towns scored broadly the same as development of new settlements, 
with recognition tha t large free -standing developments present delivery 
challenges over long timescales. Development at the more sustainable 
villages was confirmed as the least sustainable location which, depending on 
the scale of development involved, could be mitigated by a ccess to good 
quality public transport. However, within this broad assessment, the Strategy 
identified that there were considerable issues and complexities to resolve. 
The assessment did not take account of the committed development sites 
and locations in plans or the more detailed issues associated with the 
assessment and cho ice of new sites and locations.  It recognised that detailed 
assessments needed to be undertaken in relation to development options 
and transport capacity at different locations, as wel l as critical policy issues 
such as the effect of development on the openness of the Green Belt and the 
purposes of including land within it.  
 
• The Green Belt boundary on the edge of Cambridge was established in the 
Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and the South C ambridgeshire Local 
Development Framework 2007 -2010 with the expectation that its boundaries 
could endure beyond the e nd of the plan period of 2016. However, 
circumstances changed with the decision to keep the current businesses at 
Cambridge Airport, and w hilst good progress had been made towards 
achieving the current development strategy as a whole, the Councils needed 
to consider as part of preparing their Local Plans whether there were 
exceptional circumstances for reviewing Green Belt boundaries again.   
 
The Councils took a joined up approach  in the Issues and Options 
consultations in Summer 2012 and asked whether there should be more 
development on the edge of Cambridge, if there should be more land 
released from the Green Belt, a nd if so, where should  this be.  Ten Broad 
Locations around the edge of Cambridge were consulted on to explore 
whether any had potential to be released from the Green Belt for housing.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
18 
  
This was followed up by a joint review of the Green Belt, to provide detailed 
and up to date evidence on the potential impact of further releases on the 
purposes of the Green Belt and the setting of the City. The update found that 
most of the inner Green Belt continues to be of high importance for Green 
Belt purposes and specifically important to protect the setting and special 
character of Cambridge as a compact historic city. The adjacent areas to the 
previous releases are also considered to have gained a greater value to the 
purposes of the Green Belt.  
 
Considering sites submitted through the C ouncils’ respective Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessments ‘call for sites’ and identified through 
the joint Inner Green Belt Study Review 2012, a total of 41 sites were tested, 
using a joint pro -forma drawing on both Councils’ Sustainability Appr aisals. 
Following the assessment, 6 sites in the Green Belt on the edge of 
Cambridge were identified as being sites with development potential, albeit 
with some constraints or adverse impacts. These sites were subject to public 
consultation in January 2013  and subsequently identified as appropriate to 
include in the Local Plans.  
 
In response to issues raised by the Inspectors during the Local Plan 
Examination, the Councils commissioned a new independent Inner Green 
Belt Review in 2015. This also concluded t hat beyond those locations already 
identified in the submission Local Plans it is unlikely that any development 
could be accommodated without substantial harm to Green Belt purposes (in 
most locations around the edge of the City). Additional work was carri ed to 
consider sites on the edge of Cambridge on an equal basis with other sites, 
through transport modelling and Sustainability Appraisal. Work was also 
undertaken on an updated Infrastructure Delivery Study and Viability Report 
with a Development Strateg y document that drew together the findings of all 
the additional work. The Development Strategy Update and the Joint 
Sustainability Appraisal Addendum set out how the issue of Green Belt was 
considered through the plan making process, meeting the requireme nts of 
paragraphs 84 and 85 of the NPPF to consider the sustainability impacts of 
developing outside the Green Belt compared with removing land from the 
Green Belt for development. This work confirmed the approach to the 
development strategy. Further work was also undertaken to demonstrate that 
the transport measures necessary to support sustainable new settlements 
are capable of being delivered. The Greater Cambridge City Deal (now 
known as Greater Cambridge Partnership) provided a position statement in 
March 2016 that confirms the City Deal partners are wholly committed to 
delivery of the infrastructure programme for the benefit of existing and future 
residents and businesses through the provision of an enhanced transport 
network that provides good quality  connectivity between homes and jobs, 
including supporting and securing new development provided for in the Local 
Plans through the delivery of key infrastructure schemes.  
 
• The Councils undertook a joint Sustainability Appraisal of the overall strategy 
as part of the plan making process.  A range of options around the impact of South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
19 
 different levels of growth in the Green Belt on the edge of Cambridge, the 
approach to new settlements, major expansion of Cambourne and the best 
available sites at villages were iden tified and tested through Sustainability 
Appraisal, to consider the relative impact of different development packages.  
This included looking at different levels of growth at some of the site options 
to minimise adverse impacts and secure the most s ustaina ble form of 
development.  It identified the importance of balancing the accessibility 
aspects of sustainable development and the environmental and social 
aspects.  This appraisal was updated in 2015, to take account of new 
evidence prepared in response to In spectors during the Local Plan 
Examination.  
 
It concluded that the removal of additional large scale sites from the 
Cambridge Green Belt could result in irreversible adverse impacts on the 
special character of Cambridge as a compact historic city and risk the 
economic success of the Cambridge area, which is in part built on its 
attractivene ss as a place to live and work.  It confirmed that new settlements 
offer focused opportunities for infrastructure im provements, opportunities to 
co-locate housing and empl oyment, and achieve high modal share by 
sustainable transport than more dispersed strategies.   
 
• Strategy development and options testing was guided by the Joint Strategic 
Transport and Spatial Planning Group (JST&SPG), the member governance 
group set up t o guide the collaborative preparation of development plans in 
Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire and the associated Transport 
Strategy. The broad strategy options considered by the JST&SPG 
demonstrated that:  
o Focusing development on Cambridge remains the most sustainable 
locati on for additional development. The Cambridge Local Plan for the 
period 2011 to 2031 identifies significant potential within the urban area 
of Cambridge.  
o The edge of Cambridge is the next most sustainable location for growth 
in the de velopment sequence and significant development will take 
place in the plan period on land already removed from the Green Belt. 
The new Cambridge Local Plan proposes modest further revisions to 
the Green Belt which means that Cambridge is able to meet its f ull 
objectively assessed needs within its administrative area, although it 
makes little  additional  contribution to South Cambridgeshire’s 
objectively assessed needs.   
o After development on the edge of Cambridge, new settlements are the 
next most su stainabl e location for growth. South Cambridgeshire 
District Council considered a number of new settlement sites submitted 
through its ‘call for sites’ as part of the Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment and Susta inability Appraisal processes. This 
ident ified two options for a new town north of Waterbeach of different 
sizes and a new village at Bourn Airfield as options for consultati on in 
Issues and Options 2012. Subsequently, versions of both sites were 
identified as appropriate to include in the Local Plan.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
20 
 o Development in villages should continue to be limited for sustainability 
reasons. South Cambridgeshire District Council considered a strategic 
scale of village development at Cambourne submitted through its ‘call 
for sites’ as part of the Strategic H ousing Land Availability Assessment 
and Susta inability Appraisal processes. This identified the site as an 
option for consultation in Issues and Options 2012 and subsequently a 
version of the site was identified as appropriate to include in the Local 
Plan.  
o The Joint Strategic Transport and Spatial Planning Group (JST&SPG) 
considered the additional evidence prepared in 2015  and confirmed the 
approach.  
 
The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire  
 
2.19 The 1999 -2016 development strategy was predicated upon delivering efficient, 
sustainable patterns and choices of travel between home and work. Data from the 
Census 2011 shows that Cambridge has the highest proportion of people cycling to 
work in the United  Kingdom with the lifestyle conditions that are also more likely to 
promote cycle based commuting choices than anywhere else in the United 
Kingdom.  
 
2.20 The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire 2014 focuses on 
the capacity for sustainable modes of transport and what further measures need to 
be provided in the sub region between key economic hubs in and around the city, 
where people live, and where they access services. The development strategy 
locates development in areas where there is alr eady good public transport or where 
it can be provided and concentrates development in rural South Cambridgeshire in 
major new developments as far as possible to support the greatest public transport 
improvements, so that further improvements can be made t o the sustainable 
transport in and around the city by making movement straightforward and 
convenient. The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire 2014 
was prepared in parallel with the two new local plans and includes the mitigation 
and i nfrastructure requirements necessary to promote sustainable travel as part of 
the development strategy of the two plans.  
 
Comparing the Development Strategy to 2031 with the Structure Plan  
 
2.21 As part of the preparation of the Local Plan strategy in the new Local Plans to 2031, 
the Councils considered the proportions of planned development at the different 
stages in the development sequence and then tested whether it broadly continues 
the strategy set in train by the Structure Plan in 2003 as a benchmark of w hether it 
provides an appropriate sustainable pattern of development for the Cambridge area 
into the future.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
21 
 2.22 The distribution of housing across the development sequence in the Local Plans is 
shown below:  
 
 Existing 
Completions and 
Commitments 
(both areas)  New Sites  
Cambridge  New 
Sites 
South 
Cambs  TOTAL  % 
Cambridge 
Urban Area  5,358 1,470  0 6,282  19 
Edge of 
Cambridge  11,370  890 410 12,670  35 
New 
Settlements
and 
Cambourne 
West  3,445  0 4,610  8,055   23 
Rural Area 
(including 
windfalls)  7,284  0 936 8,220  23 
TOTAL  27,457  2,360  5,956  35,773  100 
Source: Housing Trajectory November 2015  
 
2.23 This compares with the proportions at each stage in the sequence in the Structure 
Plan as shown below:  
 
 Structure 
Plan 1999 
to 2016  % New Local Plan 
Strategy 2011 to  
2031 (both areas)  % 
Cambridge Urban Area  8,900  27 6,828  19 
Cambridge Fringe Sites  8,000  25 12,670  35 
New settlements  6,000  18 8,055  23 
Villages  9,600  30 8,220  23 
TOTAL 1999 to 2016  32,500  100 35,773  100 
Source: Housing Trajectory November 2015  
 
2.24 The development strategy identified in the Local Plans includes development at all 
stages in the sequence across both areas, taking account of the opportuniti es and 
constraints identified. It compares favourably with the Structure Plan with 
Cambridge remaining  the focus of the development strategy comprising 54% of the 
housing requirement of both Councils 2011 to 2031. This is comparable with and 
slightly higher than the 52% i n the Structure Plan strategy. The strategy has 35% of 
all new development planned on the edge of Cambridge, higher than the 25% in the 
Structure Plan, notwithstanding that Cambridge East is not now expected to come 
forward in the plan period at least. The main change is the swap in South South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
22 
 Cambridgeshire between the proportion of development  at new settlements and that 
at villages which sees a much higher proportion at new settlements than the 
previous st rategy: 23% compared with 18%. This leaves the lowest percentage at 
the least sustainable stage in the sequence with only 23% of planned dev elopment 
identified at villages.  
 
Vision and Objectives  
 
2.25 The Local Plan contains policies and proposals which will shape the future direction 
of change in South Cambridg eshire over the years to 2031. The plan ning decisions 
that will be made in accordance with the Local Plan will affect the future well -being 
of pe ople living and working in the d istrict as well as others who visit and invest in 
South Cambridgeshire.  This future direction is captured in the Counc il's vision, 
which has been drawn upon as the vision for the Local Plan.  
 
2.26 Reflecting the vision, are a set of more specific objectives for the Local Plan. In 
developing the objectives the Council has been guided by views gathered on what 
is important to local stakeholders.  
 Policy S/1: Vision  
 
South Cambridgeshire will continue to be the best place to live, work and 
study in the country. Our district will demonstrate impressive and sustainable 
economic growth. Our residents will have a superb quality of life in an 
exceptionally beautiful, rural and green environment.  
 Policy S/2: Objectives of the Local Plan  
 
The vision for the Local Plan will be secured through the achievement of 6 
key objectives:  
a. To support economic growth by supporting South Cambridgeshire's 
position as a world leader in research and technology based industries, 
research, and education; and supporting the rural economy.   
b. To protect the character of South Cambridgeshire, including  its built and 
natural heritage, as well as protecting the Cambridge Green Belt. New 
development should enhance the area, and protect and enhance 
biodiversity.  
c. To provide land for housing in sustainable locations that meets local 
needs and aspirations, and  gives choice about type, size, tenure and 
cost.  
d. To deliver new developments that are high quality and well -designed 
with distinctive character that reflects their location, and which responds 
robustly to the challenges of climate change.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
23 
  
2.27 South Cambridgeshire is a prosperous area with high levels of economic activity 
and low levels of unemployment. Its 350 square miles of countryside provide  a high 
quality setting for its 105 settlements. In recent decades the district has experienced 
significant growth, reflecting the success of the local economy and the need for new 
homes. These high levels of growth have managed to balance development with  
maintaining a high quality social, built and natural environment which is valued 
locally and has ensured that South Cambridgeshire regularly performs well in 
national quality of life surveys. Public consultation in updating the Local Plan 
showed strong su pport for supporting economic growth, but a degree of 
nervousnes s amongst the residents of the d istrict believing that continuing high 
levels of growth would put the environment and living standards at risk. This then is 
a clear challenge for the way in wh ich the vision and objectives are implemented 
through policies and proposals in the Local Plan and decisions on planning 
applications to provide an appropriate balance between supporting the economy, 
providing for housing needs and protecting the environme nt.   
 
Sustainable Development  
 
 e. To ensure that all new development provides or has a ccess to a range 
of services and facilities that support healthy lifestyles and well -being 
for everyone, including shops, schools, doctors, community buildings, 
cultural facilities, local open space, and green infrastructure.  
f. To maximise potential for jou rneys to be undertaken by sustainable 
modes of transport including walking, cycling, bus and train.  
Policy S/3: Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
 
1. When considering development proposals the Council will take a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. It 
will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions 
which mean that proposals that accord with the Local Plan and 
Neighbourhood Plans can be approved wherever possible, and to 
secure development that improves the eco nomic, social and 
environmental conditions in the area unless material considerations 
indicate otherwise.  
 
2. Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant 
policies are out of date at the time of making the decision then the 
Council will  grant permission unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise – taking into account whether:  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
24 
  
2.28 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF , 2012 ) states that the purpose of  
planning is to help achieve sustainable development, and the NPPF  (2012)  has at 
its heart a presumption in favour of sustainable development, which it says should 
be seen as a golden thread running through both plan making and decisi on taking. 
For South C ambridgeshire, sustainable development means supporting the 
economic success of the Cambridge area, maintaining the setting of Cambridge as 
a compact historic city, and providing for development needs in a way that 
maintains the high quality of life enjoye d by residents that makes it such an 
attractive place to live, work and study, and locates new homes close to services 
and employment or on high quality public transport routes. The Local Plan has a 
number of chapters covering the full range of planning po licy issues, which together 
contribute to the achievement of the three dimensions of sustainability: an economic 
role, a social role and an environmental role.   
 
Cambridge Green Belt  
 
2.29 The Government attaches great importance to Green Belts, an d this is s et out in the 
NPPF (2012) . The fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl 
by keeping land permanently open and a specific function of some Green Belts, 
such as the one around Cambridge, is to preserve the setting and specia l character 
of historic towns. Cambridge has had a Green Belt since the 1965 Development 
Plan, which includes about 25% of South Cambridgeshire. A review of the Green 
Belt was undertaken in the 1980s resulting in the Cambridge Green Belt Local Plan 
1992. A further and more strategically significant review was started in the Regional 
Planning Guidance for East Anglia (RPG6) with locations for Green Belt release 
identified in the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Structure Plan 2003 and detailed 
boundary changes made in the  Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and the South 
Cambridgeshire Local Development Framework 2007 -2010.  Policy S/4: Cambridge Green Belt  
 
A Green Belt will be maintained around Cambridge that will define the extent 
of the urban area. The detailed boundaries of the Green Belt in South 
Cambridgeshire are defined on the Policies Map, which includes some minor 
revisions to the inner boundary of the Green Belt around Cambridge and to 
the boundaries around some inset villages . New development in the Green 
Belt will only be approved in accordance with Green Belt policy in the 
National Planning Policy Framework.  a. Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly 
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against 
the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a 
whole; or  
b. Specific policies in that Framework indicate that development 
should be restricted.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
25 
  
2.30 The Cambridge Green Belt surrounds Cambridge and is relatively small in extent,  
extending around 3 to 5 miles from the edge of the City and incorporates many of 
South Cambridgeshire’s larger  and most sustainable villages.  The established 
purposes of the Cambridge Green Belt are to:  
• Preserve the unique character of Cambridge as a comp act, dynamic city with 
a thriving historic centre;  
• Maintain and enhance the quality of its setting; and  
• Prevent communities in the environs of Cambridge from merging into one 
another and with the city.  
 
2.31 A number of factors define the special character of C ambridge and it's setting,  
which include:  
• Key views of Cambridge from the surrounding countryside;  
• A soft green edge to the city;  
• A distinctive urban edge;  
• Green corridors penetrating into the city;  
• Designated sites and other features contributing positive ly to the character of 
the landscape setting;  
• The distribution, physical separation, setting, scale and character of Green 
Belt villages;  and 
• A landscape that retains a strong rural character.  
 
2.32 The NPPF  (2012)  is clear that where Green Belts are defined, they should only be 
altered in exceptional circumstances when preparin g a Local Plan. When reviewing 
Green Belt boundaries, Councils are required to take account of the need to 
promote sustainable development a nd consider the consequences for sustainable 
development of channelling development towards urban areas within Green Belts, 
to villages inset within the Green Belt and to locations beyond the Green Belt.  
 
2.33 The Inner Green Belt Review  2012 , undertaken jointly with Cambridge City Council, 
examined the Green Belt in detail and found a number of small areas on the edge of 
Cambridge that are not considered of long term importance to Green Belt purposes. 
Given the level of need for homes and jobs, it is cons idered that exceptional 
circumstances exist to justify their release. These comprise a site between 
Huntingdon Road and Histon Road as an extension to the housing allocation carried 
forward from the Local Development Framework (Policy SS/2) and a site on 
Fulbourn Road as an extension to the Peterh ouse Technology Park (Policy E/ 3). 
The independent Inner Green Belt Review 2015 for both Counci ls reached similar  
conclusions about the importance of land on the edge of Cambridge for Cambridge 
Green Belt purposes . 
 
2.34 In addition, land is released from the Green Belt at Sawston, Imping ton and 
Comberton (Policy H/1 ) to meet the overall need for housing and to provide a 
flexible and responsive package of sites that will best meet identified needs.  
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
26 
 Provision of New Jobs and Homes  
 
2.35 The Camb ridge Sub -Region Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2012 (SHMA) 
took an integrated approach to the identification of the need for additional jobs and 
homes in South Cambridgeshire ove r the plan period. Additional assessment of 
Objectively Assessed Need was carried out in 2015 to take account of national 
planning guidance published after the submission of the Local Plan to consider 
issues around the latest national household projections , market signals and 
affordable housing.  
 
2.36 For jobs, this takes account of the findings of two different local economic 
forecasting models alongside a range of national and local demographic forecasts, 
having regard to the proportion of economic growth expected to be c reated in South 
Cambridgeshire.  The predicted level of jobs growth is provided for in full in the Local 
Plan as a key part of the continued support for the Council's vision to demonstrate 
impressive and sustainable economic growth. This wil l help maintain the role of the 
Cambridge area as a world leader in higher education, research and knowledge 
based industries and the important role of South Cambridgeshire, including a 
number of major research parks at Cambridge Science Park, Hinxton Hall  and 
Granta Park.  
 
2.37 The number of jobs is a forecast and not a  target to be met at all costs.  The 
Economy chapter (Chapter 8) provides a set of flexible policies that focus on 
delivering the types of employment appropriate to both support the Cambridge 
cluster and to provide a diverse range of local jobs to ensure a strong and vibrant 
local economy in to the future.  The Employment Land R eview identifies that growth 
on this scale would generate a net demand for around 143,000m2 of additional 
floorspace or 43 hectares o f land in the ‘B’ use classes. The Local Plan identifies a 
supply of land that is sufficient to provide the predicted 22,000 additional jobs and 
includes sufficient surplus that would also ensure that if the economy performs 
better than expected,  the plan will not constrain economic potential. It also responds 
to demand in Cambridge identified in the Employment Land Review by identifying 
opportunities on the edge of Cambridge at the Science Park, around the new 
Cambridge North  Railway Station, and  next to the Peterhouse Technology Park.  
 
2.38 It identifies a need for 19,000 new homes and 22,000 jobs in South Cambridgeshire 
by 2031. It provides a balance between jobs and homes across the HMA and 
confirms that there is no additional outstanding backlog ar ising from the Local 
Development Framework.   Policy S/5: Provision of New Jobs and Homes  
 
Development will meet the objectively assessed needs in the district over the 
period 2011 -2031 for:  
a. 22,000 additional jobs to support the Cambridge Cluster and provide 
a diverse range of local jobs;  
b. 19,500 new homes, including affordable housing.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
27 
  
2.39 The Objectively Assessed Need: Further Evidence published in November 2015 
takes account of national guidance published after the submission of the Local Plan, 
the CLG 2012 national household projections, mark et signals and affordable need. 
Compared with the SHMA methodology with its integrated approach to jobs and 
homes it is slightly higher. It identifies a need for 19,337 new homes in South 
Cambridgeshire by 2031. The higher of the two figures is taken to re present the full 
objectively assessed need for South Cambridgeshire and in the interests of positive 
planning has been rounded to 19,500 for the purposes of the plan requirement.    
 
2.40 The SHMA includes consideration of need for affordable housing. Policy H/10  in 
Chapter 7: Delivering High Quality Homes requires the provision of affordable 
housing to respond to an identified high level of need. The Gypsy and Travellers 
Accommodation Assessment 2016 identifies no unmet objectively assessed need 
for pitches to meet the needs of Gypsies and Travellers for the period 2016 to 2031. 
It identifies a need for 11 plots for Travelling Showpeople. Policies in the High 
Quality Homes chapter provide more detail on how the needs of these  group s will 
be met.   
 
2.41 Over the plan period, the figure of 19,500 new homes implies an average delive ry 
rate of 975 homes per year. While less than the Core Strategy 2007 annualised 
average of 1 ,176 homes, for comparison over the period 2001 to 2011 a total of 
7,663 homes were bui lt at an  average of 766 homes per year and the Local Plan 
therefore represents a consistent step change in housing delivery over a lengthy 
period . The phasing of housing delivery is dealt with in Policy S/12.  
 
2.42 Taking account of all forms of housing supply, comprising: completions in 2011 - 15 
(the first  four years of the plan period) of 2,735 homes; supply of housing on the 
existing allocations in adopted plans (including those with planning permission) 
expected by 2031  of 8,771 homes; unallocated sites with planning permission of 
1,179 homes; and the Council’s forecast windfall allowance of 2,450 homes,  in 2015 
the Council had a supply of 15,135 homes towards the 19,500 home requirement. 
This required sufficient new lan d to be identified to deliver a further 4,365 new 
homes in the district between 2011 and 2031.   
 
2.43 It will be important to monitor the need for jobs and homes regularly, as well as 
progress in delivery, and to review the Local Plan as necessary (see Policy S /12). 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
28 
 The Developmen t Strategy to 2031  
 
 
 Policy S/6: The Development Strategy to 2031  
 
1. The need for jobs and homes will be met as far as possible in the 
following order of preference, having regard to the purposes of the 
Cambridge Green Belt:  
a. On the edge of Cambridge;  
b. At new settlements;  
c. In the rural area at Rural Centres and Minor Rural Centres.  
 
2. Major site allocations from the South Cambridgeshire Local 
Development Framework 2007 -2010 together with the Area Action 
Plans for Northstowe (except as amended by SS/5) , North West 
Cambridge, Cambridge Southern Fringe and Cambridge East (except 
as amended by Policy SS/3) are carried forward as part of the 
development plan to 2031 or until such time as the developments are 
complete.  
 
3. The following 3 new strategic scale allocations are  proposed for 
housing -led development with associated employment and supporting 
services and facilities to meet the majority of the additional 
development needs to 2031 and beyond:  
d. A new town north of Waterbeach for 8,000 to 9,000 homes;  
e. A new village based on Bourn Airfield for 3,500 homes;  
f. A major expansion of Cambourne for a fourth linked village of 
1,200 homes, all of which by 2031.  
 
4. Development in the rural area will be limited, with allocations for jobs 
and housing focused on Rural Centres and Min or Rural Centres, and 
rural settlement policies providing for windfall development for different 
categories of village consistent with the level of local service provision 
and quality of public transport access to Cambridge or a market town.   
 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
31 
 2.44 The sustainable development sequence has been carried forward from the previous 
plan balancing the sustainability merits of land on the edge of Cambridge in terms of 
accessibility to services and facilities and reducing emissions with the sustainability 
merits of land in the Green Belt on the edge of Cambridg e in terms of protecting the 
special characteristics of Cambridge as a compact historic city. Away from 
Cambridge, the most sustainable categories of village for development in the 
context of South Cambridgeshire are Rural Centres and Minor Rural Centres f or the 
purposes of making allocations for new housing.  
 
2.45 The development strategy for 2011 to 2031 is shown on the Key Diagrams  (see 
Figures 1 and 2) . A significant proportion of the overall housing requirement is made 
up of allocations carried forward from  the previous plan and the policy clarifies that 
the adopted Area Action Plans for some of those developments remain part of the 
development plan alongside the Local Plan.  
 
2.46 Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council jointly reached 
the view on the extent of change on the edge of Cambridge where only minor 
revisions to the inner Green Belt boundary are proposed in the Local Plan s 
including a change to the boundary of the site between Huntingdon Road and 
Histon Road in South Cambridgeshi re for housing that would not increase the 
overall number of homes currently planned but instead provide more room to 
ensure a high quality development (see Chapter 3 Strategic Sites, Policy SS/2), and 
employment allocation s for the expansion of Cambridge Biomedical Campus, and  
south of Fulbourn Road as an extension to Peterhouse Technology Park (see 
Chapter 8 Promoting a Strong and  Competitive Economy, Policies E/2  and E/3). 
 
2.47 Two new settlements – a new town north of Waterbeach and a new village at Bourn 
Airfield - and a major village expansion at Cambourne will provide the majority of 
the additi onal housing required by 2031. The preference to allocate all three 
strategic sites was influenced by the long lead in times for new settlements which 
will therefore come forward later in the plan period and co ntinue developing beyond 
2031. Without including a major expansion of Cambourne, a significant amount of 
development would be required at villages and would result in the sort of dispersed 
development s trategy co nfirmed as being unsustainable. In January 2017 the 
Council resolved to grant planning permission for a mixed use development 
including 2,350 homes at Cambourne West.  The timing of development at Bourn 
Airfield new village has regard to the longe r lead in times for the development of 
new settlements and so that the remainder of Cambourne is well progressed before 
any develop ment starts at Bourn Airfield. This will also help provide additional 
flexibility and ensure a continuous supply of house  building land.  
 
2.48 The major sites will be supported by limited development at the more sustainable 
villages in the order of 900 homes to provide flexibility and help ensure a continuous 
supply of housing land over the plan period, including if there is any delay in 
progress  on any of the major sites. These are addressed in Chapter 7: Delivering 
High Quality Homes.   
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
32 
 Development Frameworks  
 
2.49 Within settlements, policies in the plan generally support development and 
redevelopment of previously developed land subject to a range of policies which 
seek to ensure the development is sustainable.  
 
2.50 The development frameworks define where policies for  the built -up areas of 
settlements give way to policies for the countryside. This is necessary to ensure that 
the countryside is protected from gradual encroachment on the edges of villages 
and to help guard against incremental growth in unsustainable loca tions. In the 
countryside development is generally restricted to uses that need to be located 
there. The plan includes some flexibility for reusing existing buildings, and for 
development which supports the rural economy.  
 
2.51 Frameworks have been defined to take into account the present extent of the built -
up area, and planned development. Buildings associated with countryside uses 
(e.g. farm buildings, houses subject to agricultural occupancy conditions or 
affordable housing schemes permitted under the rural  exceptions policy) are not 
normally included within the framework. Frameworks have not been defined around 
small clusters of houses or areas of scattered development where such buildings 
are isolated in open countryside or detached from the main concentra tion of 
buildings within Cambridge or a nearby village. Although it is recognised that such 
dwellings may be considered locally as 'part' of the nearest settlement in community 
terms, it is important in planning policy terms to limit the amount of new 
deve lopment that can take place in rural areas with few services and little or no 
public transport.  Policy S/7: Development Frameworks  
 
1. Development and redevelopment of unallocated land and buildings 
within development frameworks (as shown on the Policies M ap) will be 
permitted provided that:  
a. Development is of a scale, density and character appropriate to 
the location, and is consistent with other policies in the Local Plan; 
and 
b. Retention of the site in its present state does not form an essential 
part of th e local character, and development would protect and 
enhance local features of green space, landscape, ecological or 
historic importance; and  
c. There is the necessary infrastructure capacity to support the 
development;  
 
2. Outside development frameworks, only allocations within 
Neighbourhood Plans that have come into force and development for 
agriculture, horticulture, forestry, outdoor recreation and other uses 
which need to be located in the countryside or where supported by 
other policies in this plan will be permitted.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
33 
 2.52 Property boundaries shown on the Ordnance Survey map have been taken into 
account in defining frameworks. However, since there are many large gardens on 
the edg e of settlements , the framework boundaries sometimes cut across such 
gardens, especially (but not solely) if parts of those gardens relate more to the 
surrounding countryside than they do to the built -up areas. The 'cutting' of some 
gardens is regarded as a positive development control tool to limit the potential for 
further residential development in smaller villages with few facilities and little or no 
public transport. However, in such circumstances this policy will not be operated to 
establish a presump tion against the grant of planning permission for ancillary 
domestic buildings in those parts of residential curtilages excluded from the 
framework. Where permission is required for such developments, applications will 
be considered on their individual mer its. 
 
Strategy for the Rural Area  
 
2.53 The Local Plan classifies villages into four groupings, to reflecting their relative 
sustainability. This is an important element of the sustainable development strategy, 
helping to direct housing to the most sustainable locations and control the level of 
windfall development that takes place in the least sustainable areas of the district 
whilst enabling the recycling of land and delivering new homes to meet local 
housing needs. Villages were classified following a review of the services and 
facilities, education, public transport and employment available at each settlement . 
 
2.54 A local community preparing a neighbourhood plan may wish to make allocations 
for community led proposals in a neighbourhood plan that lie outside of the 
development framework of a village. As such are parish -led proposals the Council is 
supportive of such  developments where they have received community support 
which means that the proposals are  capable of being included in a neighbourhood 
plan.  
 
Rural Centres  
 Policy S/8: Rural Centres  
 
1. The following villages are identified as Rural Centres:  
a. Cambourne  
b. Cottenham  
c. Great Shelford and Stapleford  
d. Histon and Impington  
e. Sawston  
 
2. Development and redevelopment without any limit on individual scheme 
size will be permitted within the development frameworks of Rural 
Centres, as defined on the Policies Map, provided that adequate 
services, facilities and infrastructure are available or can be made 
available as a result of the development.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
34 
 2.55 Rural Centres are the largest, most sustainable villages of the district. They have 
good access to a secondary school (ei ther within the village or accessible by good 
public transport), employment opportunities, a variety of services and facilities and 
have good public transport services to Cambridge or a market town.   
 
2.56 Future development will comprise development and redevelopment within the 
village frameworks. Since the Rural Centres comprise the most sustainable villages 
in South Cambridgeshire there is no strategic constraint on the amount of 
development or redevelopm ent of land for housing that can come forward within the 
development frameworks, provided that the proposals are in accordance with the 
policies in the Plan.   
 
2.57 Sites for new housing development have been identified as extensions to 
Cambourne, Histon & Imp ington and Sawston and the development frameworks 
have been drawn to include those sites.  
 
2.58 For the purposes of village classification and related Local Plan policies, part of 
Pampisford parish west of London Road on the southern end of Sawston will be 
treated as if part of the Rural Centre of Sawston. It is therefore included within the 
Sawston development framework boundary and shown on the Sawston Inset of the 
Policies Map. It is shown as an area covered by another map on the Pampisford 
Inset of the P olicies Map. It remains part of Pampisford parish.  
 
Minor Rural Centres  
 Policy S/9: Minor Rural Centres  
 
1. The following villages are selected as Minor Rural Centres:  
a. Bar Hill  
b. Bassingbourn  
c. Comberton  
d. Fulbourn  
e. Gamlingay  
f. Girton  
g. Linton  
h. Melbourn  
i. Milton  
j. Papworth Everard  
k. Swavesey  
l. Waterbeach  
m. Willingham  
 
2. Residential development and redevelopment up to an indicative 
maximum  scheme  size of 30 dwellings will be permitted within the 
development frameworks of Minor Rural Centres, as defined on the 
Policies Map.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
35 
 Policy S/10: Group Villages  
 
1. The following villages  are selected as Group Villages:  
Balsham  Fen Drayton  Little Abington  
Barrington  Fowlmere  Longstanton  
Barton  Foxton  Meldreth  
Bourn  Great Abington  Oakington  
Castle Camps  Great Wilbraham  Orwell  
Coton  Guilden Morden  Over  
Dry Drayton  Hardwick  Steeple Morden  
Duxford  Harston  Teversham  
Elsworth  Haslingfield  Thriplow  
Eltisley  Hauxton  Whittlesford  
Fen Ditton  Highfields Caldecote   
 
2. Residential development  and redevelopment up to an indicative 
maximum scheme size of 8 dwellings will be permitted within the 
development frameworks of Group Villages, as defined on the Policies 
Map.  
3. Development may exceptionally consist of up to about 15 dwellings 
where this  would make the best use of a single brownfield site.  
 2.59 Minor Rural Centres have a lower level of services, facilities and employment than 
Rural Centres, but a greater level than most other villages in South Cambridgeshire, 
and often perform a role in terms of providing services and facilities for a sm all rural 
hinterland.   
 
2.60 Within Minor Rural Centres there is scope in principle for larger scale windfall 
development  within the village framework. This would allow larger villages with a 
reasonable level of services to provide services and facilities for surrounding 
smaller village s to achieve more development. However, the overall scale of 
development should be restricted in recognition of their more limited services  
compared to Rural Centres . A maximum scheme size of 30 dwellings is used as a 
guideline f igure to indicate the upper limit of housing development likely to be 
suitable.  Development will not be permitted on sites capable of accommodating 
scheme sizes significantly larger than 30 dwellings in Minor Rural Centres.  
 
2.61 Sites for new housing developme nt have been identified as extensions to 
Comberton, Melbourn and Willingham and within Gamlingay and the development 
frameworks have bee n drawn to include those sites.  The indicative scheme size 
does not apply to allocations forming part of the overall dev elopment strategy of the 
Local Plan.   
 
Group Villages  
 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
36 
 2.62 Group villages are generally less sustainable locations for new development than 
Rural Centres and Minor Rural Centres, having fewer services and facilities allowing 
only some of the basic day -to-day requirements of their residents to be met without 
the need to travel outside the village. All Group Villages have at least a primary 
school and limited development will help maintain remaining services and facilities 
and provide for afford able housing to meet local needs.  Development will not be 
permitted on s ites capable of accommodating scheme sizes significantly larger than 
8 or exceptionally 15 dwellings in Group villages.  
 
Infill Villages  
Policy S/11: Infill Villages  
 
1. The following villages are selected as Infill Villages:  
Abington Pigotts  Heydon  Newton  
Arrington  Hildersham  Pampisford  
Babraham  Hinxton  Papworth St Agnes  
Bartlow  Horningsea  Rampton  
Boxworth  Horseheath  Shepreth  
Carlton  Ickleton  Shingay -cum-Wendy  
Caxton  Kingston  Shudy Camps  
Childerley  Knapwell  Six Mile Bottom  
Conington  Kneesworth  Stow -cum-Quy 
Croxton  Landbeach  Streetly End  
Croydon  Litlington  Tadlow  
East Hatley  Little Chishill  Toft 
Grantchester  Little Eversden  Weston Colville  
Graveley  Little Gransden  Weston Green  
Great Chishill  Little Shelford  West Wickham  
Great Eversden  Little Wilbraham  West Wratting  
Harlton  Lolworth  Whaddon  
Hatley St George  Longstowe  Wimpole  
Heathfield  Madingley  
  
2. Residential development and redevelopment within the development 
frameworks of these villages, as defined on the Policies Map, will be 
restricted to scheme sizes of not more than 2  dwellings (indicative size) 
comprising:  
a. A gap in an otherwise built -up frontage to an existing road, 
provided that it is not suf ficiently large to accommodate more than 
two dwellings on similar curtilages to those adjoining; or  
b. The redevelopment or sub -division of an existing residential 
curtilage; or  
c. The sub -division of an existing dwelling;  
d. The conversion or redevelopment of a n on-residential building 
where this would not result in a loss of local employment.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
37 
 3. In very exceptional circumstances a slightly larger development (not 
more than about 8 dwellings) may be permitted where this would lead 
to the sustainable recycling  of a brownfield site bringing positive overall 
benefit to the village.  
 
 
2.63 Infill Villages are generally amongst the sma llest in South Cambridgeshire. These 
villages have a poor range of services and facilities and it is often necessary for 
local residents to travel outside the village for most of their daily needs. These 
villages generally lack any  food shops, have no primary school and may not have a 
permanent post office or a village hall or meeting place. Development on any scale 
would be unsustainable in these villages, as it is will generate a disproportionate 
number of additional  journeys outs ide the village. Development will not be permitted 
on sites capable of accommodating scheme sizes significantly larger than 2 or 
exceptionally 8 dwellings in Infill Villages.  
 
Phasing, Delivery and Monitoring   
Policy S/12: Phasing, Delivery and Monitoring  
 
1. The Local Plan aims to achieve  a continuous high level of housing 
production throughout the plan period to support predicted and actual 
jobs growth . The housing trajectories for Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire, as updated each year in the Annual Monitoring 
Report, will be considered  together for the purposes of phasing of 
housing delivery, including for calculating 5 -year housing land supply in 
development management decisions that concern housing 
development. Five-year housing land supply will be calculated using 
the Liverpool Metho d and a buffer of 20%.  Housing sites are not 
deliberately phased.  
 
2. Compliance with policies and allocations in the Local Plan will be 
continuously monitored throughout the plan period. If, through 
monitoring, it appears that policies and allocations are n ot being 
achieved or more up to date forecasts suggest that the objectively 
assessed needs of South Cambridgeshire require different levels of 
development, the following mechanisms will be triggered:  
 
a. Review of housing and employment land supply and allocations;  
b. Action to bring forward sites for development, wherever possible 
in partnership with landowners and developers;  
c. Action to bring forward development on previously developed 
land;  
d. Action to secure the timely provision of infrastructure;  
e. Review o f all, or relevant parts of, the Local Plan.  
f. Review Development Management processes;  
g. Consider undertaking cooperation with other local authorities, 
including through duty to cooperate.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
38 
 Phasing  
 
2.64 An important aspect of th e Local Plan is to ensure that there will be a continuous 
supply of suitable, available and deliverable housing land to meet housing needs 
over the whole of the plan period. The allocations in the Plan have been made with 
the aim of ensuring a flexible and  continuous supp ly of housing.  To this end, the 
Council does not propose to phase the timing of housing development .   
 
Delivery  
 
2.65 The South Cambridgeshire Housing Trajectory included and updated each year in 
the Annual Monitoring Report  illustrates the expected rate and phasing of delivery of 
new homes. It demonstrates how the objectively assessed need for an additional 
19,500 homes between 20 11 and 2031 could be achieved. This represents an 
average of 975 homes a year but the delivery of  homes will vary over the plan 
period responding to individual site circumstances and c hanges in the national 
economy.  As outlined in paragraph 2.1 3, the Councils have agreed that the housing 
trajectories for both areas be considered together for the purpo ses of housing 
delivery, including calculation of 5 -year housing land supply in development 
management decisions that concern housing development. This is consistent with 
the development sequence and spatial development strategy for Cambridge and 
South Cam bridgeshire, and the phasing of housing delivery reflecting that strategy. 
As such, sites at the top of the development sequence in and on the edge of the 
urban area of Cambridge will deliver in the early and middle part of the plan period.  
Delivery in So uth Cambridgeshire will be greater in the middle and latter parts of the 
plan period, in particular as the fringe sites build out from the edge of Cambridge 
and move across the administrative boundary into South Cambridgeshire and as 
the new settlements co me forward. There will also be some housing in larger 
villages early in the plan period. All dwelling figures in the trajectory are net 
additional dwellings (i.e. completed dwellin gs minus losses of dwellings). The 
trajectories rely on information about si tes which have the potential to deliver 
dwellings over the next 15 years and beyond . 
 
2.66 The NPPF (2012) requires the Council to maintain a 5-year land supply. This 
requires the sites that can actually be delivered within a rolling five year period to be 
identified. This is published each year in an updated housing trajectory in  the 
Annual Monitoring Report. The NPPF  (2012) also intro duces  a requirement to 
provide “ an additional buffer of 5% (moved forward from later in the plan period) to 
ensure choice and compet ition in the market for land ”. It goes on to say that “where 
there has been a record of persistent under delivery of housing, local planning 
authorities should increase the buffer to 20% (moved forward from later in the plan 
period) to provide a real istic prospect of achieving the planned supply and to ensure 
choice and competition in the market for land ” (NPPF , 2012 , paragraph 47).   
 
2.67 The Council s have  a record of providing significant levels of housing and have  a 
significant level  of identified hous ing supply. The development strategy for 
Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire has been carried forward from previous 
plans, and includes two further new settlements.  Under these circumstances the  
appropriate methodology for calculating five year housing land  supply across the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
39 
 two authorities has been confirmed as being the Liverpool methodology . In 
response to historic levels of delivery, the appropriate buffer is 20%.  
 
2.68 Appendix A sets out the methodology for establishing housing land supply using this 
approa ch. The appendix also includes details of the housing land supply position at 
November 2017. This shows that the Councils both individually and jointly 
demonstrate a five year housing land supply based on the housing requirement 
included in the local plans , and that this is anticipated to continue for the remainder 
of the plan period. The housing supply data will be updated annually and published 
in the Annual Monitoring Report.  
 
2.69 The plan will provide sufficient flexibility in the range, size, type and loca tion of 
housing allocations to enable a 5 -year land supply to be maintained . Monitoring 
since 1999 shows that over a period of five years that South Cambridgeshire 
averages some 208 homes a year from windfall developments.   
 
2.70 The Council has included a goo d degree of flexibility in the Local Plan capable of 
responding to rapid change, and also has significant supply through windfalls to 
help make up any shortfall if that were to occur at any point during the plan period.  
 
Monitoring  
 
2.71 Monitoring provides information on the performance of policy, the delivery of 
development and impacts on the environment. Monitoring will help the local 
planning  authority assess whether its plans remain sound or whether adjustments 
need to be made to cont inue to meet the Local Plan's objectives.  
 
2.72 In order to assess the effectiveness of the policies in the delivery of development 
and protection of the environment, it is important that continuous monitoring and 
review of policies in the Local Plan is undert aken. Monitoring and review will take 
place on an annual basis through the Annual Monitoring Report (AMR). If, as a 
result of monitoring and review, it appears that development is not coming forward 
in a sustainabl e or timely manner , the Council will be pr oactive in using its powers 
to respond to changing circumstances, for example, through the use of Compulsory 
Purchase Orders to unlock sites, or through the review of land allocations  or policies 
in the Local Plan.   
 
2.73 A set of indicators has been developed specifically for monitoring the Local  Plan; 
these are set out in Appendix  F. For each indicator, the relevant policy or policies (if 
appropriate) that the indicator is monitoring are recorded, a target is set to allow 
progress to be measured, and triggers and actions are detailed to show what will be 
done if the target is not bei ng met. Some indicators included in Appendix F  are not 
directly related to the specific requirements of policies in the Local Plan; however 
annual collection of data is important against these policy issues to create an 
evidence base to inform a review of the Local Plan. These contextual indicators do 
not include triggers and actions, and instead specify that data will be collected for 
monitoring purposes only.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
40 
 Policy S/13: Review of the Local Plan  
 
The Council will undertake an early review of the Local Plan to commence 
before the end of 2019 and with submission to the Secretary of State for 
examination anticipated by the end of Summer 2022. The new Local Plan 
will be prepared jointly by Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire Councils 
for their combined districts (Greater Cambridge). Specific matters to be 
addressed by the r eview include the following:  
 
a. An updated assessment of housing needs.  
b. The progress being made towards implementation of the spatial 
strategy for Greater Cambridge, in particular the new settlements at 
Waterbeach and Bourn Airfield.  
c. Working with th e local housing authority, consideration of the 
implications of an assessment, required by the Housing Act 1985, as 
amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016, of the needs of 
people residing in or resorting to their district with respect to the 
provisio n of sites on which caravans can be stationed.  
 2.74 Additional indicators will be developed for Cambridge Northern Fringe East and land 
surrounding  the proposed Cambridge North  Station  through the preparation of the 
Area Action Plan .  
 
2.75 As part of the City Deal agreement, the partners committed to “the delivery of an 
additional 1,000 new homes on rural exception sites” in addition to “the acceleration 
of delivery of 33,480 homes by 2031”. T he Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire 
Local Plans set a requirement of 33,500 homes for Greater Cambridge, only once 
delivery exceeds the level needed to meet the Local Plans requirements can any 
eligible homes be counted towards the 1,000 additi onal home City Deal 
commitment. On 1 September 2016 the Greater Cambridge City Deal Board agreed 
that eligible homes to be counted towards the commitment should be identified as 
“all affordable homes (as defined by the National Planning Policy Framework) 
constructed  on rural exception sites, and on sites not allocated for development in 
the local plans and outside of a defined settlement boundary”. Eligible homes will be 
reported to Government as part of the City Deal process and monitored through the 
Council’s Annua l Monitoring Report.  
 
2.76 Through the Greater Cambridge City Deal the Councils committed to an early 
review of their local plans beginning in 2019. This was in order to establish what 
impact the anticipated changed infrastructure landscape and economic growth in 
the area might have on housing need and other aspects of spatial and transport 
planning. In addition during the public examination hearings into the Local Plan a 
number of issues were highlighted for specific attention in the next review of the 
Local Pl ans. These relate to the assessment of housing needs, progress in 
delivering the development strategy and in particular the new settlements, and 
provision to meet the requirements of caravan dwellers. Policy S/13 accordingly 
requires that the next full rev iew of the Local Plan should start in 2019 with South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 2        Spatial Strategy  
 
41 
 submission for examination anticipated by the end of Summer 2022.  
 
2.77 Furthermore, a non -statutory spatial plan is being prepared for the Cambridgeshire 
and Peterborough Combined Authority. It is expected that,  although non -statutory, 
the spatial plan will provide a strategy for the wider area that will inform the form 
and content of the joint local plan and should therefore precede its preparation.  
 
  Chapter 3
  
Strategic Sites
  
Bourn Airfield New Village
  
 Northstowe
  
Cambourne West
  
 Waterbeach New Town
   South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
45 
 Chapter 3     Strategic Sites  
 
3.1 The Spatial Strategy Chapter identifies the objectively assessed housing 
requirement for 19,500 new homes in the district over the period 2011 -2031 
and the strategic sites that form a major part of the development strategy in  
the Local Plan. These are a combination of sites carried forward from the 
Local Development Framework (2007 -2010) and three new sites. Policy S/6 
confirms that the Area Action Plans for the following sites remain part of the 
development plan for the plan period to 2031 or until such time as the 
developments are complete:  
• Northstowe (except as amended by Policy SS/ 5 in this chapter) ; 
• North West Cambridge;  
• Cambridge Southern Fringe; and  
• Cambridge East (except as amended by Policy SS/3 in this chapter).  
 
3.2 This chapter includes polic ies for the following existing and new strategic 
allocations for housing, employment and mixed use developments:  
 
 Edge of Cambridge:  
• Orchard Park – site carried forward from the Site Specific Policies 
Development Plan Document (DPD ) 2010 with updated policy to 
provide for the completion of the development;  
• Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road – the site carried 
forward from the Site Specific Policies DPD 2010 but extended to the 
north following the Green Belt review informin g the Local Plan. The 
notional capacity of the site  as extended is 1,000 homes (compared 
with 1,100 homes in the 2010 DPD);  
• Cambridge East – safeguarding the Airport site for longer term 
development beyond 2031, and confirming allocation of land north of 
Newmarket Road and north of Cherry Hinton (the latter together with 
land in the City), and confirming that all other policies in the Cambridge 
East Area Action Plan are retained;  
• Cambridge Northern Fringe East – updated policy consistent with the 
Cambridge Local Plan for  employment focused development around the 
new station to be guided by a new joint Area Action Plan.  
 
New Settlements:  
• Waterbeach new town;  
• Bourn Airfield new village;  
• Extension to Northstowe – allocation of the reserve land identified in the  
Northstowe Area Action Plan 2007.  
 
The Most Sustainable Villages:  
• Cambourne West.  
 
3.3 Figures 3 -6 illustrate the major development sites on the edge of Cambridge 
within the boundaries of Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire 
District Council. They are covered by policies in this Local Plan or Area Action 
Plans or the policies in the Cambridge Local Plan.  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
46 
 Edge of Cambridge  
 
Orchard Park  
 
 Policy SS/1: Orchard Park  
 
1. Land bounded by the A14, Histon Road, Kings Hedges Road and the 
former Cambridge -St Ives railway line, as  defined on the Policies Map, 
is allocated for a sustainable housing -led mixed -use development 
providing a minimum of 900 dwellings, a public transport interchange on 
the Guided Busway along the former railway line, up to 18,000m2 B1 
Business development, a primary school, a local centre, public open 
space, and the preservation or enhancement of the Arbury Camp site of 
archaeological interest.  
 
2. Development will provide for:  
a. The creation of strong internal cycle and footpath links between 
component parts of the development and the retention and 
strengthening of such links to neighbouring parts of the urban area 
and to the rural area to the north of the A14;  
b. Adequate attenuation measures in relation to noise and emissions 
generated by traffic on the A14, in cluding the adoption of an 
appropriate layout and disposition of uses;  
c. The retention of an attractive urban edge to Cambridge through 
the use of high standards of design and landscaping and the 
creation of gateway features;  
d. The retention of appropriate exi sting features of ecological interest 
and the creation of new features which will enhance the interest of 
the site.  
 
3. Additional residential development may be granted planning permission 
but only where this would be compatible with the objective for the  
development as a whole of providing a sustainable housing -led 
mixed -use development and where it would conform with the terms of 
this policy. The following specific assessments must be submitted as 
part of any planning application:  
e. A Noise Assessment to d emonstrate that the proposed 
development takes account of, and mitigates as necessary and 
appropriate, any impacts of noise on achieving a satisfactory 
external and internal residential noise environment;  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
47 
  
3.4 The Orchard Park site was originally allocated for mixed -use development 
including 900 dwellings in the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2004 and the 
Site Specific Policies DPD (adopted January 2010) carried forward the 
allocation. Outline planning permission was granted in 2005 and has lapsed.  
The majority of the development has been completed. Parcel K1 is the l ast 
remaining housing parcel from the original Development Framework Plan.     
 
3.5 There is potential for additional dwellings by using parcels originally envisaged 
for commercial development adjacent to the A14 and for mixed use 
development and a Heritage Re source & Conservation Centre (HRCC) in the 
south west corner of the site. The south west corner of the site fronts onto both 
Histon Road and Kings Hedges Road and will provide an important gateway 
building for those entering the historic City of Cambridge from the north. A high 
quality landmark building will therefore be required, which provides an 
appropriate frontage to Histon Road and reflects its edge of City location and 
the need to respect the separation with Histon and Impington village to the 
north of the A14.  
 
3.6 All the remaining land parcels have planning permission or are under 
construction.   
 
3.7 The presence of the A14 has a heavy influence on the site and the original 
strategy envisaged that commercial uses on the northern edge of the site 
would act  as noise attenuation for the A14. Any development proposal for 
residential development adjacent to the A14 would need to demonstrate that 
necessary mitigation measures have been included to ensure that traffic noise 
and vehicle emissions are reduced to a cceptable levels. This includes creating 
a satisfactory internal and external residential noise environment through 
careful acoustic design and layout of any residential buildings (such as single 
aspect, limited height, sealed non opening windows on the faç ade facing A14, 
passive and or forced mechanical acoustically treated ventilation, no external 
private amenity spaces such as balconies / gardens on any façade with direct 
line of sight to road noise source).  f. An Air Quality Assessment, including monitoring, to demonstrate 
that the proposed development takes account of, and mitigates as 
necessary and appropriate, any impacts of air quality on 
achieving a suitable residential environment and also any impacts 
of development upon the objectives of the  designated Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA). Account should also be taken of the 
anticipated effects of the A14 Improvements on the nature and 
extent of the A14 AQMA;  
g. A Transport Assessment to demonstrate that there is adequate 
highway capacity to serve  all stages of development on the 
Orchard Park site as a whole, particularly in the A14 corridor 
between Girton and Milton, having regard to the traffic forecast to 
be generated by each phase of development.  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
48 
  
3.8 An Air Quality Assessment will be required to  be submitted as part of any 
planning application. This must include monitoring of the actual location where 
residential development is proposed or an agreed equivalent, if appropriate 
monitoring data is not available from the Council. The assessment shoul d be 
based on total emissions from the site and be in accordance with current 
national best practice guidance. The Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) 
must be taken into account in any development proposals to ensure that a 
satisfactory residential environm ent can be provided in order to protect the 
health of future residents by minimising exposure to poor air quality and 
appropriate mitigation measures must be included if necessary. Any proposals 
must also have regard to any impacts of development on the na tional air 
quality objectives, the designated AQMA along the A14 and the requirement to 
produce a site based Low Emission Strategy (see Policy SC/12). Account 
must also be taken of the anticipated effects of the A14 Improvements on the 
nature and extent of  the AQMA. Development will not be permitted on any part 
of the site where this issue cannot be adequately addressed.  
 
3.9 A Transport Assessment will be required to consider the implications of 
additional or alternative forms of development on highway capacit y. This will 
include a detailed assessment of the net impact of replacing parcels assumed 
for commercial development in the Transport Assessment accompanying the 
original outline planning permission with residential development. The 
assessment must also co nsider the cumulative impact alongside other 
allocations in this part of Cambridge, on both the A14 Histon Interchange and 
surrounding local highways junctions and have regard to the effect of the A14 
Improvements.  
 
3.10 Arbury Camp (an Iron Age enclosure which  was reoccupied during the Roman 
period, when the main Roman settlement was located to the north of Arbury 
Camp) lies within the site but below ground level. As in -situ preservation of the 
enclosure has proven to be essential, its site may be used to satis fy part of the 
open space requirements of the new development insofar as such use is 
compatible with preservation of the enclosure. Any additional residential 
development will need to make provision for its recreational needs in 
accordance with Policy SC/7 , as well as any enhanced or additional 
community services and facilities to serve the additional homes. Consideration 
may be given to off -site provision of the active recreational needs of new 
residents in consultation with Orchard Park Community Council as the 
managing agency.  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
49 
 Land between Huntingdon Road and Histon Road  
 
Policy SS/2: Land between Huntingdon Road and H iston Road  
 
1. Land at North West Cambridge between Huntingdon Road and Histon 
Road, as defined on the Policies Map, will be developed as part of a 
sustainable housing -led urban extension of Cambridge. The Cambridge 
Green Belt is revised to provide the northe rn boundary of this 
development. The Green Belt will continue to ensure separation from 
Girton and Histon & Impington villages.  
 
Spatial Masterplan : 
 
2. A Spatial Masterplan will be submitted for approval by the local planning 
authorities as part of the firs t application for planning permission to 
demonstrate that the development of the whole site will integrate 
effectively with the development of the wider North -West Cambridge 
area, including development in Cambridge City:  
a.  The Masterplan will set out the  principles of good design and be 
supplemented by a Design and Access Statement;  
b.  Design Codes for each phase of development will be required  to 
be submitted and approved before the granting of the  first reserved 
matters consent,  to ensure a high qualit y development.  
 
Landscape Strategy : 
 
3. A Landscape Strategy must be submitted and approved as part of , or 
before , the granting of the first planning permission, and must include 
appropriate edge treatments that respect the Green Belt setting of 
Cambridge and  views of key features of the City. Any development shall 
retain hedges and woodland and provide a set back of the development 
from Cambridge Road and the A14 to provide effective visual separation 
between Cambridge and Impington.  
 
Provision of Housing, S ervices and Facilities : 
 
4. Approximately 1,000 dwellings will be provided in South 
Cambridgeshire . The final number  of homes may be higher or lower 
than the indicative  capacity, and will  be informed by a design -led 
assessment with a good mix of house types, sizes and tenures 
(including affordable housing) attractive to, and meeting the needs of, all 
ages and sectors of society including those with disabilities.  
 
(continued)  
  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
50 
  5. The development will provide for an appropriate level and type of 
services, facilit ies and infrastructure to meet the day to day needs of the 
development either on site or elsewhere in North West Cambridge 
(within or outside the district), including a secondary school, primary 
school, local shopping and community facilities. Provision wi ll be 
through innovative means, including opportunities for joint provision and 
co-location to provide services which best meet people’s needs, are 
accessible to all and which are cost efficient to service and facility 
providers.  Some provision has already  been planned within the local 
centre of the adjoining development in Cambridge including a health 
centre  and supermarket. Provision of other facilities to meet the needs 
of development in South Cambridgeshire will either need to be made 
on-site or via con tributions for off -site provision.  Provision for outdoor 
sports facilities, provision for teenagers and children, and informal open 
space, and allotments will be made in accordance with Polic y SC/7 .  
 
Transport, Access and Parking : 
  
6. Development and transp ort systems will be planned in order to integrate 
with adjoining development in Cambridge City, to reduce the need to 
travel and to maximise the use of sustainable transport modes, so as to 
achieve a modal share of no more than 40% of trips by car (excludi ng 
passengers). This will include the provision of employee travel plans, 
residential travel planning, and other similar measures  which could 
include car clubs.  
 
7. Adequate highway capacity will be required to serve all stages of 
development. Planning permis sion will be subject to conditions requiring 
that sufficient highway capacity is available in the A14 corridor between 
Girton and Milton throughout the development for the traffic forecast to 
be generated by each phase of development.  
 
8. Vehicular access sh all be from Cambridge Road, through the 
development, and then via Darwin Green 1 (Cambridge City Council’s 
area) to connect onto Huntingdon Road. There shall be no vehicular 
access direct to the A14 or to Girton.  
 
9. Car parking and secure cycle parking will be provided in accordance 
with Policy TI/3. Car clubs will be encouraged in order to minimise the 
amount of land given over to car parking. This must be explored 
through the Transport Assessment and Travel Plan.  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
51 
  10. The development will be highly  accessible and permeable to all its 
residents on foot, by cycle and High Quality Public Transport (HQPT), 
to support non car modes of travel, recreation and health. HQPT will be 
provided to serve the development, including bus priority through the 
develop ment , which will include segregation if required,  linking 
effectively with the route through the adjoining development in 
Cambridge City and into the wider bus network. There will be a network 
of strong internal and external cycle and  pedestrian  links to 
neighbouring parts of the urban and rural areas.  
 
Countryside Enhancement Strategy : 
 
11. A Countryside Enhancement Strategy for the land between Huntingdon 
Road, Cambridge Road / Histon Road and the A14 retained in the 
Green Belt will be prepared and implemente d to protect existing and 
provide new landscape, biodiversity and public access enhancements, 
including hedgerow management and enhancement, measures to 
protect and enhance wildlife habitats, and new footpaths, cycleways 
and bridleways including access via  the existing  A14 overbridge to 
connect to the wider public rights of way. Developers will be required to 
retain appropriate existing f eatures of ecological interest.  
 
Drainage : 
 
12. Surface water drainage will be controlled by means of a sustainable 
drainage system which will only release surface water run -off into 
surrounding water courses at least at a rate no greater than if the site 
was undeveloped. Balancing ponds serving the site shall be located 
south of the A14. The development will not result in harm in the form of 
untreated sewage discharge or increased flood risk from treated waste 
water. Planning conditions (which may include ‘Grampian’ style 
conditions¹) will link the start (and phased development of the site, if 
necessary) to the availability of w aste water treatment capacity and the 
capacity of receiving watercourses. All flood mitigation measures 
should make allowance for the forecast effects of climate change.  
 
Noise and Air Quality : 
 
13. Noise and air quality  assessments will be required as part of  any 
planning application. If necessary, development will be subject to 
measures, which may include planning conditions and / or planning  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
52 
  
 obligations, a landscaped buffer, and layout and design measures, to 
mitigate the effects of air polluti on and noise caused by traffic using the 
A14 north of the site and Histon Road east of the site. Noise attenuation 
fencing will only be permitted  exceptionally where it is demonstrated 
that landscape bunds are impractical  or inappropriate . The length of 
such fencing will be minimised . Where noise attenuation fencing is 
permitted, any potential for reflected noise shall be minimised through 
the use of noise absorptive materials or other surface finishes to the 
fencing, to ensure no unacceptable adverse impac t on nearby 
communities.  The impacts of development on air quality objectives and 
the designated Air Quality Management Area (AQMA), and the 
anticipated effects of the A14 Improvements on the nature and extent of 
the AQMA should also be taken into account.  A site based Low 
Emission Strategy will also be required ( see Policy SC/12 ). Residential 
development must be outside AQMA. Land within the AQMA can be 
used to provide noise bunds, water management facilities and open 
space uses for the wider development.  
 
Management Strategies : 
 
14. Management strategies for services, facilities, landscape and 
infrastructure will be submitted to the local planning authority for 
approval prior to the granting of outline planning permission to ensure 
high quality, robust and eff ective implementation, adoption and 
maintenance.  
 
15. A comprehensive environmental management and construction 
strategy will be required for all phases of development and planning 
conditions will be imposed to minimise the adverse effects of 
construction acti vity on residential amenity and the environment. A 
scheme will be introduced to avoid construction vehicles travelling 
through existing residential areas of Cambridge and villages in the 
locality and to avoid unacceptable adverse impacts on traffic flows o n 
the A14 and the surrounding road network. Conditions on timing of 
construction traffic movements on the network will be imposed if 
necessary, taking account also of the need to minimise adverse impacts 
on residential amenity.  
 
1 Grampian Regional Council  v. Aberdeen DC (1984) JPL 590 H.L: conditions restricting 
development unless and until an event had occurred which was not within the power of the 
applicant to bring about may be valid if reasonable and not otherwise ultra vires.  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
53 
 3.11 Land between Huntingdon Road and Cambridge Road / Histon Road, known 
as Darwin Green 2 and formerly known as NIAB 2, was released from the 
Green Belt for a sustainable housin g-led urban extension of Cambridge in the 
Site Specific Policies DPD. Plans for the adjoining built development within 
Cambridge City are to be found in the Cambridge Local Plan, which should be 
read alongside this policy to give a full understanding of al l inter -related 
proposals in the area. The northern boundary of the site has been extended to 
provide a small additional area of residential development on land removed 
from the Green Belt and outside the Air Quality Management Area (AQMA).  
 
3.12 The site is id entified for approximately 1,000 dwellings and associated 
development, which lies in the Parish of Impington (with the adjoining 
countryside to the west lying in the Parish of Girton). The site and adjoining 
land will provide the infrastructure needed to d eliver and serve the urban 
extension as a whole. The notional capacity of 1,000 dwellings is a robust 
estimate of capacity for the purposes of plan making. The number of dwellings 
will be determined by a design led approach to deliver  a high quality 
develo pment on this edge of Cambridge.  The additional part of the site added 
through th is Local Plan is  outside of the AQMA , and is  subject to ensuring 
sufficient space between the development and the A14 for a noise bund, 
preserving important landscape features  and all water management features 
necessary to serve all parts of the Darwin Green development.  
 
3.13 The revised Green Belt boundary will maintain an open green foreground 
setting to Cambridge and ensure that the expanded City remains physically 
separate from  surrounding villages especially the closest villages of Girton and 
Histon & Impington. In this way the character of Cambridge as a city 
surrounded by a necklace of villages can continue to be protected.  
 
3.14 This rural area provides an opportunity for Green B elt enhancement and a 
Countryside Enhancement Strategy will be required to demonstrate how 
landscape and biodiversity enhancements will be achieved in the area as far 
north as the A14 trunk road to help enhance the quality of the setting of 
Cambridge and m itigate the impact of development. It will also set out 
improved countryside access to provide for informal recreation to serve both 
the development proposed in the City and existing development in this sector 
of Cambridge. There is a  public footpath along  the administrative boundary 
between Darwin Green 1 and Darwin Green 2. This route  will be incorporated 
into the development . New routes for Non -Motorised Users  will be delivered in  
the countryside between the site and the A14,  as well as pedestrian  / cycle 
use of the A14 overbridge.   
 
3.15 It is important that any urban related open uses, such as playing fields, that 
are proposed in the Green Belt are carefully located and designed to ensure 
they do not reduce the effectiveness of the Green Belt separation bet ween 
Cambridge and Girton in visual terms, particularly having regard to matters 
such as fencing and floodlighting (see Policy NH/8).  
 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
54 
 3.16 The development will help meet the high level of housing need in the district.  
This requires balancing the need to make  best use of land with creating a high 
quality urban extension to Cambridge. The final number of dwellings will be 
determined through a design -led approach and the required Masterplan and 
Design Codes , and the capacity of approximately 1,000 is a notional capacity 
to be finalised through the planning application process. A range of house 
types, sizes and mix will also be important in ensuring a balanced community.  
 
3.17 The strategic developments are the key to addressing the affordable housing 
requirements of t he area.  
 
3.18 All necessary community services and facilities will be provided by the 
development, either onsite or through contributions to off -site provision 
secured through a planning obligation, for example through provision of new 
facilities or enhancemen t of existing facilities in the wider North West  
Cambridge Quadrant . Open space provision will also provide opportunities for 
enhanced nature conservation value, and will enable quiet enjoyment of the 
natural environment.  
 
3.19 A secondary school is proposed on  the site to serve the needs of all propos ed 
new development in the north -west part of Cambridge both north and south of 
Huntingdon Road. The secondary school must be provided according to a 
trigger point relating to development in the whole quadrant, whic h may be 
ahead of development on the site in South Cambridgeshire. An appropriate 
mechanism will be included in the planning obligation for the site to ensure 
timely provision of this key community facility.  
 
3.20 A fundamental requirement for this site is tha t it will be highly accessible and 
permeable to all its residents on foot, by cycle and High Quality Public 
Transport (HQPT), to support sustainable transport, recreation and health. 
Therefore all development will be within 400m easy walking distance of a 
HQPT bus stop via direct, safe and convenient routes. The route must be fully 
and effectively integrated with the route through the adjoining City 
development.  
 
3.21 Vehicular access to the development will be provided through the City 
development and it is imp ortant that there is adequate capacity in the wider 
highway network at all times during the development. Any proposal will need 
to demonstrate that there is sufficient capacity in the A14 to accommodate the 
traffic generated by the development.  
 
3.22 The impact  of development on a number of natural resources will also be 
important. This includes surface water drainage and sewage discharge and 
the need to take account of the impact of the development on the wider 
catchment, particularly in view of known problems downstream, especially at 
Histon, Impington and Oakington, and other proposed large scale 
development that drains into that area. The impact on the wider catchment 
must therefore be addressed and the potential for a catchment wide 
assessment should be cons idered. Air quality is also an important South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
55 
 consideration in view of the AQMA on the A14.   
 
3.23 It is important that the services, facilities, landscape and infrastructure needed 
by this development are not only provided to a high quality, but that they are 
provided when they are needed, properly and effectively implemented, 
managed and maintained if they are to meet the needs of the community in 
the long term. There would be advantages in a single organisation taking 
responsibility for maintenance to avoid fragm entation and ensure continuity in 
approach. The policy is not specific about the number of management 
strategies. However, there should be a single agreed management strategy 
covering recreation, landscape and biodiversity. The inclusion of water and 
drain age features within open spaces would have significant advantages to 
ensuring a holistic approach to the management of open spaces where the 
respective needs of the various land uses and functions within those spaces 
can be addressed and should therefore b e investigated.  
 
Cambridge East  
 Policy SS/3: Cambridge  East  
 
1. Land at Cambridge East is allocated for development as shown on the 
Policies Map:  
a. Land north of Newmarket Road will deliver approximately 1,300 
dwellings during the plan period.  
b. Land north of Cherry Hinton will deliver approximately 420 
dwellings during the plan period (it adjoins land allocated in Policy 
13 of the Cambridge Local Plan for 780 dwellings).  
 
2. Proposals for residential development on sites (a), and (b) as shown on 
the Policies Map, will only be supported if:  
c. acceptable mitigation of environmental and health impacts 
(including noise) from the airport can be provided; and  
d. a masterplan is submitted for the development of site SS/3 (1b) 
and adjoining land in Cambridge (site R47)  which safeguards the 
appropriate future development of the w ider safeguarded land; 
and 
e. the continued authorised use of Cambridge Airport does not pose 
a safety risk.  
 
3. Residential development on site SS/3 1b) as shown on the Policies 
Map, together with adjoining land in Cambridge (site R47), will make 
provision for a primary and secondary school, a local centre with 
community hub, open space and a spine road connecting Coldham’s 
Lane with Cherry Hinton Road.  Vehicular access to the site will only be 
permitted via the new spine road, unless needed for emergency 
acces s.  
 
(continued)  
 
 
 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
56 
  
3.24 Land at Cambridge East was taken out of the Green Belt through the 
Cambridge Local Plan 2006 and Cambridge East Area Action Plan (AAP) 
2008 for the development of a major new urban extension. This was 
dependant on the re location of current activities at the airport. Marshall had 
been actively looking into relocation options for the airport activities since 
2006. In 2010, they announced that they did not have a deliverable relocation 
option and that they intended to remain  at Cambridge Airport for the 
foreseeable future.  
 
3.25 In reviewing the future options for this large site, Cambridge City Council and 
South Cambridgeshire District Council have concluded that it is appropriate 
that the site allocated in the AAP  remain out of the Green Belt . The corridor of 
Green Belt running from Coldham’s Common to Teversham will remain as 
Green Belt.  
 
3.26 There is an opportunity during the plan period to deliver residential 
development on parts of Cambridge East  while the airport remains on the  site. 
A number of specific sites are allocated in Policy SS/3 (1) and Policy 13 (1) of 
the Cambridge Local Plan (see Figure 5). These were identified in the AAP as 
capable of coming forward ahead of the Airport site, and potentially without it. 
Careful co nsideration of how the on -going airport activities will interact with 
any new residential use will be needed  at the planning application stage , to 
ensure that the new homes have a high level of amenity, and that the 
continued authorised use of the airport would not be compromised. Any 
development that comes forward in advance of the wider site will have to be 
carefully planned and demonstrate that it is capable of working both with and 
without the wider development, so as not to prejudice the potential deli very of 
development on the safeguarded land at some point in the future if it becomes 
available.  This policy makes it clear that these areas are not part of the wider 
safeguarded site and are allocated to come forward for development before 
2031.  A masterp lan for site SS/3 (1b) and adjoining land in Cambridge will be 
required in order to ensure a comprehensive and coordinated approach to 
bringing these sites forward for development. The masterplan will take into 
account the context of the surrounding area, including development proposals 
on site R 47 (Land north of Cherry Hinton , in the Cambridge Local Plan). While 
vehicular access to the site will be from the new spine road off Coldham’s 
Lane and Cherry Hinton Road, access for emergency vehicles only from 
alternative points will need to be considered at an early stage.  
 4. The rest of the Cambridge East site is safeguarded for longer term 
development beyond 2031. Development on safeguarded land will only 
occur once the site becomes available and following a review of both 
this Plan and the Cambridge Eas t Area Action Plan.  
 
5. This policy replaces Policies CE/3 and CE/35 of the Cambridge East 
AAP. All other policies in the C ambridge East AAP are retained.  
 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
57 
 Policy SS/4: Cambridge Northern Fringe East and  Cambridge North 
railway station  
 
1. The Cambridge Nort hern Fringe East and Cambridge North railway 
station  will enable the creation of a revitalised, employment focussed 
area centred on a new transport interchange.  
 
2. The area, shown on the Policies  Map, and illustrated in Figure 6 , is 
allocated for high qualit y mixed -use development, primarily for 
employment within Use Classes B1, B2 and B8 as well as a range of 
supporting uses, commercial, retail , leisure  and residential uses 
(subject to acceptable environmental conditions).  
 
3. The amount of development, site ca pacity, viability, time scales and 
phasing of development will be established through the preparation of 
an Area Action Plan (AAP) for the site. The AAP will be developed 
jointly between South Cambridgeshire District Council and Cambridge 
City Council, and  will involve close collaborative working with 
Cambridgeshire County Council, Anglian Water and other stakeholders 
in the area. The final boundaries of land that the joint AAP will consider 
will be determined by the AAP.  
 
(continued)  3.27  Cambridge City Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council accept 
that there is an existing need for a new secondary school to serve the eastern 
part of Cambridge, in response to demogr aphic pressures. A significant 
shortfall in school capacity across the City is currently  forecast from 2018, 
which coupled with proposed development north of Newmarket Road and 
north of Cherry Hinton will require the early provision of the secondary school . 
Residential development on land north of Cherry Hinton should not come 
forward before there is an agreed approach to the delivery of sufficient school 
capacity in the area, including land for the provision of a secondary school 
being made available. As a n exception to Policy CE/6 of the Cambridge East 
AAP, the secondary school need not be included in the local centre. In 
common with practice elsewhere around Cambridge, and in line with national 
policy on Green Belt, it will be acceptable for school playin g fields to be 
located in the retained Green Belt.   
 
3.28  This policy safeguards the main airport site for longer -term development 
needs beyond 2031. Were circumstanc es to change, a review of this P lan and 
the Cambridge East AAP could examine the consequences  of the change. 
Policies in the existing Cambridge East AAP will remain other than Policies 
CE/3 and CE/35.  
 
Cambridge Northern Fringe East  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
58 
 4. All proposals should:  
a. Take into account existing site conditions and environmental and 
safety constraints;  
b. Demonstrate that environmental and health impacts (including 
odour) from the Cambridge Water Recycling Centre can be 
acceptably mitigated for occupants;  
c. Ensure that appro priate access and linkages, including for 
pedestrians and cyclists, are planned for in a high quality and 
comprehensive manner;  
d. Recognise the existing local nature reserve at Bramblefields, the 
protected hedgerow on the east side of Cowley Road which is a  
City Wildlife Site, the First Public Drain, which is a wildlife corridor, 
and other ecological features, and where development is proposed 
provide for appropriate ecological mitigation, compensation, and 
enhancement measures either on - or off -site; and  
e. Ensure that the development would not compromise opportunities 
for the redevelopment of the wider area.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.29 Cambridge Northern Fringe East (CNFE) is located within the Cambrid ge City 
Council and South Cambridgeshire District Council authority boundaries. The 
majority of the area is within Cambridge with  Chesterton Sidings and part of 
the St John’s innovation Park within South Cambridgeshire. An early review of 
the site through a jointly -prepared Area Action Plan  (AAP)  will ensure a 
coordinated approach is taken. This will enable the feasibility of development 
and its viability to be properly investigated and will ensure a comprehensive 
approach to redevelopment.  
 
3.30 The railway st ation, on the sidings in South Cambridgeshire, will be served by 
the Cambridgeshire  Guided Busway and will include cycle parking facilities 
and car parking. The station will significantly improve the accessibility of the 
site and surrounding area including  access to and from the Cambridge 
Business Park, St John’s Innovation Park and Cambridge Science Park  
making the  area a highly attractive business destination.  
 
3.31 Cambridge North railway  station will provide a catalyst for regeneration  of this 
area. Early de velopment around Cambridge North station could help create a 
vibrant area around this key infrastructure to meet the needs of users of the 
station and bring forward further phased delivery elsewhere within the CNFE 
area. Planning applications submitted bef ore the adoption of the AAP will be 
considered on their own merits and subject to ensuring that they would not 
prejudice the outcome of the AAP process and the achievement of the 
comprehensive vision for the area as a whole that will be established by the 
AAP. 
 
3.32 The adopted Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Core 
Strategy (2011) and Site Specific Proposals Plan (2012) designates a 
safeguarding area for the existing Cambridge Water Recycling Centre and South Cambridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
59 
 another for an existing aggregates railhe ad; as well as a Waste Consultation 
Area for an existing waste management facility. In addition, it identifies an area 
of search for a household (waste) recycling centre to serve the north of 
Cambridge and an inert waste recycling facility. Any development  proposals 
will need to be assessed against the above minerals and w aste policies and 
specifically will need to prove they are compatible to ensure the existing 
safeguarded aggregates railhead and waste operations can continue without 
conflict.  
 
3.33 The siding s, in South Cambridgeshire, currently have a number of businesses 
importing aggregate using the railway that is used for construction and road 
maintenance in the wider Cambridge area. This provides an important source 
of building materials for the wider ar ea.  
 
3.34 Exploration of the viability and feasibility of redevelopment of the Cambridge 
Water Recycling Centre within Cambridge City to provide a new treatment 
works facility either elsewhere or on the current site subject to its scale will be 
undertaken as p art of the feasibility investigations in drawing up the AAP. If a 
reduced footprint were to be achieved on the current site this could release 
valuable land to enable a wider range of uses. Residential development could 
be an option subject to appropriate ground conditions, contamination issues, 
amenity and air quality.  
 
3.35 The development of Cambridge Northern Fringe East will require partnership 
working between landowners and developers as well as the two local 
authorities and Cambridgeshire County Council.  Highways England will also 
be engaged  with in relation to strategic road network issues.  
  
 
 
 
South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
64 
 New Settlements  
 
Northstowe Extension  
 
3.36 The new town of Nort hstowe was originally planned in the Northstowe Area 
Action Plan (AAP) with an area of reserve land to the west of the town.  The 
reserve land is allocated in the Local Plan to provide flexibility for the phasing 
and delivery of the town over the plan peri od and will not increase the total 
number of homes delivered by 2031. Policy SS/ 5 supersedes Policy NS/3 (1g) 
of the Northstowe AAP.  
 
Waterbeach New Town  Policy SS/5 : Northstowe Extension  
 
The reserve land identified in the Northstowe Area Action Plan (AAP) is 
allocated as an extension to the site of the n ew town of Northstowe. It will 
help provide the 10,000 homes allocated in the AAP at an appropriate 
density and design and will not increase the overall number of homes.  
 Policy SS/6 : Waterbeach New Town  
 
1. A new town of approximately  8,000 to 9,000 dwell ings and 
associated uses is proposed on the former Waterbeach Barracks 
and land to the east and north as shown on the Policies Map.  A 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) will be prepared for the 
new town as addressed at subsection 17 of this policy . The final 
number of dwellings will be determined through a design -led 
approach and spatial framework diagram included in the SPD  having 
regard to:  
a. The quantum,  location and distribution of development in the 
town; and  
b. Maintaining  an appropriate setting for Den ny Abbey listed 
building and scheduled monument.  
 
2. The new town will be a sustainable and vibrant new community that 
is inclusive and diverse with its own distinctive local identity which is 
founded on best practice urban design principles, drawing on the 
traditions of fen -edge market towns, which encourages the high 
quality traditions and innovation that are characteristic of the 
Cambridge Sub -Region.  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
65 
  
 
 3. It will be developed to maintain the identity of Waterbeach as a village 
close to the new tow n. Appropriate integration should be secured by the 
provision of suitable links to enable the residents of Waterbeach village 
to have convenient access to the services and facilities in the new town 
but with limited and  controlled  opportunities for direct road access from 
the wider new town to Waterbeach with emphasis on connections  by 
public transport, cycle and  on foot.  
 
4. It will deliver an example of excellence in sustainable development and 
healthier living, which will make a significant contribution to  the long 
term development needs of the Cambridge area. It will deliver high 
quality public transport links to Cambridge, including a relocated railway 
station, to enable a high modal share of travel by means other than the 
car.  
 
The Site:  
 
5. The built area  of the settlement will be contained within the Major 
Development Site, and the location of major land uses and design of  
the northern edge of the new town will ensure   an appropriate 
relationship with Denny Abbey listed building and scheduled monument;  
 
6. The new town will establish an appropriate relationship and interaction 
with Waterbeach village, and the Cambridge Research Park;  
 
7. All built development will be provided  within the Major Development Site 
shown on the Policies Map. Land outside the Major De velopment Site 
can provide other associated uses and mitigation including drainage, 
habitat compensation and informal open space.  
 
The Phasing and Delivery of a Mix of Land Uses:  
 
8. The new town will provide a range of uses appropriate to a new town, 
includi ng: 
a. Residential development of a mix of dwelling sizes and types, 
including affordable housing, to achieve a balanced and inclusive 
community;  
  
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
66 
  b. Employment provision of a quantum, type and mix  to meet the 
needs of the town and provide access to local jobs, and support 
the continued development of the economy of the Cambridge area  
to be established through an Economic Development Strategy 
prepared in partnership with the local authority and key 
stakeholders;  
c. Shops, services, leisure and other t own centre uses¹ of an 
appropriate scale for a town whilst avoiding significant impacts on 
vitality and viability of surrounding centres, and not competing with 
Cambridge as the sub regional centre;  
d. A town centre supported by local centres, to ensure servi ces and 
facilities are easily accessible to residents;  
e. Community services and facilities, including health and both 
primary and secondary school education;  
f. Open space, sports and leisure facilities;  
g. Appropriate provision for and design of waste / recycling  
management facilities.  
 
Measures to Address Landscape, Townscape and Setting of Heritage Assets 
in the Surrounding Area, and Deliver a High Quality New Development : 
 
9. The new town will:  
a. Establish and follow  design principles to deliver a high quality 
devel opment responding to local character, but also with its own 
identity;  
b. Provide strategic landscaping within and  beyond the Major 
Development Site to deliver  high quality environs and:  
i. provide an appropriate screening of the town in views from 
Denny Abbey in order to protect the historic significance of 
the Abbey, and  
ii. maintain the village character of Waterbeach;  
 
(continued)  
 
1 Main town centre uses as defined in the NPPF  (2012) : Retail development (including 
warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); l eisure, entertainment facilities the more 
intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, night clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling 
centres, and bingo halls); offices; an d arts, culture and tourism development (including 
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September 2018  
Chapt
er 3        Strategic Sites 
 
67 
  c. Conserve and enhance the significance of Denny Abbey Grade I 
listed building and scheduled monument, incl uding the 
contribution made by its setting, the extent and nature of 
separation from the Major Development Site and formal open 
spaces, and protection of key views including to and from the 
Abbey;  
d. Include a ssessment, conservation and enhancement of other 
heritage assets as appropriate to their significance, including 
non-designated assets such as Car Dyke World War II structures , 
raised causeways , and the Soldiers Hill Earthworks.  
e. Incorporate necessary mitigation to sensitive receptor boundaries, 
with rega rd to noise  and odour , including from the A10, proposed 
railway station , recreational activities and the Waterbeach Waste  
Management Park to ensure no significant adverse impact on 
quality of life / amenity and health using separation distances or 
acoustic  earth bunding rather than physical barriers if appropriate 
and where practicable;  
f. Ensure there is no significant adverse impact on local air quality 
and or mitigate as necessary with a Low Emissions Scheme.   
 
Delivery of a Significant Network of Green Inf rastructure : 
 
10. The new town will:  
a. Provide a high degree of connectivity to existing corridors and 
networks;  
b. Include areas accessible to the public as well as areas with more 
restricted access with the aim of enhancing biodiversity;  
c. Provide  and retain  woods,  hedges, and water features which 
would contribute to the character and amenity of the town and 
help preserve and enhance the setting of Denny Abbey, managed 
to enhance their ecological value;  
d. Consider the multifunctional value of spaces, e.g. amenity, 
landscape, biodiversity, recreation and drainage;  
e. Carry out  a full programme of ecological survey and monitoring, to 
guide a Biodiversity management plan to provide appropriate 
mitigation and enhancement.  
 
Creation of a comprehensive movement network:  
 
11. The new town will be founded on a comprehensive movement network 
for the whole town, that connects key locations including the town 
centre and relocated railway station to encourage the use of 
sustainable modes of travel, and includes : 
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September 2018  
Chapt
er 3        Strategic Sites 
 
68 
  a. Signific ant improvements in Public Transport, including:   
i. Provision of a  relocated Waterbeach station with appropriate 
access arrangements by all modes  to serve the village and 
the new town;  
ii. Provision of a  Park and Ride site on the A10 to intercept 
traffic from th e north of Waterbeach, served by a new 
segregated Bus link to Cambridge;  
b. Measures to Promote Cycling and Walking , from the start of the  
development including : 
i. Provision of a  network of attractive, direct, safe and 
convenient walking and cycling routes link ing homes to 
public transport and the main areas of activity such as the 
town centre, schools and employment areas;  
ii. Provision of d irect, segregated high quality pedestrian and 
cycle links to north Cambridge, surrounding villages and 
nearby existing facilit ies such as the Cambridge Research 
Park;  
iii. A Smarter Choices package including residential, school and 
workplace travel planning.  
c. Highway Improvements , including : 
i. Primary road access  from the A10;  
ii. Additional capacity to meet the forecast road traffic 
generat ion of the new town, particularly on the A10 and at 
the junction with the A14;  
iii. Measures to mitigate the traffic impact of the new town on 
surrounding villages including Waterbeach, Landbeach, 
Horningsea, Fen Ditton and Milton;  
iv. A review of the access arrang ements to Denny Abbey  and 
the Farmland  Museum.  
 
Sustainable Design and construction:  
 
12. The new town will incorporate and deliver  opportunities to exceed 
sustainable design and construction  standards established by the Local 
Plan. These measures could in clude combined heat and power 
provided from the adjacent Waterbeach Waste Management Park.   
 
(continued)    South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
69 
  
 Infrastructure Requirements:  
 
13. The new town will:  
a. Ensure the  delivery of improvement to any existing infrastructure 
which will be relied upon by the new town a s well as the provision, 
management and maintenance of new infrastructure, services and 
facilities to meet the needs of the town.  
b. Make appropriate arrangements for Foul Drainage and Sewage 
Disposal.  
c. Ensure the p rovision, management and on -going maintenance  of 
sustainable surface water drainage measures to control the risk of 
flooding on site and which will reduce the risk of flooding to areas 
downstream or upstream of the development.  
 
Community Development:  
 
14. Measures will be required  to assist the deve lopment of a new 
community, such as through  community development workers.  
 
Site Preparation:  
 
15. Developers will be required to:  
a. Undertake  site wide investigation and assessment of land 
contamination and other issues resulting from former land uses, 
including military use, to ensure the land is suitable for the 
proposed end use and is not presenting a risk to the environment;  
b. Ensure  that all ordnance is removed from the site in ways that 
ensure the development can take place without unacceptable risk 
to workers and neighbours including major disruption to the wider 
public off site.  
 
Phasing and  Delivery:  
  
16. The delivery  of the new town, including any individual phases, must:  
a. Be in accordance with the spatial framework diagram set out in the 
Supplementar y Planning Document to ensure a comprehensive 
development of the site as a whole that will not prejudice the 
creation of a fully functioning and successful new town.  
b. Be informed by appropriate strategies, assessments and evidence 
reports.  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
70 
  
 
3.37 Land north of Waterbeach is allocated for the creation of a sustainable new 
town. I t provides the opportunity to reuse an extensive area of previously 
developed land to meet the housing and employment needs of the Cambridge 
area. It will aim to be an exemplar in sustainability and high quality design, 
building on the knowledge gained fro m other new settlements being delivered 
in the district.  
 
3.38 This is a long term development opportunity. Development will take place over 
the plan period, and beyond. The implementation of the new town 
development provided for by this policy will be informed  by a SPD produced in 
accordance with policy paragraph 17 , and the local community and 
stakeholders will be engaged in its preparation.  The policy establishes 
requirements and objectives  that will need to be addressed in the SPD, and 
subsequently by develo pers. A full range of detailed assessments will be 
required, initially at a level appropriate to inform the SPD, and ultimately as 
part of any planning application.  c.  Plan for essential services, facilities and infrastructure to be 
provided in a comprehensive manner, anticipating future n eeds, 
and e stablishing suitable mechanisms to deliver the 
infrastructure in a timely and efficient way to achieve the 
successful delivery of the new town, including the needs of 
individual phases, and the requirements on developers.  
d. Make satisfactory arran gements to ensure appropriate  
engagement and consultation with local people and 
stakeholders.  
 
Supplementary Planning Document:  
 
17. The SPD to be prepared for the Strategic Site shown on the Policies 
Map will provide further guidance and detail on the imp lementation of 
Policy SS/6 . The SPD will include:  
a. An overarching, high level vision for the new town.   
b. Consideration of relevant context including key constraints and 
opportunities.  
c. The broad location of the components of the new town which 
are essential  to support comprehensive and seamless 
development. A spatial framework diagram will be included that 
ensures the creation of a sustainable, legible and distinctive 
new settlement.  
d. The location, nature and extent of any formal open space to be 
provided ou tside of the Major Development Site. 
e. Broadly  how the development is to be phased, including the 
delivery of key infrastructure.  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
71 
  
3.39 The Policies Map also identifies the Major Development Site, which will 
accommodate the bu ilt development of the new town. This does not mean the 
whole of the area will be developed. Large parts of it will remain undeveloped 
and green after the settlement is complete to provide open spaces within the 
new town and a substantial green setting for  the new town, Denny Abbey and  
Farmland Museum and Waterbeach village. Areas to the north of the town 
within the area to be covered by the  SPD will ensure that it will remain 
physically separate from Denny Abbey. Assessment of the setting of Denny 
Abbey us ing Historic England’s  guidance on Setting of Heritage Assets will be 
required in view of the importance of conserving and where possible 
enhancing the remote rural and historic setting of Denny Abbey, a nationally 
important heritage asset, will be a key e lement of the plan, including having 
regard to key views and landscape character. There may be scope to provide 
some formal open space outside the Major Development Site whilst providing 
an appropriate setting for Denny Abbey, if demonstrated to be appropr iate 
through the SPD.  
 
3.40 Delivery of large areas of green infrastructure will also enable the 
enhancement of biodiversity within the town, whilst providing a network of 
open spaces for new and existing communities. Maintaining the identity of  
Waterbeach vill age as a village close to the new town  is also necessary. The 
nature of the transition between Waterbeach village and the new town will be 
addressed through the SPD. 
 
3.41 A new town will require a significant amount of new infrastructure, including 
schools, sh ops, services and facilities to meet the needs of the town. It is 
important that the services, facilities, landscape and infrastructure needed by 
this development are not only provided to a high quality, but that they are 
properly and effectively implement ed, managed and maintained if they are to 
meet the needs of the community as they arise and in the long term.   
 
3.42 A fundamental requirement for this site is that it will be highly accessible and 
permeable to all its residents on foot, by cycle and public tr ansport, to support 
sustainable transport, recreation and health. The site offers particular 
opportunities to deliver public transport improvements, including the relocation 
of Waterbeach railway station to a location where it will also be convenient for 
people living in Waterbeach village making rail travel highly attractive.  
Segregated provision for buses both within the town and to link the new town 
to the public transport network in Cambridge will be required and similarly for 
cycle use. This will prov ide for quicker journeys, encourage maximum use by 
residents of the new town and improve safety. The existing A10 is at capacity 
and road improvements will be required, including measures to address 
capacity at the Milton junction with the A14.  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
72 
 New Vil lage at Bourn Airfield  
 
 
 
 
 Policy SS/7: New Village at Bourn Airfield  
 
1. Land south of the A428 based on Bourn Airfield is allocated for the 
development of  a new village of approximately 3,500 dwellings. A  
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) will be prepared for the new 
village as addressed at subsection 15 of this policy. The final number of 
dwellings will be determined through a design -led approach and s patial 
framework diagram included in the SPD. It will be classified as a Rural 
Centre once built.  
 
2.  The new village will be developed to high standards of design and 
layout. A key consideration will be the relationship with other 
settlements in the A428 c orridor, and maintaining rural character and 
separation of individual villages.  
 
3. It will deliver an example of excellence in sustainable development and 
healthier living, which will make a significant contribution to the long 
term development needs of the  Cambridge area.  
 
4. The Major Development Site, which will accommodate the built 
development of the new village, is shown on the Policies Map. The 
area to be planned through the SPD is also shown on the Policies Map. 
This includes additional land to ensure that the development potential 
of the former airfield site is maximised and to ensure that the new 
village includes green infrastructure  including formal and informal open 
space, strategic, landscaping and green separation, particularly from 
Caldecote / Hi ghfields to help it fit into its rural setting.  
 
The Site:  
 
5. The built area of the settlement will be contained  within the Major 
Development Site, and the location of major land uses and the design 
of the edges of the new village will have particular regard  to ensuring 
an appropriate relationship with Cambourne and Highfields Caldecote.  
  
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
73 
  Measures to Address Landscape, Townscape and Historic Setting of the 
New Village, and Deliver a High Quality New Development:  
 
6. The new village will:  
a. Establish and follow d esign principles to deliver a high quality 
development responding to local character, but also with its own 
identity;  
b. Provide s trategic landscaping within and beyond the Major  
Development Site to deliver a high quality landscaped setting 
around  the boundary of the settlement to avoid it appearing as 
part of a ribbon of urban development south of the A428, to 
maintain the rural nature of the Broadway and ensure separation 
from Cambourne, and to ensure countryside separation from 
Caldecote / Highf ields and Bourn . The strategic landscaping 
along the eastern boundary of the Strategic Site south of the 
existing employment area will include a substantial and 
continuous woodland belt, including land within the Major 
Development Site; 
c. Protect and enhance  the setting of listed buildings near to the site;  
d. Incorporate necessary mitigation to sensitive boundaries, with 
regard to noise, including the A428,  using landscaped earth 
bunds.  
 
Delivery of a Significant Network of Green Infrastructure:  
 
7. The new villag e will:  
a. Provide a high degree of connectivity to existing corridors and 
networks,  including through an enhanced network of footpaths 
and bridleways;  
b. Include areas accessible to the public as well as areas with more 
restricted access with the aim of enhanci ng biodiversity;  
c. Retain  existing woods, hedges, and water features which would 
contribute to the character and amenity of the village or 
separation from surrounding communities, managed to enhance 
their ecological value;  
d. Consider the multifunctional value of spaces, e.g. amenity, 
landscape, biodiversity, recreation and drainage;  
e. Take account of a full programme of ecological survey and 
monitoring, to guide a biodiversity management plan to provide 
appropriate mitigation and enhancement.  
 
(contin ued) 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
74 
  Creat ion of a comprehensive movement network:  
 
8. The new village  will be founded on a comprehensive movement network 
for the whole village,  that connects key locations including the village 
centre and schools to encourage the use of sustainable modes of travel 
and includes:  
a. Significant Improvements in Public Transport, including:  
i. Provision of a  segregated bus link from Cambourne to Bourn 
Airfield new village across the Broadway, and on through the 
development to the junction of the St Neots Road with 
Highfields Ro ad; 
ii. Any measures necessary to ensure that a bus journey 
between Caldecote / Highfields and the junction of the A428 
and the A1303 is direct and unaffected by any congestion 
suffered by general traffic;  
iii. Provision of  high quality bus priority measures  or busway on 
or parallel to  the A1303 between its junction with the A428 
and Queens Road, Cambridge;  
b. Measures to Promote Cycling and Walking, including:  
i. Provision of a   network of attractive, direct, safe and 
convenient walking and cycling routes from the start of the 
development  linking homes to public transport and the main 
areas of activity such as the village centre, schools and 
employment areas;  
ii. Provision of a  direct, segregated high quality pedestrian and 
cycle links to west Cambridge, Cambourne, Caldecote / 
Highfields, Hardwick and Bourn;  
iii. A Smarter Choices package including residential, school and 
workplace travel planning.  
c.  Highway Improvements  including : 
i. Include m easures to mitigate the traffic impact of the new 
village on surrounding villages and roads;  
ii. Provide  convenient vehicular access, with at least two 
separate access points to the north west and north east of 
the site;  
iii. Ensure that there will be no direct vehicular access to the 
Broadway for southbound traffic from the new village  (except 
buses and bicycles).   
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
75 
  Sustainability:  
 
9. The new village will incorporate and deliver  opportunities to exceed 
sustainable design and construction  standards established by the Local 
Plan. These measures could include combined heat and power.  
 
Infrastruct ure Requirements:  
 
10. The new village will:  
a. Ensure t he provision, management and maintenance of 
infrastructure, services and facilities to meet the needs of the 
village;  
b. Make appropriate  arrangements for foul drainage and sewage 
disposal,  to be explored and identified through a Foul Drainage  
Strategy;  
c. Ensure the p rovision, management and on -going maintenance of 
sustainable surface water drainage measures to control the risk of 
flooding on site and which will reduce the risk of flooding to areas 
downstream and  upstream of the development.  
 
Community  Development:  
 
11. Measures  will be required  to assist the development of a new 
community, such as through  community development workers.  
 
Site Preparation:  
 
12. Developers will be required to : 
a. Undertake s ite wide investigat ion and assessment of land 
contamination and other issues resulting from former land uses, 
including military use, to ensure the land is suitable for the 
proposed end use and is not presenting a risk to the environment.  
b. Ensure that all ordnance is removed from the site in ways that 
ensure the development can take place without unacceptable risk 
to workers and neighbours including major disrupti on to the wider 
public off site.  
 
(continued)  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
76 
  
3.43 Land at Bourn Airfield is allocated for the creation of a sustainable new village 
of approximately 3,500 dwellings. It provides another opportunity for the reuse 
of previously developed land to meet the housing and empl oyment needs of 
the Cambridge area.  
 
3.44 This is a long term development opportunity. Development will take place over 
the plan period,  and beyond.  The implementation of the new village development 
provided for by this policy will be informed by a SPD produced  in accordance with 
policy paragraph 15 and the local community and stakeholders will be  engaged in Phasing and  Delivery:  
 
13. The delivery of the new village, including a ny individual phases, 
must:  
a. Be in accordance with the spatial framework diagram set out in 
the Supplementary Planning Document to ensure a 
comprehensive development of the site as a whole that will not 
prejudice the creation of a fully functio ning and succ essful new 
village;  
b. Be informed by appropriate strategies, a ssessments and 
evidence reports;  
c. Plan for essential services, facilities and infrastructure to be 
provided in a comprehensive manner, anticipating future needs, 
and establishing suitable mechanism s to deliver the 
infrastructure in a timely and efficient way to achieve the 
delivery of the new village, including the needs of individual 
phases, and the requirements on developers ; 
d. Make satisfactory arrangements to ensure appropriate  
engagement and cons ultation with local people and 
stakeholders.  
 
Supplementary Planning Document:  
 
14. The SPD to be prepared for the Strategic Site shown on the Policies 
Map will provide further guidance and detail on the implementation of 
Policy SS/7 . The SPD will include:  
a. An overarching , high le vel vision for the new village;   
b. Consideration of relevant context including ke y constraints and 
opportunities;  
c. The broad location of the components of the new village which 
are essential to support comprehensive and seamless 
developme nt. A spatial framework diagram will be included that 
ensures the creation of a sustainable, legible and distinctive 
new settlement;  
d. Broadly how the development is to be phased, including the 
delivery of key infrastructure.  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
77 
 its preparation.  The policy above establishes  requirements and  objectives  that 
will need to be addressed in the SPD, and subsequently by developers.  
 
3.45 The Policies Map  identifies the  Major Development Site which will 
accommodate the built development of the new village and infrastructure to 
support it. Not all the site will be developed within the Plan period and large 
parts of it will remain undeveloped and green after the settlement is complete 
to provide a substantial green setting for the settlement. A wider Strategic Site  
is identified to be addressed by the SP D. This will allow the consideration of 
measures to mitigate the wider impacts of the village, s uch as through 
strategic landscaping and green infrastructure, to ensure that it will remain 
physically separate from surrounding villages especially the closest villages of 
Caldecote / Highfields, Bourn and Cambourne.   
 
3.46 The landscape strategy will avoid creating the appearance of a ribbon of 
development south of the A428, demonstrate how landscape and biodiversity 
enhancements will be achieved in the area, ensure substantial landscaped 
separation between settlements and maintain the rural character of the  Broadway.  
 
3.47 It is important that any urban related open uses, such as playing fields are 
carefully located and designed to ensure they do not reduce the rural 
character of the landscaped setting in visual terms, particularly having regard 
to matters such a s fencing and floodlighting.  
 
3.48 All necessary community services and facilities will be provided by the 
development, either on -site or through contributions to off -site provision 
secured through a planning obligation, for example in relation to off -site 
transport infrastructure.  
 
3.49 A secondary school will be provided on site to serve the needs of the 
development.  Local experience has shown that new settlements of this scale 
can support a secondary school which is also important for community 
cohesion. With fur ther growth planned at Cambourne West it would be not be 
possible to expand that school to meet the needs generated by development 
at Bourn Airfield. The secondary school will be provided according to a trigger 
point in the planning obligation for the site  to ensure timely provision of this 
key community facility.  At least two primary schools and provision for early 
years childcare will be required.  
 
3.50 A fundamental requirement for this site is that it will be a sustainable 
development which is highly acces sible and permeable to all its residents on 
foot, by cycle and public transport, to support sustainable transport, recreation 
and health. Segregated provision for buses and cycle use provides for quicker 
journeys, greater use and improved safety. Together with development at 
West Cambourne extensive off -site transport infrastructure provision will be 
required to mitigate transport impacts, particularly between the new village and 
Cambridge.   
 
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
78 
 3.51 The impact of development on a number of natural resources will  also be 
important. This includes surface water drainage and sewage discharge and 
the need to take account of the impact of the development on the wider 
catchment, particularly in view of known problems on the Bourn Brook. The 
impact on the wider catchment  must therefore be addressed and the potential 
for a catchment wide assessment / improvements should be considered.   
 
Sustainable Villages  
 
Cambourne West  
 Policy SS/8: Cambourne West  
 
1. Land shown on the Policies Map south of the A428, north west of 
Lower Cambourne, including an area within the current Business 
Park is allocated for the development of a sustainable, fourth linked 
village to Cambourne of approximately 1,200 dwellings by  2031 with 
high levels of green infrastructure, subject to:  
 
Masterplanning  
 
2. Development taking place in accordance with a Masterplan to be 
submitted for approval by the Local Planning Authority as part of the 
first application for planning permission. The M asterplan will set out 
the principles of good design and be supplemented by a Design and 
Access Statement. Design Guides / Design Codes for the 
development will be prepared as part of applications for the grant of 
approval for reserved matters. The Masterp lan will demonstrate how 
the development will integrate with the rest of Cambourne, the 
Business Park and with Cambourne Village College.  
 
3. A Landscape Strategy must be submitted for approval by the Local 
Planning Authority as part of the first application for planning 
permission, and include the provision of a high quality landscaped 
setting around the boundary of the settlement to avoid it appearing as 
part of a ribbon of development south of the A428, to protect the rural 
character of the A1198, to mitiga te the impact on Caxton village and 
provide appropriate open space between the new village and Lower 
Cambourne. This setting will form part of the publicly accessible 
green infrastructure of the settlement, and be well connected to 
Cambourne’s existing gre en network and the wider countryside,  
including through an enhanced network of footpaths and bridleways.  
 
(continued)  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
79 
 4. Building heights and landscaping will minimise the visibility of the 
settlement and the secondary school from adjoining roads to the nor th, 
west and south.  
 
5. Existing woods, hedges, unimproved grassland areas and water 
features will be retained which would contribute to the character and 
amenity of Cambourne West, managed to enhance their ecological 
value and linked together by areas of ope n space to provide a network 
of accessible green infrastructure.  
 
Provision of the Following Land Uses  
 
6. Residential, primarily dwelling homes (Use Class C3), but could also 
include nursing and residential care homes. Housing densities to vary 
across the si te with higher densities close to the village centre and bus 
routes and lower densities around the settlement boundary. The 
starting point for negotiations concerning the provision of affordable 
housing on this site will be Policy H/ 10.   
 
7. Land south of th e Business Park access road will be developed 
primarily for residential uses, and will include provision of a segregated 
cycle and pedestrian path linking to Cambourne Village College along 
the southern boundary, enhancing the existing footpaths and 
bridle ways. It will only come forward once replacement employment 
land in criterion 7 is secured;  
 
8. An equivalent quantity of employment land to that lost on the Business 
Park (8.1 ha. in June 2013) will be delivered in the northern part of the 
Cambourne West sit e rather than its current location. In order to be 
compatible with residential development this will primarily be in Use 
Class B1, although other suitable employment uses will be included to 
provide a mix of employment opportunities, including smaller unit s.  
 
9. Small scale shops and other town centre uses to serve the needs of the 
village and adjoining Business Park. Provide for convenience shopping 
needs with a store of up to 500 m2 (gross floorspace) within a 600 
metre walk of the great majority of homes. A retail assessment will be 
submitted with the first planning application to demonstrate that the 
quantity of town centre uses proposed will support the needs of the 
development whilst not having a significant adverse impact on the 
vitality and viability o f other centres including Cambourne village centre.  
 
(continued)  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
80 
 10. If necessary to expand the capacity of the school, to provide land to 
enable the expansion of Cambourne Village College.  
 
11. Community needs for other services and facilities being provided in 
accordance with policies and standards set out in Chapter 9 including 
Policy SC/4.  
 
Access  
 
12. Development will provide for the additional travel demands generated. 
Coordination will be required with other developments on the A428 
corridor to deliver the nece ssary improvements. The development will 
need to address, but is not limited to, the following (subject to detailed 
strategy development and to the transport assessment of development 
proposals):  
a. Any measures necessary to ensure that a bus journey between 
Cambourne West  and the junction of the A428 and the A1303 is 
direct and unaffected by any congestion suffered by general traffic;  
b. High quality segregated bus priority measures on the A1303 
between its junction with the A428 and Queens Road, Cambridge;  
c. Direct, segregated high quality pedestrian and cycle links to west 
Cambridge, Papworth Everard, Caxton and Bourn;  
d. The impact of the proposals on the junctions of the A428 with the 
A1303 and the A1198 will be assessed in detail and contributions 
towards or dir ect funding of improvements to the junctions may be 
required;  
e. Delivery or funding of any measures required to mitigate the traffic 
impact on Bourn, Caldecote, Toft, Comberton and Barton;  
f. A Smarter Choices package including residential, school and 
workplace  travel planning;  
g. Vehicular access to be provided through an enhanced route 
through the Business Park, one or more access points from the 
Caxton Bypass, and via Sheepfold Lane;  
h. Bus prioritisation measures, including a bus link from one of the 
roundabouts o n the Caxton bypass through the Cambourne West 
site, linking through to Great Cambourne by the Cambourne 
Business Park;  
i. Creation of high quality segregated cycle and pedestrian routes 
within the new settlement.  
 
(continued)  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
81 
  
3.52  Cambourne comprises three linked villages of Great, Upper and Lower 
Cambourne, separated by substantial landscaped areas. Land at Cambourne 
West is allocated  for the creation of a new fourth sustainable linked village of 
approximately 1,200 dwellings. Large parts of the site will remain undeveloped 
and green after the fourth linked village is com plete to provide a substantial 
green setting for the development and the rest of Cambourne and to retain 
separation from Lower Cambourne and further enhance the green 
infrastructure network of Cambourne. The development must also ensure that 
it will remain  physically separate from Caxton village.  
 
 
3.53  A key issue is the integration of the fourth linked village with the rest of 
Cambourne. The original Masterplan creates some challenges for integrating Other Requirements  
 
13. Sustainable  design and construction measures which will exceed the 
minimum standards set out in Policies CC/3 and CC/4 in recognition of 
the opportunities to exceed those standards afforded by strategic scale 
developments;  
 
14. Satisfactory provision being made for the p rovision, management and 
on-going maintenance of sustainable surface water drainage facilities to 
control the risk of flooding on site and which will reduce the risk of 
flooding to areas downstream and upstream of the development;  
 
15. Satisfactory arrangement s being made for foul drainage and sewage 
disposal,  to be explored and identified through a Foul Drainage 
Strategy;  
 
16. Satisfactory arrangements to control traffic noise from the A428 and 
A1198 which do not involve the use of acoustic fences and walls such 
as gently contoured landscaped soil bunds;  
 
17. Planning permission will only be granted where there are satisfactory 
legal agreements for the improvement, provision, management and 
maintenance of infrastructure, services and facilities, open spaces and 
other m atters necessary to make the scheme acceptable in planning 
terms;  
 
18. Satisfactory arrangements being made concerning site accesses, haul 
roads, construction traffic routes, storage compounds, use of plant and 
machinery, working days and hours, and retention of construction spoil 
on site.  
 South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
82 
 additional development and a requirement of the proposed Ca mbourne West 
development is that it includes all mode car, bus, pedestrian and cycle access 
to the village via a remodelling of the Business Park access road, as well as 
from Sheepfold Lane and the Caxton Bypass. With the new village and the 
access through  the Business Park, there is potential to relocate the remaining 
employment land on the Business Park onto the northern part of the new 
village and replace it with residential development that will help link and 
integrate the new village with the rest of C ambourne. The relocation of the 
employment land provides an opportunity for a more flexible range of 
employment uses to serve Cambourne as a whole, including small units.  
 
3.54 The Landscape Strategy will avoid creating the appearance of a ribbon of 
urban devel opment south of the A428 and extending down the A1198, 
demonstrate how landscape and biodiversity enhancements will be achieved 
in the area, ensure substantial landscaped separation between settlements 
and maintain the rural character of the A1198.   
 
3.55 It is important that any urban related open uses, such as playing fields are 
carefully located and designed to ensure they do not reduce the rural 
character of the landscaped setting in visual terms, particularly having regard 
to matters such as fencing and fl oodlighting.  
 
3.56 The development will help meet the high level of housing need in the district.  
To this end it must balance the need to make best use of land whilst providing 
a high quality development. The final number of dwellings will be determined 
throug h a design -led approach and the required Masterplan and Design 
Guides / Design Codes. A range of house types, sizes and mix will also be 
important in ensuring a balanced community.  
 
3.57 Providing a substantial amount of affordable housing is fundamentally 
impo rtant to the growth strategy for the Cambridge Sub Region. It is necessary 
to sustain the growth of the local economy and to ensure that local people are 
not priced out of the housing market by economic success. Strategic 
developments like Cambourne West a re the key to addressing the affordable 
housing requirements of the area.  
 
3.58 Small scale shops and other uses of an appropriate scale to serve the needs 
of the village will be provided and there is potential to locate them so they are 
accessible from the adj oining Business Park to help take advantage of the 
potential additional custom and also to provide facilities more local to the 
business park, whilst not competing with the main Cambourne centre.   
 
3.59 All necessary community services and facilities will be p rovided by the 
development, either onsite or through contributions to offsite provision secured 
through a planning obligation, for example in relation to off -site transport 
infrastructure or elsewhere in Cambourne. Open space provision will also 
provide op portunities for enhanced nature conservation value, and will enable 
quiet enjoyment of the natural environment as part of an enhancement of the 
extensive green network at Cambourne.  South Ca mbridgeshire Local Plan       Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 3        Strategic Sites  
 
83 
  
3.60 If the development of Cambourne West requires the expansion of Cambourne 
Village College, land and funding should be provided to enable this expansion.  
At least one new primary school and provision for early years childcare will 
also be required.  
 
3.61 A fundamental requirement for this site is that it will be highly accessible and  
permeable to all its residents on foot, by cycle and public transport, to support 
sustainable transport, recreation and health. High quality provision for buses 
and segregated cycle use provides for quicker journeys, greater use and 
improved safety. Toget her with development at Bourn Airfield, extensive 
off-site transport infrastructure provision will be required to mitigate transport 
impacts.  
 
3.62 The impact of development on a number of natural resources will also be 
important. This includes surface water d rainage and sewage discharge and 
the need to take account of the impact of the development on the wider 
catchment, particularly in view of known problems of Bourn Brook. The impact 
on the wider catchment must therefore  be considered and addressed.  
 
3.63 It is important that the services, facilities, landscape and infrastructure needed 
by this development are not only provided to a high quality, but that they are 
properly and effectively implemented, managed and maintained if they are to 
meet the needs of the com munity in the long term. There would be 
advantages in a single organisation taking responsibility for maintenance to 
avoid fragmentation and ensure continuity in approach. The policy is not 
specific about the number of management strategies. However, there  should 
be a single agreed management strategy covering recreation, landscape and 
biodiversity. The inclusion of water and drainage features within open spaces 
would have significant advantages to ensuring a holistic approach to the 
management of open spac es where the respective needs of the various land 
uses and functions within those spaces can be addressed and should 
therefore be investigated.  
 
3.64 Construction spoil should be retained on site. Construction traffic routes 
should avoid passing through local v illages.   
 
3.65 Following the submission of the Local Plan , the Council resolved to grant 
permission in January 2017 for a mixed use development including 2,350 
homes, on a larger site which includes the land allocated in Policy SS/8.  
 
 
  Chapter 4Chapter 4   
Climate ChangeClimate Change   
Cambourne, South CambridgeshireCambourne, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
87 
 Chapter 4     Climate Change  
 
4.1 Our day-to-day activities and lifestyles such as heating and powering our homes 
and using our cars are releasing significant quantities of greenhouse gases  into the 
atmosphere , affecting the climate in ways that could threaten how we live both 
today and tomorrow.  Greenhouse gas emissions are the collective name for a range 
of gases that trap some of the sun’s warmth within the earth’s atmosphere, and the 
most prevalent greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide. The effects of climate change 
include shifts in our seasons, hotter drier summers, warmer wetter winters , rising 
sea levels  and more extreme weather events such as droughts, flash floods, and 
strong winds. National policy is leading the response to climate change but there 
are measure s that can be taken through the Local Plan to reduce our contributions 
to greenhouse gas emissions and adapt development to deal with the 
consequences  of climate change.   
 
4.2 Both red ucing the impacts of , and being less vulnerable to , climate change is an 
essential part of delivering the environmental element of sustainable development. 
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF , 2012 ) states that planning can 
help to create places that secure radical reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, 
minimise vulnerability and provide resilience to the impacts of climate change, and 
deliver renewable and low carbon energy systems.  
 
4.3 The UK has committed to targets for reducing greenhouse gas em issions, and 
increasing energy generation from renewable sources, these are:  
• an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 (from 1990 levels);  
• a 26% reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2020 (from 1990 levels); and  
• sourcing 15% of its energy from renewable sources by 2020 (in 2010 3.3% of 
UK energy came from renewable sources).  
Although meeting these targets will go some way to slowing down climate change , it 
is not going to immediately stop the changes happening , therefore  developments 
will s till need to be designed to be resilient to the predicted impacts .  
 
4.4 A range of measures will contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and 
protecting our residents and business from the consequences of climate change:  
• buildings that will minimise he at loss in colder weather and also minimise 
overheating in hotter weather;  
• locating new developments where they will minimise the need for travel by 
car and more sustainable alternatives are available ;  
• including energy and water efficiency in the design a nd construction of 
buildings ;  
• integrating renewable and low carbon energy technologies within a 
building(s)  or delivering community renewable energy projects ;  
• incorporating green spaces and vegetation within developments to increase 
the absorption of carbon dioxide emissions and surface water run -off; and  
• ensuring that buildings are designed  to protect their o ccupiers from extreme 
weather events .  
 
4.5 This chapter sets out the planning policies that will ensure that development 
delivered in South Cambrid geshire can better cope with the predicted impacts of South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
88 
 climate change as well as helping to ensure that it reduces  greenhouse gas 
emissions . New d evelopment and refurbishment  of existing buildings  in the district 
provides an opportunity to deliver sustainab le schemes  and these opportunities will 
need to be integrated within the district’s unique built and natural heritage .  
 
Mitigation and Adaptation to  Climate Change  
 
  
4.6 The National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF , 2012 ) requires that local planning 
authorities adopt proactive strategies to mitigate and adapt to climate change.  
 
4.7 Climate change mitigation means taking action to reduce the causes of climate 
change , primarily through reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Designing and 
constructing developments that are extremely energy efficient or make the best use 
of renewable energy technologies are both ways  of helping to mitigate further 
climate change.   
 
4.8 Climate change adaptation means  ways that a development can be adapted to deal 
with the weather related consequences of climate change. Using water more Key Facts : 
• In March 2012 there were planning permissions for approximately 
40MW of renewable energy from 15 wind turbines, two solar energy 
farms, two biomass boiler s, and 22 arrays of photovoltaic panels.  
• Planning permission for the first community wind turbine in the district, 
near Gamlingay, was approved in April 2012 and installed in 2013.  
• Gas and electricity consumption in the dist rict has fallen in the last 
few years however fuel poverty is affecting 13.5% of households.  
• The Sustainable Parish Energy Partnership consists of 27 Parish 
Councils working with volunteers to help residents cut fuel bills and 
reduce carbon emissions.  
• Environmentally friendly show homes for new developments have 
been opened at Cambourne  (February 2013) and Trumpington 
Meadows  (August 2012) . 
• The district is designated an area of Water Stress and with areas 
subject to flood risk.  
Policy CC/1: Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change  
 
Planning permission will only be granted for proposals that demonstrate and 
embed the principles of climate change mitigation and adaptation into the 
development. Applicants must submit a Sustainability Statement to 
demonstrate how these principles have been embedded into the 
development proposal. The level of information provided in the Sustainability 
Statement should be proportionate to the scale and nature of the proposed 
develo pment.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
89 
 efficiently , reducing overheating and controlling high levels of rainwater run -off are 
all examples of adapting a development to respond to changes in our climate.  
 
4.9 The principles of climate change adaptation and mitigation are embedded within the 
policies included  in this chapter and other chapters in this plan , and therefore  
references are provided  in the paragraphs below  to the detailed policies.  Further 
guidance on what should be included in a Sustainability Statement will be provided 
in the review of the District Design Guide SPD.   
 
4.10 To mitigate climate change, proposals should demonstrate:  
• high level s of energy efficiency ( Building Regulations ); 
• use and generation of renewable and low carbon energy (Policy CC/3);  
• promotion of sustainable forms of transport, such as using buses, cycling or 
walking, and reduction of car use (Policy HQ/1  & Transport Policies ); 
• recycling and waste reduction both during construction and occupation 
(Policy CC/6); and  
• inclusion of high speed broadband to facilitate home working (Policy  TI/10 ). 
 
4.11 To adapt to the effects of climate change, proposals should:  
• mana ge and conserve water resources (Policy CC/4 ); 
• demonstrate that flood risk from all sources has been avoided or managed 
(Policy CC/9 ); 
• use Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) (Policy CC/8 ); 
• use layout, building orientation, design, and materials to ensure properties 
are not susceptible to overheating and include open space and vegetation for 
shading and cooling, and to detain surface water run -off (Policy HQ/1); and 
• create a better linked habitat network by conserving, creating or enlarging 
existing habitats  (Policy NH/4 ). 
 
4.12  The policy requires applicants to submit a Sustainability Statement to demonstrate 
how the principles of climate change mitigation and adaptation have been 
embedded within the development proposal. The Council woul d recommend that  in 
the case of  larger -scale developments (100 or more dwellings or exceeding 
5,000m2 of other floorspace) that a BREEAM Communities asse ssment is 
undertaken as part of  demonstrating how they have integrated sustainable design 
into the masterplanning  process.  
 
4.13  To help local authorities, businesses and other organisations to consider the 
impacts of climate change and appropriate adaptation, the Environment Agency has 
published ‘Climate Ready’ – a set of tools and information to help live with the 
chan ging climate, guidance on adaptation, and maps showing detailed climate 
change information for each river basin district (using data from the UK Climate 
Change Projections 2009).   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
90 
 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
 
4.14 This policy sets out the criteria that must be considered when assessing proposa ls 
for developments to generate renewable or low carbon energy from freestanding 
installations , such as wind or solar farms.  
 
4.15 Renewable and low carbon energy generation sources can either fully or partially 
displace the use of fossil fuels. These sources include  technologies such as 
photovoltaic panels, wind turbines, solar thermal panels, air or ground source heat 
pumps, anaerobic digestion , combined heat and power plants, and biomass boilers  
where heat is generated . These technologies need to be located on-site or close to 
the energy users.  
 
4.16 Using renewable and low carbon energy technologies to generate electricity and/or 
heat will help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and should also progressively 
improve the security, availability and affordability of energy by increasing the 
diversity of sources we can access . 
 Policy CC/2: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation  
 
1. Planning permiss ion for proposals to generate energy from r enewable 
and low carbon sources , with the exception of proposals for wind  
turbines,  will be permitted provided that:  
a. The development, and any associated infrastructure,  either 
individually or cumulatively with other developments, does not 
have unacceptable adverse impacts on heritage assets (including 
their settings), natural assets,  high quality  agricultural land,  the 
landscape, or the amenity of nearby residents (visual impact, 
noise, shadow flicker, odour, fu mes, traffic);  
b. The development can be connected efficiently to existing national 
energy infrastructure , or by direct connection to an associated 
development or community project,  or the energ y generated 
would be used for on -site needs only;  
c. Provision is ma de for decommissioning once the operation has 
ceased, including the removal of the facilities and the restoration 
of the site; and  
d. Developers have engaged effectively with the local community 
and local authority.  
 
2. Planning  permission for wind energy develo pment involving one o r 
more wind turbines  will only be permitted provided that:  
e. The development site is in an area identified as suitable for wind 
energy development in a Neighbourhood Plan; and  
f. Following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning 
impacts identified by affected local communities have been fully 
addressed and therefore the proposal has their backing.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
91 
 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy in New Developments  
 
4.17 New developments, such as housing, employment and community uses, can 
generate their own renewable energy by integrating smaller technologies such as 
solar panels into their design. This will also contribute to the achievement of 
national renewable energy targets. To meet the requirements of the policy, an 
applicant should design the development to achieve compliance with Part L of 
Building Regulations, and then use this as the baseline for calculating the amount 
of carbon emissions that should be met through the provision of renewable or low 
carbon energy technologies in accordance with the policy. The choice of which 
renewable or l ow carbon energy technology to use to deliver compliance with the 
policy rests with the applicant and should respond to the specific characteristics of 
the development proposed.  Detailed guidance on the implementation of Policy 
CC/3 and the supporting docu ments that should be submitted to demonstrate 
compliance with the policy will be provided in a Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
 
4.18 The Council, in partnership with three other local authorities in Cambridgeshire, 
commissioned a review of their existing polic ies that require reduction in carbon 
emissions from new developments through the installation of on -site renewable 
energy generation technologies. The ‘Review of Merton Rule policies in four local 
planning authorities in Cambridgeshire ’ considered the effe ctiveness of these 
policies and highlighted assessment, enforcement and monitoring concerns and 
inconsistency in delivery of the policy. The study found that either solar thermal or 
photovoltaic panels or a combination of both were the most tried and teste d 
technologies that are also low maintenance and customer friendly.  
 Policy CC/3: Renewable and Low Carbon Energy in New Developments  
 
1. Proposals for new dwellings and new non -residential buildings of 
1,000m2 or more will be required to reduce carbon emissions  by a 
minimum of 10% (to be calculated by reference to a baseline for the 
anticipated carbon emissions for the property as defined by Building 
Regulations) t hrough the use of on -site renewable energy a nd low  
carbon technologies.  
 
2. This could be provided through the installation of an integrated system 
or site  wide solutions involving the installation of a system that is not 
integrated within the new building .  For a site wide solution , evidence 
must be submitted demonstrating that the installation is technically 
feasible  and is capable of being installed . 
 
3. For growth areas and new settlements, site wide renewable and low 
carbon energy sol utions that maximise on -site generation from these 
sources will be sought, such as renewable and low carbon district 
heating systems.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
92 
 Water Efficiency  
 
 
4.19 The NPPF (2012) states that planning should support the transition to a low carbon 
future in a changing climate, and to achieve this should seek ways to radically 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, actively support energy efficiency improvements 
and use nationally de scribed standards when setting any local requirements for a 
building’s sustainability.  
 
4.20 The Government has created a new approach for the setting of technical standards 
for new housing, including relating to water efficiency. The web based planning 
practice guidance  (PPG) states that local planning authorities have the option to set 
additional technical requirements exceeding the minimum standards required by 
Building Regulations in respect of w ater efficiency where there is a clear local need.  
 
4.21 The Cambridge Water Company is in an area of water stress as designated by the 
Environment Agency . The average person in the UK uses 150 litres of water per 
day. Water is a finite resource, and abstractio n can have environmental costs. 
Cambridge Water Company’s Resources Management Plan shows that beyond 
2035, without additional resources or greater efficiency, the need for water to serve 
development will be greater than currently available supply. Cambrid ge Water 
Company are carrying out an enhanced programme of installing water meters to 
encourage reduced water use and are raising awareness of the need to save water.  
 
4.22 Reflecting these local circumstances the policy requires higher water  efficiency 
standar ds than the n ational Building R egulations. The efficiency measures required 
can be delivered at relatively low additional cost.  
  Policy CC/4 : Water Efficiency   
 
1. All new residential developments must achieve as a minimum  water 
efficiency equivalent to 110 litres per person per day.  
 
2. Proposals for  non-residential  development  must be accompanied by a 
water conservation strategy, which demonstrates a  minimum water 
efficiency standard equivalent to the  BREEAM standard for 2 credits for 
water use le vels unless demonstrated not practicable.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
93 
 Sustainable Show Homes  
 
 
4.23 Sustainable show  homes  can demonstrate environmentally sustainable alternatives 
for finishes, materials, fixtures and technologies as options that can be purchased 
when a dwelling is bought off -plan. Examples of options include:  
• renewable technologies such as solar panels;  
• rainwate r harvesting and greywater recycling devices ;  
• windows and doors from sustainably sourced materials, with significantly 
improved ‘u’ values;  
• mechanical ventilation and heat recovery;  
• smart energy metering and management systems;  
• low energy internal and ext ernal light fittings;  
• water efficient toilets and other sanitary ware fixtures or fittings;  
• white goods with high energy efficiency ratings and low water consumption;  
• raised growing beds, composting and enhanced recycling bins;  
• sustainably  sourced and low embodied energy flooring and wall finishes, 
kitchens and furniture . 
 
4.24 The Council has secured th e provision of sustainable show  homes at Trumpington 
Meadows and Cambourne.  
  Policy CC/ 5: Sustainable Show Homes  
 
1. On developments where a show home is being provided, a sustainable 
show  home must be provided  (either separately or instead of the show 
home)  demonstrating environmentally sustainable alternatives beyond 
those provided to achieve the  standard agreed for  the development.  
 
2. The sustainable alternatives can be purchased when a dwelling is 
bought off -plan and must be fully functional in the show  home and 
positively marketed. Purchasers should be clear on where alternatives 
are available, why it is more sustainable, and the cost  of including the 
alternative.  
 
3. It must be as practical as possible for the purchaser to buy the 
sustainable alternatives as to purchase the standard options and the 
environmentally friendly options must be offered at a price (including 
cost of delivery an d/or installation) that reflects the same profit margin 
to the developer as other standard buyer’s options or extras.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
94 
 Construction Methods  
 
4.25 The construction process for any new development utilises a significant amount of 
natural resources and generates construction waste and spoil. Construction of new 
developments can adversely affect the amenity of surrounding occupiers and the 
local environ ment through the generation of noise, smells and dust.  
 
4.26 A Construction Environmental Management Plan  or similar document should set out 
the management measures which the builders will adopt and implement for the Policy CC/6: Construction Methods  
 
1. Development which by its nature or extent is likely to have some 
adverse impact on the local environment and amenity during 
construction and/or generate construction waste must:  
a. Carefully manage materials already on -site (including soils), or 
brought to the site, to reduce the amount of waste produce d and 
maximise the reuse or recycling of materials either onsite or 
locally. Any construction spoil reused within the development 
should take account of the landscape character and avoid the 
creation of features alien to the topography;  
b. Ensure that constru ctors are considerate to neighbouring 
occupiers by restricting the hours of noisy operations and by 
locating storage compounds and using plant or machinery to 
avoid noise, smells, dust, visual or other adverse impacts.  
 
2. Where practicable, construction tra ffic will be required to be routed to 
avoid roads passing through villages.  
 
3. Any temporary haul roads must:  
c. Be agreed with the Local Planning Authority;  
d. Be located, designed and landscaped in such a way as to avoid 
any adverse impacts on existing resident s and businesses;  
e. Have an agreed methodology for where they cross public rights 
of way; and  
f. Include provision for the cleaning of vehicle tyres to avoid the 
deposition of mud / debris on the public highway and the 
generation of dust.  
 
4. Applicants must submit supporting documents with any planning 
application to demonstrate how their development will comply with this 
policy; this should include a Construction Environmental Management 
Plan (CEMP) or similar document and may include registr ation with the 
Considerate Constructors Scheme. The level of information provided in 
the supporting documents, including CEMP or similar document, 
should be proportionate to the scale and nature of the proposed 
development.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
95 
 construction of the proposed development to avoid and manage any construction 
effects on: the environment and surrounding communities.  
 
4.27 The ‘Considerate Constructors Scheme ’ is a national initiative set up by the 
construction industry . Any construction sites and companies that register with the 
sche me are monitored against a Code of Considerate Practice , which includes 
guidelines for respecting the community by considering the impact on their 
neighbours, and for protecting and enhancing the environment.    
 
Water Quality  
 
4.28 The quality of w ater bod ies is measured in terms of their overall ‘ecological status’ 
which is made  up of the ir chemical, biological and physical attributes . The Local 
Plan needs to ensure that development does not result in a deterioration of water 
quality, and that opportunities are taken for enhancement to support the 
achievement of the Water Framewo rk Directive standards.  
 
4.29 In South Cambridgeshire the majority of rivers are currently of moderate or poor 
ecological status. Most failures are due to phosphates and man -made alterations to 
river and bank form. In much of the south east of the district the  underlying geology 
is chalk, providing a significant source of groundwater which is used for the public 
drinking water supply. It is particularly important that the quality of this water is Policy CC/ 7: Water Quality  
 
1. In order to protect and enhance water quality , all development proposals 
must demonstrate  that: 
a. There are adequate water supply, sewerage and land drainage 
systems (including water sources, water and waste water 
infrastructure) to serve the whole development, or an ag reement 
with the relevant service provider to ensure the provision of the 
necessary infrastructure prior to the occupation of the 
development. Where development is being phased, each phase 
must demonstrate sufficient water supply and waste water 
conveyance ,  treatment  and discharge capacity;  
b. The quality of ground, surface or water bodies will not be harmed, 
and opportunities have been explored and taken for improvements 
to water quality, including renaturalisation of river morphology, and 
ecology;  
c. Appropri ate consideration is given to sources of pollution, and 
appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) measures 
incorporated to protect water quality from polluted surface water 
runoff.  
 
2. Foul drainage to a public sewer should be provided wherever possibl e, 
but where it is demonstrated that it is not feasible, alternative facilities 
must not pose unacceptable risk to water quality or quantity.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
96 
 protected from pollution in these areas. Groundwater Protection m aps are prepared 
by the Environment Agency, identifying zones of greatest risk.  
 
4.30 Anglian Water and the Cambridge Water Company are the statutory undertakers 
responsible for water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal. The Environment 
Agency is responsible for water resource management, fluvial flooding, river 
management, pollution control and regulating the handling and disposal of waste 
water . Internal Drainage Boards (IDBs) manage all drainage within their areas 
excluding main rivers. Those applying for p lanning permission should consult 
statutory undertakers and IDBs as they may levy an infrastructure charge.  Maps 
showing the area covered by individual Internal Drainage Boards can be found in 
the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment , and in the Cambr idgeshire Flood 
and Water Supplementary Planning Document . 
 
4.31 South Cambridgeshire is a rural district, and not all developments will have access 
to a public sewer. It is essential that development provide s appropriate plant that 
will treat effluent safely and protect the environment. A package treatment plant will 
be sought where practicable, and only where it is not practicable will a sy stem 
incorporating septic tanks be acceptable.  
 
Sustainable Drainage Systems  
 
4.32 Well planned and well designed surface water management infrastructure is 
necessary for the creation and on going maintenance of sustainable communities. It 
provides a flood risk management function alongside benefits for amenity and Policy CC/ 8: Sustainable Drainage Systems  
 
Development proposals must incorporate appropriate sustainable surface 
water drainage systems (SuDS) appropriate to the nature of the site.  
Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that:  
a. Surface water drainage schemes comply with the Sustainable 
Drainage Systems: Non -statutory technical standards for sustainable 
drainage systems  and the Cambridgeshire Flood and Water 
Supplementary Planning Document  or successor documents;  
b. Opportunities have been taken to integrate sustainable drainage with 
the development, create amenity, enhance biodiversity, and contribute 
to a network of green (an d blue) open space;  
c. Surface water is managed close to its source and on the surface where 
it practicable to do so;  
d. Maximum use has been made of low land take drainage measures, 
such as rain water recycling, green roofs, permeable surfaces and 
water butts;  
e. Appropriate pollution control measures have been incorporated, 
including multiple component treatment trains; and  
f. Arrangements have been established for the whole life management 
and maintenance of surface water drainage systems.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
97 
 biodiversity and can be  linked to a network of green (and blue) open spaces. It can 
also conserve water resources and help improve the quality of water as it passes 
through the system. All these aspects make a significant contribution to climate 
change ada ptation.  
 
4.33 The Government is committed  to protecting people and property from flood risk and 
expects that SuDS will be provided in new developments wherever this is 
appropriate.  However, there is still a risk that SuDS are seen as later additions to 
develo pment, and do not fully realise their potential multifunctional benefits. They 
should be considered from the beginning of the design and masterplanning process , 
taking account of all opportunities and constraints, including heritage and wildlife 
assets.  
 
4.34 In some areas of the district infiltration SuDS will not be practicable due to ground 
conditions, but there are a wide range of measures that can be implemented to find 
suitable solutions for all sites. Detailed guidance on developing proposals that 
include  the use of SuDS that effectively manage water, are aesthetically pleasing, 
conserve, accommodate and enhance biodiversity, and provide amenity for local 
residents is provided in the  Cambridgeshire Flood and Water Supplementary 
Planning Document.  
 
Managing Flood Risk  
Policy CC/9: Managing Flood Risk  
 
1. In order to minimise flood risk, development will only be permitted 
where:  
a. The sequential test and exception tests established by the 
National Planning Policy Framework demonstrate the 
development is acceptable (where required).  
b. Floor levels are 300mm above the 1 in 100 year flood level plus 
an allowance for climate change where appropriate and where 
appropriate and practicable also 300mm above adjacent highway 
levels.  
c. Suitable flood protection / mitigation measures ar e incorporated 
as appropriate to the level and nature of flood risk, which can be 
satisfactorily implemented to ensure safe occupation, access and 
egress. Management and maintenance plans will be required, 
including arrangements for adoption by any public authority or 
statutory undertaker and any other arrangements to secure the 
operation of the scheme throughout its lifetime;  
d. There would be no increase to flood risk elsewhere, and 
opportunities to reduce flood risk elsewhere have been explored 
and taken ( where appropriate), including limiting discharge of 
surface water (post development volume and peak rate) to natural 
greenfield rates or lower, and  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
98 
  
4.35 The N PPF (2012) requires a risk based sequential approach to flood risk, to avoid 
high risk areas and steer development to areas at lower risk. As well as minimising 
risk to the development itself, development should not increase flood risk 
elsewhere , and opportunities should be taken to reduce risk downstream, such as 
by reducing run off rates.  
 
4.36 The Environment Agency publishes a Flood Map for Planning on their website, 
which identifies  areas with an annual likelihood of flooding greater than 1% in any 
year for fluvial inland flooding (equivalent to 1 flood event in 100 years). They do not 
take account of existing flood defences, but show where these are present.  
 
4.37 South Cambridgeshire District Council, in partnership with Cambridge City Council, 
commissioned a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, which explores the nature and 
extent of flood risk across the area, taking account of the anticipated impacts of 
climate change. In addition, Cambridgeshire County Council, now the lead local 
flood management au thority, has prepared a Surface Water Management Plan. 
These should be used to support the consideration of planning applications.  A 
flooding and water management Supplementary Planning Document will be 
prepared in liaison with stakeholders to assist developers and key stakeholders with 
the effective delivery and implementation of the policy .  
 
4.38 The appropriate responsible bodies incl uding The Environment Agency, Anglian 
Water , Internal Drainage Boards and Cambridgeshire County Council should be e. The destination of the discharge obeys the following priority order:  
i. Firstly, to the ground via infiltration;  
ii. Then, to a water body;  
iii. Then, to a surface water sewer;  
iv. Discharge to a foul water or combined sewer is 
unacceptable.  
 
2. Site specific Flood Risk Assessments (FRAs) appropriate to the scale 
and nature of the development  and the risks involved, and which takes 
account of future climate change, will be required for the following:  
f. Development proposals over 1ha in size;  
g. Any other development proposals in flood zones 2 and 3;  
h. Any other development proposals in flood zone 1 where evidence, 
in particular the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment or Surface 
Water Management Plans, indicates there are records of historic 
flooding or other sources of flooding, and/or a need for more 
detai led analysis.  
 
3. FRAs will need to meet national standards and local guidance (including 
recommendations of the South Cambridgeshire and Cambridge City 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2010) and the Phase 1 and 2 Water 
Cycle Strategy or successor documents) .  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 4         Climate Change  
 
99 
 consulted, as appropriate, during the initial design proces s for any new 
development or re development.  
 
 
  Chapter 5Chapter 5   
Delivering High Quality PlacesDelivering High Quality Places   
Impington, South CambridgeshireImpington, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 5        Delivering High Quality Places  
 
103 
 Chapter 5     Delivering High Quality Places  
 
5.1 The National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF , 2012 ) establishes that Planning 
should “ always seek to secure high quality design and a good standard of amenity 
for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings ”.  
 
5.2 South Cambridgeshire has been voted amongst the top 10 places in the country to 
live in a number of nati onal surveys ov er recent years.  The Local Plan seeks to 
shape development of all scales, be that small scale rural housing to major new 
communities, to create sustainable and successful places that protect the special 
qualities of the district’s rural character, whilst u sing the opportunities presented by 
development to enhance the built and natural environment , and create vibrant  
communities . 
 
5.3 The District Council has signed up to the  Cambridgeshire Quality Charter for 
Growth , which is a clear policy statement of the aspiration to create new 
developments that offer communities a fulfilling, visually pleasing and 
environmentally sensitive way of life.   
 
Securing High Quality Design  Key Facts : 
• The district has settlements of varied and distinct local character, 
ranging from compact hamlets through larger villages with linear street 
patterns to new settlements and extensions to the urban fabric of 
Cambridge.  
• The Council has signed up to the Cambridgeshire Quality Charter for 
Growth, published in 2010,  which sets out core principles f or the level 
of quality expected in new developments.  
• South Cambridgeshire has adopted a District Design Guide (2010)  to 
provide additional guidance on how developments can ensure they are 
sustainable and achieve a high quality of design in a way that respects 
the local context.  
Policy HQ/1: Design Principles  
 
1. All new development must be of high quality des ign, with a clear vision 
as to the positive contribution the development will make t o its local 
and wider context. As appropriate to the scale and nature of the 
development, proposals must:  
a. Preserve or enhance the character of the local urban and rural 
area and respond to its context in the wider landscape;  
b. Conserve or enhance important natural and historic assets and 
their setting;  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 5        Delivering High Quality Places  
 
104 
  c. Include variety and interest within a coherent, place -responsive 
design, which is  legible and creates a positive sense of place  and 
identity  whilst also responding to the local context and respecting 
local distinctiveness;  
d. Be compatible with its location and appropriate in terms of scale, 
density, mass, form, siting, design, proportion , materials, texture 
and colour in relation to the surrounding area;  
e. Deliver a strong visual relationship between buildings that 
comfortably define and enclose streets, squares and public 
places, creating interesting vistas, skylines, focal points and 
appropriately scaled landmarks along routes and around spaces;   
f. Achieve a permeable development with ease of movement and 
access for all users and abilities , with user friendly and 
conveniently accessible streets  and other  routes both within the 
development and linking with its surroundings and existing and 
proposed facilities and services , focusing on delivering attractive 
and safe opportunities for walking, cycling , public transport and , 
where appropriate , horse riding ; 
g. Provide safe and convenient access for all users and abilities to 
public buildings and spaces, including those with limited mobility 
or those with other impairment such as of sight or hearing;   
h. Ensure that car parking is integrated into the development in a 
convenient, accessible  manner  and does not dominate the 
development and its surroundings or cause safety issues;  
i. Provide safe, secure, convenient and accessible provision for 
cycle parking and storage, facilities for waste management, 
recycling and coll ection in a manner that is appropriately 
integrated within the overall development;  
j. Provide a harmonious integrated mix of uses both within the site 
and  with its surroundings that contributes to the creation of 
inclusive communities providing the faciliti es and services to meet 
the needs of the community;  
k. Ensure developments deliver flexibility that allows for future 
changes in needs and lifestyles, and adaptation to climate 
change;  
l. Mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change on 
development through  location, form, orientation, materials and 
design of buildings and spaces;  
m. Include high quality landscaping and public spaces that integrate 
the development with its surroundings, having a clear definition 
between public and private space which provide op portunities for 
recreation, social interaction as well as support healthy lifestyles, 
biodiversity, sustainable drainage and climate change mitigation;  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 5        Delivering High Quality Places  
 
105 
  
5.4 The NPPF  (2012) sets out a clear national policy framework for promoting good 
design as a key element to achieving sustainable development and emphasises the 
indivisible link between good design and good planning (paragraphs 56 -68). 
 
5.5 All new development will have an impact on its surroundings. Development needs 
to be of an appropriate scale, design and materials for it s location and conform to 
the design principles set out in the policy above . The aim must be that any 
development  from a major urban extension to Cambridge to an extension to an 
existing home respects, preserves and enhances the special character of South 
Cambridgeshire generally and the locality specifically . Any development must also 
take proper care to respond to its surroundings, and create sustainable, inclusive 
and healthy environments where people would wish to live, work, shop, study  or 
spend their  leisure time. Well designed buildings and places contribute to the quality 
of life, increase economic vitality, achieve high environmental standards, reduce 
emissions and deliver a high quality public realm.  
 
5.6 A fully integrated and responsive design -led ap proach to develo pment is needed  
rather than design being approached as a simple checklist or as an optional extra.  
Policy HQ/1  establishes a set of fundamental design principles that should be 
applied to all development to ensure it contributes to social,  economic and 
environmental sustainability and makes a positive difference to people’s lives to 
help provide homes, jobs and better opportunities for everyone, whilst protecting 
and enhancing the natural and historic environment, and conserving the country side 
and open spaces that are important to everyone.  Applicants will be required to 
demonstrate how their proposals meet the principles of sustainability, by submitting 
a Sustainability Statement, under Policy CC/1 in Chapter 4 Climate Change.  
 
5.7 The Governm ent requires Design and Access Statements to be submitted with 
most planning applications, intended to demonstrate how a proposal is functional, 
attractive and accessible to all.  Comprehensive guidance on their format and 
content is provided in the Counci l’s Design & Access Statements Briefing Note.    
 
5.8 Developments should be planned comprehensively  in an integrated manner, not 
piecemeal . Some l arger scale developments or complex sites can tak e a number of n. Protect the health and amenity of occupiers and surrounding uses 
from development that is overlooking, overbearing or results in a 
loss of daylight or development which would create unacceptable 
impacts such as noise, vibrati on, odour, emissio ns and dust;   
o. Design -out crime and create an environment that is created for 
people that is and feels safe, and has a strong community focus.  
 
2. Larger and more complex developme nts will be required to submit 
Masterplans and Design C odes to agree an overall vision and strategy 
for a development as a whole that demonstrates a comprehensive and 
inclusive approach.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 5        Delivering High Quality Places  
 
106 
 years to complete  and are often d elivered and planned in stages.  In order to ensure 
developments take place in a coherent a nd structured way, M asterplans and 
Design C odes should  be produced to agree an overall vision and strategy for a 
develop ment as a whole at the outset. Guidanc e on what should be c overed in 
Masterplans and Design C odes is provided in the District Design Guide 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) . 
 
5.9 Further guidance to support Policy HQ/1  will be provided in the review of the District 
Design Guide SPD . Other detailed local context in formation can be found in 
Cons ervation Area Appraisals. Some parish c ouncils have prepared Village Design 
Guides, or are considering neighbourhood plans, which also provide local context.  
Other useful guidance on design includes : By Design (DETR, 2000);  Urban Design 
Compendium (Llewelyn -Davies for English Partnerships, The Housing Corporation 
and Urban Design Alliance) ; Car parking what works where (English Partnerships);  
RECAP Waste Management Design Guide SPD (Cambridgeshire County Council 
2012).  
 
Public Art  
 
  
5.10 The provision of quality visual arts and crafts as part of new developments can 
bring social, cultural, environmental, educational and economic benefits, both to 
new devel opment and the local community.  Done well, public art that is designed to 
reflect and enhance its surroundings will help to raise the visual quality of Policy HQ/2 : Public Art and New Development  
 
1. The Council will encourage the provision or commissioning of public art 
that is integrated into the design of development as a means of 
enhancing the quality of develop ment proposals, in particular  from:  
a. Residential developments comprising 10 or more dwellings; and  
b. Other developments where the floor area to be built is 1,000 m2 
gross or more, including office, manufacturing, warehousing and 
retail developments.  
 
2. Where development is unable to achie ve an appropriate scheme on 
site the Council will encourage developers to make a financial 
contribution to support public art initiatives. Financial contributions may 
be pooled  (up to a maximum of five),  where appropriate.  
 
3. The provision of public art must  involve  the local community and could 
be community -led and  have regard to the local circumstances of the 
site and/or local aspirations.  
 
4. Where public art is provided, c ontributions and commuted maintenance 
sums for up to 10 years wi ll be required and  include the cost of 
decommissioning where appropriate.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 5        Delivering High Quality Places  
 
107 
 developments , create a sense of place  and through community involvement help 
with community development.    
 
5.11 Public art can en compass a wide range of approaches.  Integrated into the d esign 
to give a new development a sense of place and individuality . Public art  could 
include designing a development so that functional elements such as lighting, 
seating, fencing, landscape, fountains and water features, and signage are bespoke 
or it could be a landmark work s uch as a sculpture . Alternatively, it could include 
provision of funding and/or space and facilities to enable performing arts which can 
help build new communities.   
 
5.12 Public art will  be sought though negotiation. An appropriate balance needs to be 
struck between all the competing demands on development and the  benefits of 
public art.  It is also important that public art is supported by the local community 
therefore proposals should be community -led to understand what is appropriate in 
their locality, having regard to the circumstances of the site.   
 
5.13 Further gu idance to support Policy HQ/2 will be provided in a District Design Guide 
SPD.  
  Chapter 6
  
Protecting and Enhancing the Natural 
  
and Historic Environment
  
Wimpole Hall, South Cambridgeshire
   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
111 
 Chapter  6    Protectin g and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
6.1 South Cambridgeshire has over one  hundred villages with many featuring beautiful 
buildings set withi n a wide range of landscapes. Land use and the underlying 
geology have combined to produce a very diverse landscape including the 
distinctive Chalklands, rolling Clay Hills and the wide expa nses of the Fens to the 
north.  South Cambridgeshire has extensive areas of high quality agricultural land 
with medium to large -scale arable farmland dominating. Within the fields and 
hedgerows, hills and valleys, woodlands and fen a variety of habitats exist for plant 
and animal species. The Council wants to make sure th ese landscapes with their 
biodiversity are protected for the future.   
 
6.2 Many of South Cambridgeshire’s villages have a quiet, rural character which belies 
their proximity to Cambridge or towns outside the d istrict. The Council regards the 
Cambridge Green B elt as vital to retaining the rural character of land and villages 
around Cambridge. Within villages are green spaces of particular importance to 
local communities or views into open countryside which all help to create what is 
special about the vil lages in South Cambridgeshire. These special features need to 
be protected. The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy  highlights 
opportunities for improving landscapes, enhancing biodiversity, enjoying heritage 
and getting out into the countryside.  
 
6.3 People  have lived and worked in the area since Palaeolithic times and the 
evidence of their lives is all around us. It can be found in the historic villages and 
landscapes and as archaeological remains beneath our feet. Roman roads, 
remains of medieval field sys tems, Gothic churches, Georgian parkland, 
nineteenth century model farms and twentieth century schools are just some 
examples. A number of historic buildings are at risk from neglect or lack of use 
while modern agriculture can be harmful to archaeology. Ot her challenges are 
retaining the special character of historic buildings and places while 
accommodating modern changes and new and growing settlements.  
 
6.4 South Cambridgeshire has many heritage assets, ranging from the nationally 
designated historic parks and gardens, scheduled monuments and listed buildings 
to historic landscapes, archaeology and historic buildings of local interest. Some 
parts of our heritage have particular meaning and value to local communities. 
Conservation areas are based on groups of  historic buildings but also seek to 
conserve and enhance other aspects of a village which make it special.  
 
Key Facts:  
• Five distinctive landscape characters in the district are identified by 
Natural England – from the Fens in the north to the Chalklands and 
Claylands  to the south.  
• The waterways flowing through the district are important wildlife 
corridors but other uses for recreation may put pressure on these 
environments. The River Cam is identified as a County Wildlife Site.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
112 
  
Conservation  Area and Green Separation at Longstanton  
 
6.5 The green separation between Longstanton village and the new town of 
Northstowe is designed to ensure the maintenance of the village character of 
Longstanton. Most of the area of green separation is covered by the Northstowe 
Area Action Plan, but part of t he area lies outside its boundary and is covered by • South Cambridgeshire has a diverse range of wildlife sites many of 
which are officially recognised for  protection.  These include 39 
nationally important Sites of Special Scientific Interest and over 100 
County Wildlife Sites.  Development pressures can thr eaten the future of 
some habitats.  
• Only one internationally important wildlife site exists within the district; 
the Eversden and Wimpole Woods Special Area of Conservation which 
is home to a breeding colony of the rare  Barbastelle bat. 
• The ancient woodland s and veteran trees in the district are invaluable 
for their biodiversity importance.  
• The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy (2011)  provides an 
overarching strategy for Cambridgeshire which highlights existing 
natural green space and opportunities for creating, linking, and 
improving it. It shows two major ecological networks: the Gog Magogs 
Countryside Area and the West Cambridgeshire Hundreds project . 
• The area of the Green Belt in South Cambridgeshire comprises 23,000 
hectares coveri ng 25% of the district.    
• The district has a very rich heritage with 2,672 listed buildings, 86 
conservation areas and 103 scheduled monuments.  
• Within the wider historic landscape are individual features such as 
Roman roads and ancient Dykes.  
• Historic l andscapes are particularly important in South Cambridgeshire 
where they add interest and variety to an intensively farmed 
countryside.  
• Important visitor attractions with historic links include Wimpole Hall, 
Denny Abbey and the Imperial War Museum, Duxford.  Impington Village 
College is a pioneering modernist building.  
Policy NH/1: Conservation Area and Green Separation at Longstanton  
 
Areas of countryside within the conservation a rea at Longstanton will form 
part of the green separation between Longstant on and Northstowe. Public 
access to this area of countryside wil l be controlled to protect the 
conservation a rea. The area will contain only open land uses, such as playing 
fields, allotments and cemeteries, which will contribute towards effective 
separa tion between these communities. The open aspect of the fields 
affording views of All Sai nts Church will be maintained. Elsewhere the 
landscape character of a series of hedged paddocks, small copses and tree 
belts will be maintained and enhanced.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
113 
 this policy. The land within the conservation area has a valuable character which 
should be preserved or enhanced.  The predominant historic character of the open 
land comprises a series of paddocks with h edgerows and small copses, bounded 
by the tree -lined bridleway of Long Lane. Historically this is an important area and 
includes fields which still demonstrate remnants of the early ridge and furrow field 
system. Long Lane is a long es tablished right of wa y and its S ylvan character is a 
key part of the setting of Longstanton.  
 
Protecting and E nhancing Landscape Character  
 
6.6 The importance of the landscape is reflected in national planning guidance with the 
National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF , 2012 ) stating that the planning 
system should contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment by 
protecting and enhancing valued landscapes.  
 
6.7 The South Cambridgeshire landscape has several distinctive and readily identified 
characters. T hese have been identified by Natural England as five distinct National 
Character Areas:  
• The Fens  
• South Suffolk and North Essex Claylands  
• East Anglian Chalk  
• Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire Claylands  
• Bedfordshire Greensand Ridge.  
 
6.8 Within these national areas  are a number of smaller and more detailed landscapes 
which add to and enhance the local landscape character of the district.  The East of 
England Landscape Typology provides further detail on the landscape character 
within the National Character Areas, pro viding a finer grain of landscape 
assessment based on geology, landform, natural features, landscape patterns, 
vegetation, settlement patterns, and historic features and development. Each 
typology is also assessed in terms of Historic Features, Enclosure P atterns, 
Settlement Patt erns and Historic Development.   
 
6.9 The district’s landscape is dominated by arable farmland with dispersed woodlands 
and often low, trimmed hedgerows. As a result it is a predominantly open 
landscape, allowing long views. A mosaic of hedgerow, fields, parkland and small 
woodlands create variety and combine to create an often treed skyline.  A greater 
degree of enclosure and a more detailed landscape is often associated with 
settlements and  the many small river valleys. Early enclosures  of ‘ancient 
countryside’ give a distinctive character to some villages which are surrounded by 
small fields with hedgerows.   
 Policy NH/2: Protecting and E nhancing Landscape Character  
 
Development will only be permitted where it respects and retains, or 
enhances the local character and distinctiveness of  the local landscape and of 
the individual National Character Area in which is it located.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
114 
 Policy NH/3: Protecting Agricultural Land  
 
1. Planning  permission will not be granted for development which would 
lead to the irreversible loss of Grades 1, 2 or 3a agricultural land unless:  
a. Land is allocated for development in the Local Plan ; 
b. Sustainability considerations and the need for the development 
are sufficient to override the need to protect the agricultural value 
of the land.  
 
2. Uses not involving substantial built development but which take 
agricultural land will be regarded as permanent unless restricted 
specifically by condition.  
 
3. When considering proposals for the change of use or diversification of 
farmland, particu lar consideration shall be given to the potential for 
impact upon Priority Species and Habitats1.  
 
1 Priority Species and Habitats are those that are identified within a Biodiversity Action Plan 
(BAP) and / or the Natural Environment and Rural Communities  Act, 2006, Section 41.  6.10 There are pressures on these landscapes as a result of changes in agricultural 
practice and the impact of new developmen t for ho using and employment. These 
distinctive landscapes help create a quality natural environment within the district 
which needs to be enhance d and protected for the future.  There will be 
opportunities to enhance the landscape particularly in the growth areas around 
Cambridge and elsewhere in the district as these new settlements and urban fringe 
sites are de veloped in the coming years. The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure 
Strategy identifies further opportunities for landscape enhancement within the 
distric t. 
 
6.11 To assist in retaining the distinctive nature of the South Cambridgeshire landscape 
the Council provides more detailed guidance about landscape character areas in 
the District Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  and the 
Landscape in New Developments SPD  to ensure that development respects both 
the di stinctiveness of these National Character Areas and the m ore detailed local 
landscapes. Within the lifetime of the Local Plan these SPDs will be reviewed to 
include the more detailed East of E ngland Landscape Typology  published by 
Landscape East further refining the landscape character areas within the district.  
 
Protecting  Agricultural Land  
 
6.12 The NPPF (2012)  requires plans to take into account the economic and other 
benefits of the best and most versatile agricultural land. Where significant 
development of agricultural land is demonstrated to be necessary, local planning 
authorities should seek to use areas o f poorer quality land in preference to that of a 
higher quality.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
115 
 Policy NH/4: Biodiversity  
 
1. Development proposals where the primary objective is to conserve or 
enhance biodiversity will be permitted.  
 
2. New development must aim to maintain, enhance, restore or add to 
biodiversity.  Opportunities should be taken to achieve positive gain 
through the f orm and design of development. Measures may include 
creating, enhancing and managing wildlife habitats and ne tworks, and 
natural landscape. The built environment should be viewed as an 
opportunity to fully integrate biodiversity within new d evelopment through 
innovation. Priority for habitat creation should be given to sites which 
assist in the achievement of targets in the Biodiversity Action Plans 
(BAPs) and aid delivery of the Cambridge shire Green Infrastructure 
Strategy.  
 
3. If significant harm to the population or conservation status of a Protected 
Species, Priority Species1 or Priority Habitat resulting from a 
development cannot be avoided (through locating on an alternative site 
with le ss harmful impacts), adequately mitigated, or, as a last resort, 
compensated for, then plannin g permission will be refused.  
 
4. Where there are grounds to believe that a proposal may affect a 
Protected Species, Priority Species or Priority Habitat, applicants  will be 
expected to provide an adequate level of survey information and site 
assessment to establish the extent of a potential impact. This survey 
information and site assessment shall be provided prior to the 
determination of an application.  
 
(continued)  6.13 South Cambridgeshire has a significant resource of good quality agricultural land .   
Much of the best agricultural land lies around Cambridge and the larger 
settlements, which may be the mos t sustainable locations for future development.  
The need to identify and maintain a large supply of land for development means 
there is pressure for development of agricultural land. In addition, the impact of 
development on soils and the protection of so il quality must be considered.  
 
6.14 Farmland is also important for biodiversity whether it is arable or pastoral.  South 
Cambridgeshire being still a largely rural district has a large proportion of open 
farmland which has a variety of habitats on both high and low grade agricultural 
land. This provides an extensive biodivers ity resource for the district. Due to the 
pressures of increasing land use and the past needs of intensive cultivation, the 
farmland of the district in places is under severe stress and t his resource needs to 
be protected.  
 
Biodiversity  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
116 
  
6.15 National  legislation and planning guidance place a duty on  local a uthorities to 
consider  biodiversity  through their Local Plans. The Council is committed to the 
protection and enhancement of biodiversity and will work with partners to ensure a 
proactive approach to protection, enhancement and management of  biodiversity 
identified in national and local strategies and plans such as Biodiversity Action 
Plans (BAPs) and the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy.  
 
6.16 Whilst the need for development will be carefully considered against its impact on 
biodiversity , opportunities for biodiversity enhancement and the creation of new 
habitats can arise through sensitively located and carefully designed 
developments.  For example, where habitats would be fragmented by new 
developments, it may be possible to create green corridors to reconnect habitats 
and assist species’ movement and dis persal into the wider landscape  thereby 
contributing to wider ecological networks.  
 
6.17 BAPs provide guidance on targets and actions for habi tats and species 
conservation. Further guidance on sites, species and habitats are set out in the 
Council’s Biodiversity SPD. This also contains guidance for developers of how 
biodiversity should be considered in the development process.  
 
6.18 It is recognised that climate change poses a ser ious threat to biodiversity. As a 
means  to make biodiversity more resilient to climate change applicants will be 
encouraged to reduce habitat fragmentation and to strengthen ecological networks 
to aid migration, natural dispersal and the exchange of geneti c material within 
species.  
 5. Previously developed land (brownfield sites) will not be considered to be 
devoid of biodiversity. The re use of such sites must be undertaken 
carefully with regard to existing feat ures of biodiversity interest. 
Development proposals on such  sites will be expected to include 
measures that maintain and enhance important features and 
appropriately incorporate them within any development of the site.  
 
6. Planning permission will be refused for development resulting in the loss, 
deterioration or fra gmentation of irreplaceable habitats, such as ancient 
woodland, unless the need for, and benefits of, the development in that 
location clearly outweigh the loss.  
 
7. Climate change poses a serious threat to biodiversity and initiatives to 
reduce its impact need to be considered.  
 
1 Priority Species and Habitats are those that are identified within a Biodiversity Action Plan 
(BAP) and / or the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act, 2006, Section 41.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
117 
  
6.19 The NPPF  (2012)  states that to minimise impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity 
local planning authorities must identify and map components of the local ecological 
networks, including the hierarchy of international, na tional and locally designated 
sites of importance for biodiversity, wildlife corridors and stepping stones that 
connect them , along with areas identified by local partnerships for habitat 
restoration or creation.  
 
6.20 South Cambridgeshire has a range of important sites and habitats for biodiversity, 
recognised  through designations, from international to loca l importance. Some of 
these are also of geological importance.  Sites of Biodiversity or Geological 
Importance are identified on the Policies Map and these represent a tiered network 
for the conservation of biodiversity and geodiversity within South Cambridgeshire.  
These sites include the statutorily protected international Special Areas of 
Conservation (SACs) and Spe cial Protection Areas (SPAs) and national Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and the non -statutorily protected Local Nature 
Reserves and County Wildlife Sites.  
 
6.21 The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010, require all European 
Sites to be given full protection. Ramsar and potential SPAs or SACs are afforded Policy NH/5: Sites of Biodiversity or Geological Importance  
 
1. Proposed development likely to have an adverse effect on land within or 
adjoining a Site of Biodiversity or Geological Importance, as shown on 
the Policies Map (either individually or in combination with other 
developments) , will not normally be permitted.  Exceptions will only be 
made where the benefits of the development clearly outweigh any 
adverse impact.  
 
2. In determining any planning application affecting Sites of Biodiversity or 
Geological Importance the Council will ensure that the intrinsic natural 
features of particular interest are safeguarded or enhanced having 
regard to:  
a. The international, national or local sta tus and designation of the 
site; 
b. The nat ure and quality of the site’s features, including its rarity 
value;  
c. The extent of any adverse impacts on the notified features;  
d. The likely effectiveness of any proposed mitigation with respect to 
the protection of the features of interest;  
e. The need for co mpensatory measures in order to  re-create on or 
off the site features or habitats that would be lost to development.  
 
3. Where appropriate the Council will ensure the effective management of 
designated sites through the imposition of planning conditions or 
Section 106 agreements as appropriate.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
118 
 similar protection as if  they were legally designated. Natural England will be 
consulted on any planning application in or adjacent to a European Si te, or any 
such candidate site.  It is therefore a requirement that all proposals that might 
adversely affect the special interest of a European Site be given special scrutiny.   
 
6.22 At present the only site of international importance within South Cambridgeshire is 
the Eversden and Wimpole  Woods SAC.  The site provides a habitat for a breeding 
colony of the Barbastelle bat, one of the rarest bats in Western Europe. The bats 
have been recorded at a small number of other sites up to ele ven kilometres from 
the Woods. The SA C is shown on the Pol icies Map.  The area of particular interest 
for the bats’ flight and feeding areas is shown within the Biodiversity SPD . 
 
6.23 There are a number of other sites within the surrounding districts, which are 
considered as part of any Habitat Regulation Assessment c arried out by the 
Council, because of their proxim ity to South Cambridgeshire and/ or the nature 
of their conservation interest:  
• Ouse Washes SAC and SPA  
• Fenland SAC  (Woodwalton Fen, Chippenham Fen, Wicken Fen)  
• Portholme SAC  
• Devil’s Dyke SAC  
• Breckland SAC an d SPA  
 
6.24 The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy has identified a strategic 
green infrastructure  network across Cambridgeshire.  Within the district it is 
important to retain and enhance the existing networks of natural habitats and 
the NPPF  (2012)  recognise s the value of such networks. These networks may 
link sites of biodiversity importance and provide routes or stepping stones for 
the migration, dispersal and genetic exchange of spe cies in the wider 
environment.  In South Cambridgeshire such netwo rks may include public 
rights of way, important roadside verges which need to be protected from 
road improvements or new access points, watercourses, ponds, moats, 
marshes and ditches that can be adversely affected by changes in local 
hydrology, woodlands,  copses, pollarded willow and hedgerows, semi -natural 
grasslands and disused  gravel, chalk or clunch pits. The management of such 
features is crucial to maintaining the existing biodiversity interest and to 
assisting further colonisation o f habitats by var ious species. Further detail on 
these networks will  be provided in the Biodiversity SPD.  
 
6.25 Rivers, streams and drainage networks are particularly important features in 
South Cambridgeshire and make an important contribution to the biodiversity 
and landscap e of the district. However these waterways are also a major 
recreation and tourism resource and careful management is required to 
preserve the special  qualities that attract users.  In view of the specialist 
characteristics of river valley habitats and thei r importance to the biodiversity 
of the district as a whole, detailed guidance on the way in which development 
proposals should respect these habitats, natural features and characteristic 
species shall be included in the Council’s Biodiversity S PD. 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
119 
 6.26 Publi c rights of way can often be green corridors in their own right, especially 
when in open arable countryside. Some rights of way can be up to 18 metres 
(60 feet) wide strips through the countryside, and should consequently be 
protected for the biodiversity opportunities that they provide. These corridors 
often co -exist with SSSIs, Local Nature Reserves, County Wildlife Sites, and 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments, and need to be very carefully managed to 
balance the complex rights and various statutory protections .   
 
Green Infrastructure  
 
 
6.27 Green i nfrastructure  is a strategic, multi -functional network of public green 
spaces and routes, landscapes, biodiversity and heritage. It includes a wide 
range of elements such as country parks, wildlife habitats, rights of way, 
bridleways, commo ns and greens, nature reserves, waterways and bodies of 
water, and historic landscapes and monuments. The net work comprises rural 
and urban green i nfrastructure of different sizes and character, and the 
connections and links between them. It is part of (an d contribu tes to) the 
wider environment. It includes both land that can be open to the public and 
areas that are not accessible.  
 
6.28 In 2011 a partnership of local organisations, including the Council, produced 
the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy which provides an 
overarching green infrastructure strategy a nd network for Cambridgeshire. In 
the NPPF  (2012)  it states that in order to minimise impacts on biodiversity and Policy NH/6: Green Infrastructure  
 
1. The Council will aim to conserve and enhance g reen infrastructure 
within the d istrict.  Proposals that cause loss or harm to this network will 
not be permitted unless the need for and benefits  of the development 
demonstrably and substantially outwe igh any adverse impacts on the 
district’s green infrastructure network.  
 
2. The Council will encourage proposals which:  
a. Reinforce, link, buffer and create new green infrastructure ; and  
b. Promote, manage a nd interpret green infrastructure and enhance 
public enjoyment of it.  
 
3. The Council will support proposals whi ch deliver the strategic green 
infrastructure network and priorities set out in the Cambridgeshire 
Green Infrastructure Strategy, and which delive r local green 
infrastructure.  
 
4. All new developments will be required to contribute towards the 
enhancement of the green inf rastructure network within the d istrict. 
These contributions will include the establishment, enhancement and 
the on -going management costs.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
120 
 geodiversity, planning policies should plan for biodiversity at a landsc ape 
scale across local authority boundaries and this Strategy takes such an 
approach. The Strategy highlights shortfalls in green infrastructur e which 
need to be addressed. The level of growth planned for South Cambridgeshire 
and Cambridge will put pressur e on existing green infrastructure and will 
require inves tment to develop this network. Major developments create new 
demands and opportuniti es for green infrastructure. Delivery of green 
infrastructure can achieve many goals including linking different ar eas of 
green space, enhancing landscape character and creating more robust 
wildlife habitats, climate change adaptation, as well as delivering public 
access to countryside open space and supporting healthy lifestyles.  
 
6.29 The Greater Cambridgeshire Local Nat ure Partnership has been set up to 
promote and deliver natural environment objectives and related benefits.  A 
key role for the partnership is to  be overseeing delivery of the S trategy.   
 
6.30 The Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy network is shown o n 
Figure 7. The Strategy identifies a range of opportunities for enhancement in 
and around the district and has Cambridge and the surrounding area  as one 
of its strategic areas.  Each strategic area contains target areas and projects. 
Full details are inclu ded in the Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy .  
 
Figure 7: Green Infrastructure Strategy N etwork  
 
6.31 The target areas in and around South Cambridgeshire are Northstowe; 
Wicken Fen and Anglesey Abbey; Cambridge; Cambourne; Wimpole; West 
Cambridgesh ire Woodlands and Fen Drayton. The projects include Fen 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
121 
 Drayton Lakes; RSPB habitat and visitor infrastructure management; Fens 
Waterways Link; Chalk Rivers project; Fowlmere Nature Reserve extension 
and development of facilities; linear monuments; woodlan d linkage project; 
enhanced rights of way links in Northsto we; Wicken Fen Vision; Wimpole 
cycle link; Cambridge fringe sites and Cambridge necklace projects. These 
take in projects in the Quarter to Six Quadrant part of the district which 
includes the pari shes of Barton, Coton,  Grantchester and Madingley.  Other 
areas and projects outside the district will also be important to the resi dents of 
South Cambridgeshire. Green infrastructure projects will continue to come 
forward. An example of a Green Infrastruc ture project coming forward is a 
River Cam Corridor Strategy which is being prepared by local stakeholders , 
including the Council . 
 
Ancient Woodlands and Veteran T rees 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.32 The NPPF  (2012) encourages local authorities to protect ancient woodl ands 
and veteran or aged trees.  Ancient woodland is defined as an area that has 
been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD and such areas exis t within 
South Cambridgeshire. Veteran trees are particularly valuable for biodiversity 
due to the large amount of deadwood that they may contain. These trees are 
defined by Natural England to be ‘A tree which because of its great age, size 
or condition is  of exceptional value culturally, in the landscape or for wildlife’.  
 
6.33 Ancient woodlands and veteran trees represent an important constituent of 
green corridors across the district since they have a hi gh inherent biodiversity 
value.  Where there are trees wi thin the application site, or on land adjacent to 
it that could influence or be affected by the development, information will be 
required on which trees are to be lost / retained, including whether any are 
ancient or veteran. It is best practice to underta ke a tree survey in accordance 
with BS 5837 ‘Trees in relation to construction – Recommendations’ to 
determine the significance and amenity value of trees on and near the site.  
 Policy NH/7: Ancient Woodlands and Veteran T rees 
 
1. Planning permission will be refused  for development resulting in the loss 
or deterioration of ancient woodland (as shown on the Policies Map) or 
veteran trees found outside ancient woodland, unless the need for, and 
benefits of, the development in that location clearly outweigh the loss.  
 
2. Development proposals affecting ancient woodland or veteran trees will 
be expected to mitigate any adverse impacts, and to contribute to the 
woodland’s or veteran tree’s management and further enhancement via 
planning conditions or planning obligations.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
122 
 The Green Belt  
 
6.34 The NPPF  (2012)  gives strong protection to the Green Belt.  The area of 
Green Belt in South Cambridgeshire comprises 23,000 hectares covering 
over 25% of the district. This means much of the district is affected by Green 
Belt policies particularly around those  villages surrounding Cambridge . There 
are no villages w ithin the Cambridge Green Belt,  each is an ‘island’ inset 
within the Green Belt with its own defined develop ment framework boundary . 
 
6.35 Green Belt is a key designation in the district, which protect s the setting and 
special character of Cambridge. Inappropriate development  is by definition 
harmful to the Green Belt and will not be approved except in very special 
circumstances  and in accordance with the approach set out in the NPPF  
(2012) .  
 
Redevelopment in the Green Belt  Policy NH/8: Mitigating th e Impact of Development I n and A djoining the 
Green Belt  
 
1. Any development proposals  within the Green Belt  must be located and 
designed so that they do  not have an adverse effect on the rural 
character and openness of the Green Belt.  
 
2. Where development is permitted, landscaping conditions, together wi th 
a requirement that any planting is adequately maintained, will be 
attached to any planning permission in order to ensure that the impact 
on the Green Belt is mitigated.  
 
3. Development on the edges of settlements which are surrounded by the 
Green Belt must  include careful landscaping and design measures of a 
high quality.  
Policy NH/9: Redevelopment of Previously Developed Sites and Infilling 
in the Green Belt  
 
1. Redevelopment of Previously Developed Sites and Infilling in the Green 
Belt will be inappropriate development except for:  
 
a. The re -use of buildings provided that the buildings are of 
permanent and substantial construction, are consistent with 
Policies E/17 and H/17,  provided they preserve the openness of 
the Green Belt and do not conflict  with the purposes of including 
land in Green Belt;  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
123 
 b. The extension or alteration of a building provided that it does not 
result in disproportionate additions over and above the size of the 
original building;  
 
c. The replacement of a building, provided the new building is in the 
same use, and not materially larger than the one it replaces;  
 
d. Limited infilling, where infilling is defined as the filling of small 
gaps between existing built development (excluding tempo rary 
buildings). Such infilling should have no greater impact upon the 
openness of the Green Belt and the purpose of including land 
within it than the existing development. The cumulative impact of 
infilling propo sals will be taken into account;  
 
e. The parti al or complete redevelopment of previously developed 
sites (brownfield land), whether redundant or in continuing use 
(excluding temporary buildings), which would not have a greater 
impact on the openness of the Green Belt and the purpose of 
including land within it than the existing development.   
 
 
 
 
6.36 There are existing developments within the Cambridge Green Belt, ranging 
from large institutions, to smaller groups of scattered development and 
individual buildings.  NPPF  (2012) paragraph 89 enables limited infilling or the 
partial or complete redevelopment of previously deve loped sites in the Green 
Belt in a number of specific circumstances .  
 
Green Belt and Recreation Uses  
 
6.37 The Cambridge Green Belt plays an important role in providing opportunities 
for access to the countryside for local people. This is recognised in the 
Cambridgeshire Green Infrastructure Strategy.   
 
6.38 The NPPF  (2012)  guidance on Green Belt at paragraph 81 r equires local 
planning authorities to plan positively to enhance beneficial use of the Green 
Belt including through providing opportunities for outdoor sport and outdoor 
recreation. At paragraph 89 the NPPF  (2012)  allows for the provision of  new 
buildings to provide  appropriate facilities for outdoor sport and outdoor 
recreation that preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do  not conflict 
with Green Belt purposes . With the growth proposed in the extensions around Policy NH/10: Facilities for  Recreation in the Green Belt  
 
Proposals for new buildings to provide  appropriate facilities for outdoor sport 
and outdoor recreation  will be permitted  where they will not (either individually 
or cumulatively) harm the openness of the Green Belt and the purposes of 
including land within it . 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
124 
 Policy NH/11: Protected Village Amenity Areas  
 
Protected Village Amen ity Areas are identified on the Policies Map where 
development will not be permitted within or adjacent to these areas if it 
would have an adverse impact on the character, amenity, tranquillity or 
function of the village.  the City in the Cambridge Green Belt it is likely that land will become more 
intensively used, which could result in pressure for sport and  recreational 
facilities  being relocated to, or specifically developed on Green Belt land. It is 
important this is done in a way which protects the overall r ural character of the 
Green Belt rather than creating a character more associated with the urban 
environment.  
 
Protecting Village C haracter   
 
6.39 The character of villages is made up of a blend of buildings and open spaces.  
Given the pressure for development  in the district, the remaining open land in 
and on the e dge of villages is threatened. Some undeveloped land can be 
built on without harm to the character of the village and can contribute to the 
full and effective use of land in accordance with national policy, but others are 
important to maintain the village character and should not be developed. 
Some of these open spaces are particularly valued and cherished by the local 
community.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.40 Protected Village Amenity Areas (PVAAs) have been designated on sites 
within village frameworks in order to safeguard those areas of undeveloped 
land within villages which are important to retain.  Some of the PVAAs may 
have important functions for the vil lage such as allotments, recreation 
grounds and playing fields whilst others have an important amenity role in 
providing a setting for buildings or offer tranquil areas wh ere there is minimum 
activity. Not all PVAAs have public access as some undeveloped a reas which 
are im portant may be private gardens.  They also vary from those which are 
very open to visual penetration to those which may be enclosed or semi -
enclosed.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Policy NH/12 : Local Green Space  
 
Local Green Space identified on the Policies Map wil l be protected from 
development that would adversely impact on the character and particular 
local significance placed on such green areas which make them valu ed by 
their local community. Inappropriate development, as defined in the National 
Planning Policy  Framework, would not be approved except in very special  
circumstances and in discussion with the local community.    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
125 
 6.41 The NPPF  (2012) has created a designation called Local Green Space (LGS), 
which is for green areas of particular importance to local communities which 
once designated can prevent new development other than in very special 
circum stances. Local communities and parish c ouncils in the district have 
helped the Council to identify the sites that are demonstrably spe cial to their 
local community. A LGS must hol d a particular local significance, for example 
because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including as a 
playing field), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife. The green area must be in 
reasonably close proximity to the community it serves. It must be local in 
character and not b e an extensive tract of land.  These sites can protect land 
outside of a development  framework. A list of Local Green Space is provided 
in Appendix C. 
 
6.42 In many places land with a strong countryside character  penetrates or sweeps 
into South Cambridgeshire’s villages or separates t wo parts of the built -up 
area. Such land enhances the setting, character and appearance of the 
village by retaining the sense of connection between the village and its r ural 
origins a nd surroundings. The frontage where this interface particularly occurs 
is identified to indicate that the frontage and the open countryside beyond 
should be kept open and free from development.  In most cases it is land 
which adjoins the village built -up ar ea but in some cases it separates two 
parts of the village and the open intervening land therefore assumes an 
importance for the character of the village as a whole.  
 Policy NH/13: Important Countryside Frontage  
 
1. Important Countryside Frontages are defined where land with a strong 
countryside character either:  
a. Penetrates or sweeps into the built -up area providing a significant 
connection between the street scene and the surrounding rural 
area; or  
b. Provides an important rural break between two nearby  but 
detached parts of a developmen t framework.  
 
2. Planning permission for development will be refused if it would 
compromise these purposes . South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
126 
 Heritage Assets  
 
6.43 A core planning principle of the NPPF  (2012) is to conserve heritage assets in 
a manner appropriate to their significance, so that they can be enjoyed for 
their contribution to the quality of life of this and future generations.  
 
6.44 Heritage assets are buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or land scapes 
which are significant because of their historic interest. They are irreplaceable 
but can be vulnerable to neglect or unsympathetic change.  
 
6.45 The d istrict’s character is largely shaped by its heritage, including that of its 
much loved hist oric villag es and countryside. Villages stand out in the 
landscape, with a variety of forms which respond to their lo cations such as at 
the edge of Fens or on hilltops or valley sides. Agricultural and 
foodprocessing buildings are characteristic, and the varied geolo gy is 
reflected in traditional materials such as brick, tile, clunch and clay batt.  
 
6.46 Challenges facing the historic environment include preserv ing the d istrict’s 
special rural character and scale of building, the degree of change generated 
by prosperity, the impact of intensive agriculture on historic landscapes and Policy NH/14: Heritage Assets  
 
1. Development proposals will be supported when:  
a. They sustain and enhance the special character and 
distinctiveness of the d istrict’s historic environment including its 
villages and countryside and its building traditions and details;  
b. They create new high quality environments with a strong sense of 
place  by responding to local heritage character including in 
innovatory ways . 
 
2. Development proposals will be supported when they sustain and 
enhance the significance of heritage assets, including their settings,  as 
appropriate to their significance and in accor dance with the National 
Planning Policy Framework, particularly:  
c. Designated heritage assets, i.e. listed buildings, conservation 
areas, scheduled monuments, registered parks and gardens ; 
d. Non-designated heritage assets including those identified in 
conserva tion area appraisals, through the development process 
and through further supplementary planning documents;  
e. The wider historic landscape of South Cambridgeshire including 
landscape and settlement patterns;  
f. Designed and other landscapes including historic parks and 
gardens, churchyards, village greens and public parks;  
g. Historic places;  
h. Archaeological remains of all periods from the earliest human 
habitation to modern times.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
127 
 archaeology, the need to find new uses for traditional farm, food -processing 
and industrial buildings, and securing the future of unoccupied buildings suc h 
as historic garden pavilions.  Underst anding, conserving and enhancing the 
historic environment will be an essential part of master planning the growth 
planned within the district helping to create a sense of place.   
 
6.47 The distinctive character and quality of life given by the historic environ ment 
of the area has bee n key to its economic success. Many i mportant Hi -Tech 
and Bio -Tech organisations and businesses are based in large historic 
houses and their parkland settings. Strategic management plans are an 
important tool for achieving successfu l growth. Historic farm and industrial 
buildings can provide a range of size and type of premises for smaller 
businesses. Retaining historic pubs in use is important for village life as well 
as conservation.  
 
6.48 Heritage is an essential component of plans fro m a village or neig hbourhood 
level to that of the d istrict. A full understanding of the historic environment , 
including traditional materials as used in vernacular buildings,  is needed to 
inform plans, identify opportunities for conservation and enhancemen t, and to 
be able to reinforce local identity and create a sense of place.  
 
6.49 The conservation of heritage assets does not prevent all change but requires 
it to be managed in a way which does not compromise heritage significance 
and exploits opportunities f or enhancement. Section 12 of the NPPF (2012) 
provides guidance regarding the consideration of development proposals on 
heritage assets. In summary the more important the asset, the greater the 
weight should be applied to its conservation. Where development would lead 
to the substantial harm or total loss of significance of a designated asset, the 
local planning authority should refuse consent unless demonstrated it is 
necessary to achieve substantial public benefit that outweigh the harm or 
loss. Proposals leading to less than substantial harm to the significance 
should also be weighed against public benefits of the proposal. For proposals 
affecting non -designated asset s a balanced judgement will be made, having 
regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the heritage 
asset.  
 
6.50 Non-designated heritage assets of archaeological interest which are of equal 
significance to scheduled monuments will be consid ered in the same way as 
designated heritage assets.  
 
6.51 Finding viable uses which sustain rather than compromise the significance of 
historic buildings is fundamental to conservation (though not possible for all 
buildings). The need to secure the future of b uildings may require a flexible 
approach to other policies or enabling development, Section 106 agreements 
and other planning contributions. Buildings at risk will be monitored and action 
taken to secure their repair and encourage sustaining uses. The Coun cil is 
committed to ensuring the future viable uses of assets within the district.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
128 
 6.52 Decisions on development proposals must be based on a good understanding 
of how the proposals will affect heritage. Applicants must describe the 
significance of any heritag e assets, including any contribution from their 
setting. The level of detail must reflect the importance of the asset and clearly 
identify the potential impact of the proposal.  
 
6.53 Where development is proposed for a site which includes or has the potential 
to include heritage assets with archaeological interest, developers must 
submit an appropriate desk -based assessment and, where necessary, a field 
evaluation.  
 
6.54 Prospective developers should contact the County Council’s Historic 
Environment Team for informa tion to establish whether there is known or 
potential archaeological interest and the need for investigation and evaluation 
at an early stage.  
 
6.55 Different levels of information are available on different types of h eritage asset 
and parts of the d istrict. F or some development proposals, more research will 
be required. It will always be important to investigate sites and their context 
on the ground.  
 
6.56 The Cambridgeshire Historic Environment Record, maintained by the County 
Council, provides information on her itage assets, including non -designated 
and designated heritage assets with archaeological interest.  Other information 
on heritage assets and local heritage character is available on national 
websites, from the County Council’s Historic Environment Team, an d in 
District Council C onservation Area Appraisals and SPDs. The Council’s web 
site and officers will give advice on sources of information.  
 
6.57 Where development resulting in the loss of a heritage asset is permitted, the 
developer will be required to recor d and advance the understanding of the 
heritage asset to be lost. The results of assessments and investigations which 
are required and collected as part of development management are of public 
interest and will be made accessible, normally through the Camb ridgeshire 
Historic Environment Record.  
 
6.58 The Council encourages people to be involved with and enjoy local heritage 
and, where appropriate, developers will be required to support public 
understanding and engagement, and interpretation.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan   Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 6       Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
129 
 Heritage A ssets and Adapting to Climate Change  
 
6.59 Historic buildings and settlements often have su stainable forms of 
construction and design, and they can inform and inspire the best modern, 
sustainable development. Their survival reflects their success and 
adaptability.  Conserving and re -using historic buildings retains their materials 
and ‘embodied e nergy’ which is the energy used in materials and 
construction.  
 
6.60 The energy efficiency of b uildings is covered in Chapter 4 : Climate Change. 
However, the implications of energy efficient and renewable energy measures 
for historic buildings need special con sideration. Historic buildings are 
normally constructed and perform in a different way to modern buildings and 
the measures should be compatible with an individual building’s 
characteristics as well as its heritage significance.  
 
6.61 There are opportunities in  most historic buildings to improve energy 
conservation without causing harm, through measures such as secondary 
glazing, improved loft insulation using natural materials, low energy lighting, 
and fuel efficient boilers. In some situations, renewable energ y technologies 
can also be installed without causing harm.  
 
6.62 When proposals will have a potentially negative impact on heritage assets, 
then alternative solutions which cause no or less harm should be identified. 
Where conflict between climate change objec tives and the conservation of 
heritage assets is unavoidable, then the public benefit of mitigating the effects 
of climate change will be weighed against the harm to the significance of the 
heritage assets.  
 
6.63 Historic England  provides guidance on how heritage assets can be 
acceptably adapted to reduce their carbon footprint. The Council ’s Listed 
Buildings SPD  provides guidance on general sustainability, improving energy 
efficiency and renewable energy related to listed buildin gs. The Council will 
produce supplementary guidance which will set out ways in which the 
environmental performance of heritage assets can be improved without 
compromising their significance, taking account of new approaches and 
innovations.   
 Policy NH/15:  Heritage A ssets and A dapting to Climate Change  
 
1. The retention and re -use of historic buildings and other heritage assets 
will be encouraged and supported as a sustainable resource.  
 
2. Proposals for energy efficient and renewable energy measures for 
historic buildings which adequately safeguard their heritage significance 
will be permitted.    Chapter 7Chapter 7   
Delivering High Quality HomesDelivering High Quality Homes   
Impington, South CambridgeshireImpington, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
133 
 Chapter 7     Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
7.1 Building new market and affordable homes to meet housing needs will support the 
creation of healthy communities and contribute to the success of the local economy.  
Building the right type of homes in the right places can also promote energy 
efficiency and help reduce fuel poverty. The Local Plan needs to do this whilst 
ensuring the protection and enhancement of our environment.  
 
7.2 The Loc al Plan needs to consider the housing needs of the whole community 
including single person households, families, elderly people, people with disabilities, 
Gypsies and Travellers, and people wishing to build their own homes and be 
sufficiently flexible to c ope with changes over the plan period. A proportion of the 
housing will need to be available at below market costs to help households who 
cannot afford open market prices or rents.  
 
7.3 Housing needs  and aspirations can often be met by extending existing hom es or by 
replacing them. Wher e non -residential buildings lie vacant, turning them into homes 
can provide attractive places to live, provided that this is not at the cost of providing 
appropria te local places of employment. National planning policy requires that the 
Local Plan consider s restricting inappropriate development in gardens and limiting 
new housing development in the countryside.  
Key Facts:  
• South Cambridgeshire has high house prices in relation to earnings.  In 
June 2012 average house prices were 6.9 times average household 
incomes with the ratio increasing to 10.3 times when comparing lower 
quartile prices and incomes.  
• In June 2012 the average house price was £299,359 compared to an 
average price a cross England of £250,056.  
• A housing register with over 3,378 households seeking affordable 
housing in March 2013. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(2013)  identifies that 11,838 affordable homes will be required to meet 
current and arising need in the period to 2031.   
• 1,416 new affordable homes built during 5 year period between 1 April 
2007 and 31 March 2012 including 276 built on exception sites.  
• Gypsy and Traveller community needs have been identified through the 
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodatio n Assessment 2016.  
• An ageing population with growth forecast between 2001 to 2021 of 
95% for the 60 -74 age group and 108% for those 75+.  
• The 2011 census recorded that 41.5% of homes were detached houses 
or bungalows, 33.5% semi -detached houses or bungalows , 18% 
terraced houses or bungalows, 6% flats or maisonettes, and 1% were 
caravans and other dwellings.   
• The Census 2011 recorded that 25% of households in the district were 
of one person (11.5% pensioners), 31% were households with 
dependent children, 9% were households with non -dependent children, 
32% were households with no children (10% of which were pensioners), 
and 3% were other types of household.   
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
134 
 Allocations for Residential Development at Villages  
 
 
Site 
reference  Address  Area (ha.) and 
indicative 
dwelling capacity  Development requirements  
H/1:a  Sawston, Dales 
Manor Business Park  10.7 ha.  
200 dwellings  • Contribution to any highway 
works required to mitigate the 
impact of development as a 
whole on the eastern flank of 
Sawston;  
• Creation of a new vehicular 
access to Wakelin Avenue;  
• Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
eastern boundary of the site 
where it adjoins farmland to 
provide a soft green village 
edge;  
• Land bounded by East Way, 
Middle Way and Grove Road to 
be developed to provide light 
industrial and office employment 
(Use Class B1).  
• Retention of the tree belt and 
hedges on the south -west part of 
the site except as required to 
provide for access.   POLICY H/1: Allocations for Residential Development at Villages  
 
1. The following sites shown on the Policies Map are allocated for housing 
development and associated uses. They will be developed in 
accordance with relevant Local Plan policy requirements, and the 
development requirements identified in respect of each site in the table 
below. The nu mber of homes granted planning permission on the site 
may be higher or lower than the indicative capacity and should be 
determined through a design -led approach.  
 
2. All sites will need to make appropriate financial contribution to any 
necessary additional infrastructure requirements, including towards 
additional capacity in local schools.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
135 
  
Site 
reference  Address  Area (ha .) and 
indicative 
dwelling capacity  Development requirements  
H/1:b  Sawston, land north 
of Babraham Road  
(In Babraham Parish)  3.64 ha . 
80 dwellings  • Contribution to any highway 
works required to mitigate the 
impact of development as a 
whole on the eastern flank of 
Sawston;  
• Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
eastern boundary of the site 
where it adjoins farmland to 
provide a soft green  village 
edge.  
H/1:c  Sawston, land south 
of Babraham Road  
(Part of the site is in 
Babraham Parish)  11.64 ha . 
260 dwellings  
 • Contribution to any highway 
works required to mitigate the 
impact of development as a 
whole on the eastern flank of 
Sawston;  
• A contribution to any necessary 
additional capacity in local 
schools and/or the provision of 
land to enable the expansion of 
Icknield Primary School.  
• Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
eastern and southern boundary 
of the site where it adjo ins 
farmland to provide a soft green 
village edge;  
• Vehicular access from 
Babraham Road only, but to 
include additional cycle and 
pedestrian links into Sawston 
along the western boundary of 
the site including to The Green 
Road, Church Lane and 
Plantation Ro ad; 
• To come forward as a single 
proposal in a comprehensive 
scheme.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
136 
 Site 
reference  Address  Area (ha .) and 
indicative 
dwelling capacity  Development requirements  
H/1:d  Histon & Impington, 
land north of 
Impington Lane  1.21 ha . 
25 dwellings  • Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
boundary of the site where it 
adjoins or could be seen from 
open countryside to provide a 
soft green village edge;  
• Design to mitigate impact on the 
conservation area and nearby 
listed b uildings;  
• No built development to take 
place in flood zones 2 or 3.  
H/1:e  Melbourn, land off 
New Road and rear 
of Victoria Wa y 3 ha. 
65 dwellings  • Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
boundary of the site where it 
adjoins or could be seen from 
open countryside to provide a 
soft green village edge.  
H/1:f  Gamlingay, Green 
End Industrial Estate  4.09 ha . 
90 dwellings  • To be developed as a mixed use 
site, incorporating employment 
uses utilising not less than 25% 
of the site, providing light 
industrial , office, and/or general 
industrial  employment (Use 
Class B1 and B2) compatible 
with a residential area.  
H/1:g  Willingham, land east 
of Rockmill End  2.12 ha . 
50 dwellings  • Creation of a significant 
landscape buffer along the 
boundary of the site where it 
adjoins or could be seen from 
open countryside to provide a 
soft green village edge, and 
provide capacity f or a 
sustainable drainage system.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
137 
 Site 
reference  Address  Area (ha .) and 
indicative 
dwelling capacity  Development requirements  
H/1:h  Land at Bennell 
Farm, Comberton (I n 
Toft Parish)  6.27 ha . 
90 dwellings  • Residential development will be 
located to the east of the access 
road running through the site 
and be at a low density  to take 
account of the character of this 
part of Comberton;  
• Will be required to incorporate a 
full size football pitch and 
changing facilities for Toft 
village;  
• Will be required to provide 
community car parking that is 
also available for overspill 
parking for Comberton Village 
College;  
• The affordable housing provision 
to meet the affordable housing 
needs of the villages of Toft and 
Comberton, proportionate to the 
level of need in each village.  
 
7.4 The Local Plan must allocate sites for new housing development to meet the long 
term needs of the district and support forecast new jobs. As detailed in the Spatial 
Strategy chapter, the majority of new housing will be delivered in the form of 
previously p lanned urban extensions to Cambridge, Northstowe and Cambourne, 
and additional new settlements at Waterbeach and Bourn Airfield and further 
expansion of Cambourne, which are addressed in Chapter 3: Strategic Sites.  
 
7.5 The number of allocations in villages has been limited, and focused on opportunities 
at the more sustainable villages. They have been identified taking account of a 
range of factors and opportunities provided by individual sites, such as avoiding the 
best and most versatile agricultural land , brownfield sites, avoiding heritage and 
wildlife designations, landscape and townscape impacts, site access, school 
capacity, and site viability and deliverability.  
 
7.6 At July 2017, the following  allocations in villages have already been granted 
planning per mission:  
• Land off New Road and rear of Victoria Way, Melbourn:  Full planning 
permission (S/2048/14/FL) was granted in February 2015 for erection of 64 
dwellings on land south west of Victoria Way. Outline planning permission 
(S/0287/15/OL) was granted in M arch 2017 for erection of 18 dwellings and 
the retention of the existing dwelling on land at 36 New Road.  
• Green End Industrial Estate, Gamlingay:  Outline planning permission 
(S/2068/15/OL) for the demolition of 5 dwellings and industrial and office 
units a nd the erection of up to 90 dwellings was granted in December 2016. 
This planning permission covers approximately 75% of the allocation . South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
138 
 • Land east of Rockmill End, Willingham:  Outline planning permission 
(S/2833/15/OL) for erection of up to 72 dwellings, r elocation of allotments 
and provision of public open space was granted in May 2017. This planning 
permission covers a larger site than the allocation.  
• Land at Bennell Farm, Comberton (in Toft Parish):  Outline planning 
permission (S/2204/15/OL) for erection  of up to 90 dwellings, car park, 
football pitch and changing facilities was granted in October 2016.  
 
7.7 The most significant village development is planned at Sawston, one of the best 
served villages in the district in terms of access to services and facil ities and will 
provide new homes close to the research parks located to the south of Cambridge. 
Allocations will provide an opportunity for a comprehensive and planned approach 
to the eastern side of the village, utilising opportunities for the reuse of pr eviously 
developed land.  
 
7.8 The identified development requirements for each of the housing sites are 
necessary to ensure that the likely impacts of the development will be adequately  
mitigated. Further site development requirements and contributions may be  required 
by national planning policy and other policies in the Local Plan when a planning 
application is under consideration, where these are necessary to make a particular 
development acceptable in planning terms.   
 
7.9 Associated uses in the context of thi s policy can include uses commonly found in 
and appropriate to residential areas such as affordable housing, schools and 
childcare facilities, open spaces for recreation and sport including allotments and 
play areas, healthcare facilities, and small local shops and services.   
 
7.10 Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) may be prepared during the plan period 
which add detail to Local Plan policies or provide further guidance on how sites 
should be developed. Account should be taken of such SPD as material plann ing 
considerations.   
 
Bayer CropScience Site, Hauxton  
 
  POLICY H/2: Bayer CropScience Site, Hauxton  
 
1. Land at Bayer CropScience Plc, Hauxton, is allocated for a sustainable 
high density, residential -led mixed -use development. Development of 
the 8.7 hectare site will comprise housing and B1 employment 
development as well as open space and community facilities. 
Development will be required to provide appropriate contributions to 
local services and facilities and the provision of a high quality bus 
service and cycle links to Cambridge (i ncluding long -term financial 
support if necessary).  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
139 
  
7.11 The Bayer CropScience site near Hauxton offers a specific opportunity where a 
brownfield site is available for redevelopment, located near to the edge of 
Cambridge. The site comprises a vacant previously intensively developed industrial 
site that incl uded  manufacturing and warehousing.  Appropriate redevelopment will 
comprise a mix of uses to maximise sustainability and it will enable visual 
improvement of this prominent site, improving a  major approach into Cambridge. It 
will need to be sensitively des igned to take account of its position  surrounded by the 
Green Belt. It is capable of being developed with good links to the Trumpington 
Meadows development, and Trumpington Park and Ride, as well as the village of 
Hauxton itself. The site also offers oppor tunities for improved access to the River 
Cam.  
 
7.12 Part of the site lies within the medium risk flood zone, and appropriate mitigation 
measures will be required. The site was contaminated and remediation works have 
been undertaken and at time of writing site  monitoring continues to be undertaken.  
Development should not commence on site until the Council has agreed that 
satisfactory remediation has been undertaken.    
 
7.13 Proposals for the redevelopment of the recreation buildings and waste water 
treatment facil ity on the western side of the A10 will be considered in the context of 
proposals that do not comprise inappropriate  development within the Green Belt. As 
a planning objective it would be highly desirable to secure the removal of the 
incongruous industrial  structures on the western part of the site. Particular 
consideration should be given to proposals that remove these structures and 
improve the visual appearance of the Green Belt through proposals that are  
consistent with Policy NH/9 and the NPPF (2012) paragraph 89.  2. The development will include:  
a. The creation of riverside informal open space linking between the 
proposed Trumpington Meadows Country Park and Hauxton 
village, retaining appropriate existing features of ecological 
interest, and creation of new features that will enhance the site;  
b. Establishing pedestrian and cycle links to the Trumpington 
Meadows development, and to the Trumpington Park and Ride;  
c. Establishing pedestrian and cycle links to the village of Hauxton;  
d. Contributions to improved public transport provision along the A10 
corridor;  
e. Improved community facilities;  
f. Finding uses for the listed buildings on the site at the Hauxton Mill 
complex;  
g. The remediation of all contamination caused by previous industrial 
uses of the site;  
h. Redevelopment that will secure a reduced visual impact of the site 
on the openness of the Cambridge Green Belt.  
 
3. A Masterplan will be required for the sit e. 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
140 
 Fulbourn and Ida Darwin Hospitals  
 
 
7.14 A policy allowing the redevelopment of the Ida Darwin Hospital and Fulbourn 
Hospital sites for residential development and new mental health facilities was 
originally included in the Site Specific Policies DPD. Fulbourn Hospital and Ida 
Darwin Hospital lie within the Cambridge Green Belt which in this locality separates 
Cambridge from Fulbourn village and forms part of the  setting of the city. 
Cambridgeshire & Peterborough Mental Health Foundation Trust who own and 
operate both sites intend to rationalise health care provision on the sites, including 
relocating some existing uses from the Ida  Darwin site to the Fulbourn Hospital site.  
They will no longer require the majority of buildings on the Ida Darwin site.  
 Policy H/3: Fulbourn and Ida Darwin Hospitals  
 
1. The redevelopment of the existing built footprint of the Ida Darwin 
Hospital into a different configuration, comprising residential 
redevelopment on the eastern part of the Ida Darwin site and the 
transfer of part of the building footprint to the Fulbourn Hospital site for 
new mental health facilities will be permitted.   
 
2. Redevelopment will create a green wedge on the western part of the 
Ida Darwin site to provide a compensatory enhancement to the 
openness of the Green Belt in this location. This green wed ge will also 
provide enhanced public access to the countryside.  
 
3. Developers will be required to undertake ecological surveys and 
monitoring prior to the commencement of construction, and propose a 
Biodiversity Strategy for the protection and enhancement of  biodiversity 
that establishes which areas will be protected and enhanced, and 
appropriate mitigation measures.  
 
4. An investigation into land contamination will be required prior to the 
granting of any planning permission. Should this indicate that 
remediati on should be undertaken, this must be done to a standard 
agreed with the Council and conditions will be imposed on any planning 
permission to ensure that development takes place in accordance with 
a programme which takes account of remediation work.  
 
5. Appro priate investigation of noise and vibration in relation to the 
adjoining railway line will be required, and attenuation measures may 
be secured by condition as necessary.   
 
6. Development Briefs for this sensitive location in the Green Belt between 
Cambridge  and Fulbourn are required to be submitted to and approved 
by the Local Planning Authority prior to granting of planning permission.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
141 
 7.15 The National Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF , 2012 ) states that the construction 
of new buildings in the Green Belt should be regarded as inappropriate, except 
where the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed sites would 
not have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt and the purpose of 
including land within it than the existing development.  
 
7.16 The Ida Darwin Hospital site adjoins the western end of Fulbourn village. As a 
previously developed site which is developed at a relatively low density in 
landscaped grounds it has a physical relationship with the village but a significantly 
different character which justifies its location in the  Green Belt. Redevelopment of 
the built footprint in a different configuration as a residential area would change the 
character of the site and its relationship with Fulbourn, but there is potential for this 
to have positive implications by the removal of all buildings from the western part of 
the site, and the creation of an area of open countryside character which could help 
increase the openness of the Green Belt.  
 
7.17 The residential development potential would depend on how the existing Ida Darwin 
site bui lt footprint were redistributed across the whole site. It is anticipated that the 
Ida Darwin site could deliver 250 to 275 dwellings, although the total would depend 
on any buildings that would remain on the Ida Darwin site, and the amount of 
additional he althcare development required on the Fulbourn Hospital site.  
 
7.18 Fulbourn Hospital Conservation Area was designated in December 1992 to 
preserve and enhance the setting of the group of 19th Century former asylum 
buildings. The boundary of the conservation are a includes the important parkland 
setting which was fundamental to the building’s purpose as one of the first ‘open 
asylums’ in the country. Any additional development will need to consider the 
historic pattern of development and parkland settlement.  
 
7.19 A Biodiversity Strategy will be required to accompany development proposals, 
which should consider features worthy of retention. The redevelopment of the Ida 
Darwin site will provide significant opportunities for biodiversity enhancement, 
particularly on the w estern part of the site which is proposed to revert to open 
countryside.  
 
7.20 A single line railway runs adjacent to the north of the Ida Darwin site. Although it is 
not a main line, railway noise will need assessment in accordance with the NPPF 
(2012) and ass ociated guidance. Noise and vibration mitigation and/or attenuation 
on site and noise insulation measures to buildings may be required to provide 
external and internal noise levels that are acceptable for future residents.  
 
7.21 There appears to have been a lan dfill area to the north west of the Ida Darwin site, 
and the site itself has historical use as a hospital. These are potential  sources of 
land contamination. This is a material consideration that will require investigation 
and remediation as necessary so t hat land is suitable for use in accordance with the 
NPPF (2012) and associated British Standards / guidance.  
 
7.22 The Ida Darwin site is located immediately to the south of a Roman settlement 
considered to be of national importance and subject to statutory des ignation South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
142 
 (Scheduled Monument 95). Further evidence of Iron Age and Roman settlement is 
known to the east of the scheduled monument and the settlement area is likely to 
extend into the Ida Darwin Hospital site. This will require appropriate investigation, 
although development of the hospital itself may have removed some or all remains.  
 
7.23 The Ida Darwin site is within a groundwater protection zone and appropriate 
measures would therefore need to be provided so as to ensure the water 
environment is protected from contamination. The area is known to have a high 
water table, and this will need to be considered in a site -specific Flood Risk 
Assessment.  
 
7.24 Residential development will be designed and landscaped to minimise impact on 
the character of the Green Belt. Strengthening the existing boundary tree planting, 
particularly the southern boundary will help mitigate the impact of a denser 
development on the character of the Green Belt. This will also allow two storey 
houses and three storey extra care accommodation  to replace those parts of the Ida 
Darwin Hospital, which are large single storey without adversely affecting visual 
amenity.  
 
7.25 A comprehensive Construction Environmental Management Plan will be required for 
all phases of development and the development sho uld be carried out in 
accordance with Policy CC/6.  
 
Papworth Everard West Central  
 
7.26 The Site Specific Policies DPD identified an area in Papworth Everard for 
redevelopment that would provide a mix of uses to enhance the village centre. 
Papworth West Central contains a number of buildings that have reached the end of 
their life or that are currently unused. The redevelo pment or reuse of these buildings 
is an opportunity for continued invigoration of the village centre. Located at the heart 
of the expanded village any redevelopment will be based on the principle of Policy H/4: Papworth Everard West Central  
 
1. Redevelopment of Papworth Everard West Central, as defined on the 
Policies Map, must be aimed at the continued invigoration of the village 
centre with the pr inciple of providing a mix of uses including community 
uses, employment uses and housing development.  
 
2. Any scheme for redevelopment must:  
a. Be well related to, and respect the character of, Papworth Everard 
village centre; and  
b. Integrate with surrounding dev elopment including the new 
residential development to the south.  
 
3. Exceptionally, planning permission will be granted for housing 
development above the scale permitted in a Minor Rural Centre.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
143 
 providing a mix of uses in the Papworth West Central area  including community 
uses, employment uses and housing.  
 
Fen Drayton Former Land Settlement Association Estate  
 
 
7.27 The Land Settlement Association (LSA) was created in the 1930s to carry out an 
experimental scheme for the provision of smallholdings for unemployed persons, 
with financial assistance f rom the Government. The scheme ended in the 1980s 
and only a very small number of smallholdings are still in commercial horticultural 
use, although some other commercial us es now operate within the area.  The legacy 
of the experiment is a network of smallho ldings with dwellings along the road 
frontages, a collection of glasshouses and outbuildings in varying states of repair, 
and large areas of unused land.  
 
7.28 The Site Specific Policies  DPD  originally identified the former LSA estate at Fen 
Drayton as a location for experimental and ground -breaking forms of sustainable 
living. This replaced the previous policy included in the Local Plan 2004 which 
restricted development within the estate to that directly related to agriculture, 
horticulture, forestry or other uses appropriate to a rural area.  
 
7.29 The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 
(BREEAM) for non -residential buildings is a nationally recognised assessment for 
measuring the sustainability of non-residential  buildings. Each building is assessed 
against a numbe r of categories covering energy, water, materials, waste, pollution, 
health and wellbeing, management , land use  and ecology,  transport and innovation  
to produce an overall score for the sustainability of the building.  
 
7.30 Detailed guidance on the implementation of Policy H/ 5 will be provided in a   
Supplementary Planning Document.  
 Policy H/5: Fen Drayton Former Land Settlement Association Estate  
 
Within the former Land Settlement Association Estate at Fen Drayton, as 
defined on the Policies Map, planning permission for the redevelopment of 
existing buildings (excluding glasshouses) will be permitted provided that:  
a. Any new development delivers onsite experimental or groundbreaking 
forms of sustainable living and any non -residential buildings achieve 
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 
(BREEAM) outstanding standard;  
b. It can be demonstrated that the buildings are no longer needed for 
agricultural purposes; and  
c. The development would not occupy a l arger footprint than the existing 
buildings that are being replaced.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
144 
 South of A1307, Linton  
 
 
7.31 The A1307 is a major transport route that links Cambridge to Haverhill and is a high 
casualty route. The southern part of Linton is severed from the rest of the village by 
the A1307 and includes employment uses, re sidential uses and Linton Zoo. 
Although there is a pelican crossing and reduced speed limit, the A1307 makes it 
difficult for re sidents, workers or visitors to safely and easily access the services 
and facilities in the centre of the village. Windfall residential development in this 
location would not be sustainable with its poor access to the village facilities and 
services.  
 
Reside ntial Moorings   
 
7.32 The site was proposed by the Conservators of the River Cam. The delivery of 
additional moorings will relieve pressure on areas within Cambridge, and provide 
further support for tourism. The Cambridge Local Plan allocates an adjoining area of 
land within their administrative boundary, which would be developed with this site.  
 
7.33 The site lies in the Green Belt. Built development needed to support the moorings 
should be kept to the minimum needed to support the use of the moorings. 
Proposals wi ll need to address impacts on the riverside footpath, to ensure 
continued convenient use for users.  Appropriate provision of car and cycle parking 
will also be required. Proposals will need to be accompanied by full ecological and 
landscape assessments, to  address the resulting changes to the nature of the site.  
There is also known archaeology in the area, which will require assessment prior to 
development.  
 Policy H/6: South of A1307, Linton  
 
South of th e A1307 at Linton, within the area defined on the Policies Map, 
windfall residential development will not be permitted other than 
improvements to existing properties.  
Policy H/7: Residential Moorings  
 
1. A site of 0.95 hectares at Chesterton Fen Road, Milton is allocated for 
residential boat moorings.  
 
2. The site must be designed so that it does not impede navigation and/or 
the use of the footpath alongside the river.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
145 
 Housing Density  
 
7.34 The density of residential development describes the number of houses or flats that 
are developed on an area of land.  Achieving the right density of development for a 
location is important to the character of a pl ace and local quality of life. The 
appropriate density for any particular location will be determined by the nature of the 
area and by its surroundings and by a  need to use land eff iciently as a finite 
resource. A net site density measure includes only those areas which will be 
developed for housing and directly associated uses such as access roads within the 
site, private garden space, car parking, incidental op en space and landscaping, and 
children’s play areas.  
 
7.35 A density of 30 dwellings per hectare will ac hieve an efficient use of land.  A higher 
density of 40 dph (net) will make the most of land in our most sustainable locations 
on the Cambridge fringe and in new settlements. 30 dph is identified for all but our 
smallest Infill villages . Local character, the scale of development, and other 
circumstances can justify development at lower and higher densities than 30 dph 
and 40 dph (net).  Density guidelines are no t needed for developments and rural 
affordable housing exception site developments in Infill villages where a design -led 
approach taking account of local circumstances including the character of the 
locality and the scale of the development should be follo wed.   
 
Housing Mix  Policy H/8: Housing Density  
 
1. Housing developments including rural exception sites, will achieve an 
average net density of:  
a. 30 dwellings per hectare (dph) in Rural Centres, Minor Rural 
Centre villages, and Group villages; and  
b. 40 dph in urban extensions to Cambridge and in new settlements.   
 
2. The net density on a site may vary from the above where just ified by the 
character of the locality, the scale of the development, or other local 
circumstances.   
Policy H/9: Housing Mix  
 
1. A wide choice, type and mix of housing will be provided to meet the 
needs of different groups in the community including families with 
children, older people,  those seeking starter homes, people wishing to 
build their own homes, people seeking private rented sector housing, 
and people with disabilities. The market homes in developments of 10 
or more homes will consist of:  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
146 
  
7.36 In order to deliver a wide choice of high quality homes, widen opportunities for 
home ownership and create sustainable, inclusive an d mixed communities, it is 
important that we plan for a mix of housing based on the needs of dif ferent groups 
in the community.  The high cost of housing locally also affects the size of home that 
many people can afford, even if their preference would be fo r a larger property, and 
it is important to provide for everyone’s needs and help create m ixed and balanced 
communities.  The Council will encourage the creation of sites for starter homes 
within the district so that first time buyers are given more opportu nities to live in the 
district. Also the Council will support those people wishing to build their own homes.  
The private rented sector plays an essenti al role in the housing market. The Census 
2011 identifies a tenure change to private rented of 3.1% from the Census 2001 for 
South Camb ridgeshire. Affordability within the private sector is a m ajor concern for 
the District. The increase in size of deposit required for both market and sh ared 
ownership means there is likely to be a significant demand for private rented a. At least 30% 1 or 2 bedroom homes;  
b. At least 30% 3 bedroom homes;  
c. At lea st 30% 4 or more bedroom homes;  
d. With a 10% flexibility allowance that can be added to any of the 
above categories taking account of local circumstances.  
 
2. Section 1 is subject to:  
e. The housing mix of affordable homes (except starter homes) in all 
developments being determined by local housing needs evidence.  
f. On all sites of 20 or more dwellings, and in each phase of strategic 
sites, developers will supply dwelling plots for sale to self and 
custom builders. Where plots have been made available and 
appropriately marketed for at least 12 months and have not been 
sold, the plot(s) may either remain on the market or be built out by 
the developer. Exceptionally, no provision will be expected in 
developments or phases of developments which comprise high 
density multi -storey flats and apartments.  
 
3. The mix of market homes to be provided on sites of 9 or fewer homes 
will take account of local circumstances.  
 
4. 5% of homes in a development should be built to the accessible and 
adaptable dwellings M4(2) standard  rounding down to the nearest 
whole property. This provision shall be split evenly between the 
affordable and market homes in a development rounding to the nearest 
whole number.  
 
5. Developments including specialist accommodation for the elderly (with 
or with out care) will not be subject to the housing mix set out in section 
1 and will demonstrate appropriate design standards.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
147 
 accommodation from lo w to middle income households. We will support the private 
rented sector to grow through build to let, to meet the growing demand for rented 
homes as pa rt of the market element of housing developments.   
 
7.37 Our housing stock has traditionally been dominated by larger detached an d 
semi -detached family houses. Whilst recent developments have helped to increase 
the stock of smaller properties available, the overall imbalance of larger properties 
remains. The Census 2011 for example identifies that 75% of the housing stock are 
detached and semi -detached houses and  bungalows, with 18% terraced homes and 
6% flats and maisonettes.   
 
7.38 The population of the d istrict is ageing and often older people need or prefer smaller 
properties that are easier to manage than their original home, with people often 
looking to ‘do wnsiz e’ to a smaller property. We also know that as people age the 
incidence of disability and frailty also increase, and in the age band 64 -74 up to 7% 
of residents will be classified as frail1. The Cambridgeshire Joint Strategic Needs 
Assessment for Older Peo ple (2010) recorded that 5% of older people received a 
disability living allowance and that by 2020 the prevalence of people with diabetes is 
expected to be 7.4%, 6% with cardiovascular disease and 2.7% with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.   
 
7.39 There are a range of models that can play a part in providing specialist 
accommodation for older people.  These include sheltered and enhanced sheltered 
housing, Extra Care housing, retirement villages, continuing care retirement 
communities and registered care h omes both with and without nursing care. Where 
appropriate, specialist accommodation for the elderly should be provided on a 
mixed -tenure basis, and such accommodation should be located on sites in new 
settleme nts or within larger villages. Where any schem e providing specialist 
accommodation for the elderly (with or without care) includes an affordable housing 
component, this can count towards the overall 40% affordable housing requirement 
if part of a wider development.  
  
7.40 Custom and self build housing is housing built or commissioned by individuals (or 
groups of individuals) for their own occupation. As the Local  Plan allocates mainly 
larger housing sites, without this policy, it is likely that custom and self builders 
would struggle to compete for sites. In October 2015 there were 229 people 
registered on the South Cambridgeshire Right to Build register which had been 
open since January 2015. New applications now average around 10 per month. 
This policy helps local residents develop their own lower cost ma rket housing, 
supports the local economy by providing work for local builders and tradesmen, 
increases the diversity of housing supply, and will facilitate innovative designs and 
the development of more sustainable houses.    
 
7.41 Local evidence shows that in C ouncil housing up to 41% of households include 
someone with a disability2. This figure falls to 14.3% of private sector households of 
which just less tha n half have mobility problems. A breakdown o f household 
                                                
1 Strategic Housing Market Assessment Chapter 34, Table 9.   
2 South Cambridgeshire Housing Strategy 2012 -1016, page 27  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
148 
 composition in the d istrict in 2011 can be read  in the ‘key facts’ box  at the start of 
this chapter.  
 
7.42 The provision of housing which is constructed to Wheelchair Housing Design 
standards will only be expected as part of the affordable housing element of 
developments and then only in response to identi fied need.   
  
Affordable Housing  
 
7.43 Affordable housing is housing that is subsidised  and provided to eligible households 
in the district whose ne eds are not met by the market. It includes rented housing 
and housing where occupiers  purchase part of the property.  A full definitio n is 
provided in the glossary. Detailed  guidance on how this policy will be implemented 
will be provided in a Supplementary Planning Document.   
 
7.44 The provision of affordable housing to meet housing need i s a key issue for the 
Council . The Housing Strategy 2012 -2016 aims  to deliver a range of homes that are Policy H/10: Affordable Housing  
 
1. All developments of 11 dwellings  or more, or on development sites of 
less than 11 units if the total floorspace of the proposed units exceeds 
1,000m2, will provide affordable housing as follows:  
a. To provide that 40% of the homes on site will be affordable;   
b. To address evidence of housing need.  An agreed mix of 
affordable house tenures will be determined by local 
circumstances at the time of granting planning permission;  
c. In small groups or cluster s distributed through the site.  
 
2. Except where:  
d. It can be demonstrated that the level of affordable housing sought 
would make a development unviable in light of changing market 
conditions, individual site circumstances and development costs.  
In which case a revised mix of affordable house types and tenures 
and then a lower level of affordable housing provision may be 
negotiated;  
e. The off -site provision of affordable dwellings can be demonstrated 
to have benefits such as the provision of additional affordable  
dwellings, or the improvement or a better use of existing housing 
stock and would contribute to the creation of mixed and balanced 
communities;  
f. It can be demonstrated that it is not possible or appropriate to 
build affordable homes on -site or off -site, i n which case the 
development will provide a financial contribution towards the 
future provision of affordable housing.  The contribution to be of 
‘broadly equivalent value’ to that which would have been provided 
on-site.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
149 
 affordable to all and where people want to live that will support economic  growth 
and economic activity. The key driver affecting the need for affordable housing is 
the high cost of buying or renting on the open market  in compari son to local 
household incomes.  There is a high level of housing need in the district with 3,378 
households on the Council hous ing register as of March 2013. The Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment records that identifies that 11,838 affordable homes 
will be required to meet current and arising need in the period to 2031 , a 
considerable proportion of all the homes to be built to 2031, however the delivery of 
such housing will be constrained by development viability, the availability of land, 
and the need to create sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.   
 
7.45 Viability evidence and past delivery has identified that 40% affordable housing is 
viable for most developments in most locations across the district. The number, 
type, and tenure of affor dable housing will be negotiated on a site by site basis 
informed by the current housing strategy, local housing need and relevant site 
constraints. Local experience has shown that major complex developments such as 
new settlements have significant infrast ructure requirements, but all are different 
both in terms of location, phasing and the package of required infrastructure. If there 
is an issue about whether such a development will stand the affordable housing 
target that  is a matter that can most effecti vely be addressed through the planning 
application process where all the policy calls on a development, together with other 
development related requirements, can be looked at comprehensively and relative 
priorities determined.   
 
7.46 There is no guarantee that  any form of public subsidy will be available to  support 
development projects. Factors such as market and site conditions, and site -specific 
development costs will be taken into account and an 'open -book' approach will be 
taken to negotiation where necessa ry. Developers seeking to justify a lower 
proportion of affordable housing are required to demonstrate why it is not viable to 
provide 40% affordable housing on -site. The financial viability assessment should  
be prepared by the applicant. Where agreement i s not reached, external 
consultants will be appointed to undertake a further independent viability 
assessment. The applicant will meet the costs of the independent assessment.   
 
7.47 In line with national policy, the priority is for new affordable housing to b e provided 
on-site so that it contributes tow ards creating a mix of housing.  However, for some 
developments, the provision of affordable housing on -site may not always be 
possible, and in these cases the Council will exceptionally accept a financial 
contri bution towards future affordable housing provision rather tha n requiring on -site 
provision. Only where it can be robustly justified, will provision on a separate site or 
through a financial contribution (of broadly equivalent value) be potentially 
consider ed as acceptable.  
 
7.48 The Council has previously operated a threshold of 2 properties, but this threshold 
has been raised in line with the Written Ministerial Statement of 28 November 2014,  
to encourage development on smaller brownfield sites and to help diversify the 
house building sector by providing a boost to small and medium sized developers . 
Affordable homes should be integrated with market homes in small groups or 
clusters to create sustainable, i nclusive and mixed communities.  Note that a vacant South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
150 
 building credit may apply to developments bringing vacant buildings on site back 
into lawful use or where such buildings are demolished as part of a development. If 
a vacant building credit is allowed the effect would be to reduce the expected 
affordable hou sing contribution from a site.  
 
Rural Exception Site Affordable Housing  
 
 
7.49 Many of our rural villages face particular difficulties in securing an adequate supply 
of land for affordable housing to address local needs.  Most villages do not have 
housing site allocation s, house prices are often high and existing social rented 
housing is usually  under long term occupancy a nd rarely available to re -let. An 
exception site is a site that provides affordable housing located within  (for villages 
without a development  framework  boundary), or adjoining but outside a 
development  framework boundary, as an exception to normal planning policy.   
 
7.50 The Council has a very good record of delivering exception sites and much 
progress has been made to deliver new local affordable housing in this way. We 
work with Parish  Councils to understand local needs and explore options for 
meeting those needs. Howeve r more could be done if landowners were prepared to 
make additional land available and the N ational Planning Policy Framework (N PPF, 
2012 ) asks that the Local Plan consider allowing some market housing on such 
sites to enable the provision of significant a dditional affordable housing to meet 
local needs.   
 Policy H/11: Rural Exception Site Affordable Housing  
 
1. Affordable housing developments to meet identified local housing 
needs on small sites adjoining a development framework boundar y will 
be permitted subject to:  
a. The number, size, design, mix and tenure of affordable homes are 
confined to, and appropriate to, meeting identified local needs;  
b. The development is of a scale and location appropriate to the size, 
facilities and character o f the settlement;  
c. For sites at settlements within or adjoining the Green Belt, that no 
alternative sites exist that would have less impact on Green Belt 
purposes;  
d. That the affordable homes are secured for occupation by those in 
housing need in perpetuity. Mortgagee in Possession clauses will 
be allowed where demonstrated to be necessary to enable 
development to proceed.  
 
2. In order to facilitate the delivery of significant additional affordable 
housing the Council will consider allowing some market housing on  
rural exception sites on viability or deliverability grounds.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
151 
 7.51 Exception sites should provide 100% affordable housing but this may not always be 
possible . The developer must demonstrate that the inclusion of market housing is 
required to enable the site to be develo ped primarily for affordable housing.   
 
7.52 To ensure priority for the affordable housing is given to people in local housing 
need, the Council will require the affordable housing provider to enter into a legal 
agreement with cascade provisions, under which ap plicants with a connection to the 
village (through residence, employment or close family) are given first priority for 
newly created housing, followed by those with a connection to neighbouring 
villages, and  then those in the rest of the d istrict.  
 
 Residential Space Standards  
 
7.53 The provision of sufficient space within new homes is an important element of good 
residential design and will ensure a reasonable level of residential amenity and Policy H/12: Residential Space Standards  
 
New residential units will be permitted where their gross internal floor areas 
meet or exceed the Government’s Technical Housing Standards – Nationally 
Described Space Standard (2015) or successor document.  
 
The standard requires that:  
a. The dwelling provides at least the gross internal floor area and built -in 
storage area set out in Figure 8;  
b. A dwelling with two or more bedspaces has at least one double (or 
twin) bedroom;  
c. In order to provide one bedspace, a singl e bedroom has a floor area of 
at least 7.5m² and is at least 2.15m wide;  
d. In order to provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a 
floor area of at least 11.5m²;  
e. One double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75m wide and every other 
double (or twin ) bedroom is at least 2.55m wide;  
f. Any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not counted within the 
gross internal area unless used solely for storage (if the area under the 
stairs is to be used for storage, assume a general floor area of 1m² 
within th e gross internal area);  
g. Any other area that is used solely for storage and has a head room of 
900- 1,500mm (such as under eaves) is counted at 50% of its floor 
area, and any area lower than 900mm is not counted at all;  
h. A built -in wardrobe counts towards the gross internal area and bedroom 
floor area requirements, but should not reduce the effective width of the 
room below the minimum widths set out above. The built -in area in 
excess of 0.72m² in a double bedroom and 0.36m² in a single bedroom 
counts towar ds the built -in storage requirement;  
i. The minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.3m for at least 75% of the gross 
internal area.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
152 
 quality of life, and that there is sufficient space, privacy and storage facilities to 
ensure the long term sustainability and usabil ity of new homes. From time to time 
the Government may make changes to the nationally described space standards, 
development proposals should therefore meet or exceed the standards in place at 
the time of the planning application if these are different fro m those in Policy H/1 2. 
 
7.54 Applicants should state the number of bedspaces / occupiers a home is designed to 
accommodate rather than simply the number of bedrooms.  
 
Figure 8 : Minimum gross internal floor areas and storage (m²)  
 
Number of 
bedrooms 
(b) Number of 
bed spaces  
(persons ) 1 storey 
dwellings  2 storey 
dwellings  3 storey 
dwellings  Built in 
storage  
1b 1p 39 (37)    1.0 
2p 50 58  1.5 
2b 3p 61 70  2.0 
4p 70 79  
3b 4p 74 84 90 2.5 
5p 86 93 99 
6p 95 102 108 
4b 5p 90 97 103 3.0 
6p 99 106 112 
7p 108 115 121 
8p 117 124 130 
5b 6p 103 110 116 3.5 
7p 112 119 125 
8p 121 128 134 
6b 7p 116 123 129 4.0 
8p 125 132 138 
 
Notes:  
1. Built-in storage areas are included within the overall gross internal areas and 
include an allowance of 0.5m2 for fixed services or equipment such as a hot 
water cylinder, boiler or heat exchanger.  
2. Gross internal areas for one storey dwellings include enough space for one 
bathroom and one additional WC (or shower room) in dwellings with 5 or more 
bedspaces. Gross internal areas for two and three storey dwellings include 
enough space for one bathroom and one additional WC (or shower room). 
Additional sanitary facilities may be included without increasing the gross 
internal area provided that all aspects of the  space standard have been met.  
3. Where a 1 bedroom 1 person flat has a shower room instead of a bathroom, the 
floor area may be reduced from 39m2 to 37m2, as shown bracketed.  
4. Furnished layouts are not required to demonstrate compliance.  
5. Further de tails on how to apply the standard can be found in the Government’s 
Technical Housing Standards – Nationally Described Space Standard (2015) or 
successor document.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
153 
 Extensions to Dwellings in the Countryside  
 
 
7.55 There are a wide range of properties in the countryside outside villages, from large 
farmhouses and substantial residences to s mall dwellings built at a time when 
families had few possessions and were used to living in cramped, crowded 
conditions, and who would ha ve worked locally on the land. These dwellings 
although small, often sit  on large plots of land. Today these properties  can be 
ill-suited for modern family life but remain expensive to purchase or rent because of 
the lan d that comes with the dwelling.  Such properties are found across the district 
but with a notable concentration at the Land Settlement Associa tion Estate at  Great 
Abington. This policy applies to all the free standing buildings on a curtilage which 
together form a dwelling.   
 
7.56 In determining what constitutes ‘ a disproportionate addition ’, account will be taken 
of the extent to which the dwelling has been prev iously extended, or could be 
extended under Permitted Development rights and the character of the area. For 
the purposes of this policy 'original' is defined as the size of the dwelling as it was 
built or as it existed as of the 1st July 1948,  whichever is  the oldest date.   
 Policy H/13: Extensions to Dwellings in the Countryside  
 
Extensions to dwellings outside  the village framework boundaries shown on 
the Policies Map will be permitted where:  
a. The development would not create a separate dwelling or be capable of 
separation from the existing dwelling;  
b. The extension is in scale and character with the existing dwe lling and 
would not materially change its impact on its surroundings;  
c. The existing home is of permanent design and construction;  
d. If in the Green Belt that the extension would not result in a 
disproportionate addition to the original dwelling;  
e. If the origin al dwelling is subject to an occupancy condition, it must be 
demonstrated that the resultant dwelling can be supported by the 
viability of the site/holding or rural enterprise and that the cost of its 
occupation would not be unaffordable to workers employe d in 
agriculture, forestry or another business where a rural location is 
essential.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
154 
 Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
 
7.57 Where it can be demonstrated that the use of a dwelling has not been abandoned, 
replace ment on a one -for-one basis can be permitted which should encourage mor e 
self-build housing projects. There is a growing trend for people to build their own 
homes which is limite d by the availability of land. Assessment of the design quality, 
scale, countr yside impact, and effect on local character of the proposed 
development will be considered against the other policies of the plan.   
 
7.58 The Council may control  the further expansion of replacement dwellings by the use 
of planning conditions to remove the rights under the General Permitted 
Development Order, to dwellings both within and outside the Green Belt.  
 Policy H/14: Replacement Dwellings in the Countryside  
 
1. The one -for-one replacement of dwellings within a curtilage, outside the 
village framework boundaries shown on the Policies Map, will be 
permitted where:  
a. It can be demonstrated  that the use as a dwelling has not been 
abandoned;  
b. If the replacement dwelling is not on the footprint of the original 
dwelling, that the original is demolished within a month of the 
replacement dwellings first occupation;  
c. In considering countryside impac t and effect on local character only 
the removal of existing buildings currently lawfully used for 
purposes ancillary to the residential use of the original dwelling can 
be taken into account and they must still be standing at the time of 
the application;  
d. If in the Green Belt that the replacement dwelling is not materially 
larger than the one it replaces.  
 
2. Caravans and mobile homes are distinct from permanent dwellings since 
they can be removed. Given the restrictions on development in the 
countryside the r eplacement of caravans and mobile homes with 
permanent dwellings will not be permitted outside village framework 
boundaries.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
155 
 Countryside Dwellings of Exceptional Quality  
 
 
7.59 Our countryside benefits from and is enhanced by existing high quality countrysi de 
homes built before planning controls were introduced and when the population and 
business density of the area were both m uch lower than they are today. The NPPF  
(2012) says we should avoid the construction of isolated country homes unless 
there are spec ial circumstances such as the exceptional quality and innovative 
nature of the design, that the house would enhance its immediate setting and that it 
is sensitive to the defining char acteristics of the local area. Sites with an existing 
dwelling which coul d be replaced under policy H/13 should be avoided in order to 
protect the supply of sites suitable for self -build and other more ‘affordable’ homes.   
 
7.60 The Council’s Economic Development Strategy shows an unfulfilled demand for 
large high quality homes in the £1 million plus category  suitable for business 
executives. The desirability of the district as a place to live and work is key to 
attracting and ret aining businesses in the area. So too is the availability of homes 
that mee t the needs of top executives. A limited number of such bespoke homes 
could help to satisfy this demand and provide a significant enhancement to the 
countryside.  
 Policy H/15: Countryside Dwellings of Exceptional Quality  
 
Outside the Green Belt, single new bespoke dwellings of exceptional quality 
will be permitted in the countryside providing all of the following criteria are met:  
a. The dwelling would reflect the high est standards in architecture, being 
recognised as truly outstanding or innovative;  
b. The dwelling would significantly enhance its immediate setting;  
c. The nature and size of the site, and the design of the dwelling, its 
landscaping and location on site are se nsitive to the defining 
characteristics of the local area and to wider views;  
d. That there are no existing dwellings on the site capable of being replaced 
under Policy H/14.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
156 
 Development of Residential Gardens  
 
 
7.61 Over the years there has been a trend for development to take place in residential 
gardens as one of the only means available to provide new housing in villages and 
as a means whereby property owners c an gain value from their land. Such 
developments  include where a n existing house or houses are demolished for 
redevelopment, and where an existing house is retained and new dwell ings are 
erected in the garden.  It is recognized that there are limited opportunities for new 
development in many villages and that there can be some situations where there 
can be development in residential gardens without harm to the local area.   
 
7.62 The development  of residential gardens has in the past led to concerns about 
impacts on residential amenity, local character, heritage, and from inc reased traffic.  
Gardens represent an important part of the character and amenity value of many 
villages which can be harmed by inappropriate deve lopment. The NPPF  (2012)  
asks us to consider the case for including policies in our Local Plan to resist the 
inappropriate development of residential gardens.   Policy H/16: Development of Residential Gardens  
 
The development of land used or last used as residential gardens for new 
dwellings will only be permitted where:  
a. The development is for a one -to one replacement of a dwelling in the 
countryside under Policy H/14 and/or:  
b. There would be no significant harm to the local area taking account of:  
i. The character of the local area;  
ii. Any direct and on -going impacts on the residential amenity of nearby 
properties;  
iii. The proposed siting, design, scal e, and materials of construction of 
the buildings;  
iv. The existence of or ability to create a safe vehicular access;  
v. The provision of adequate on -site parking or the existence of safe, 
convenient and adequate existing on -street parking;  
vi. Any adverse impacts on  the setting of a listed building, or the 
character of a conservation area, or other heritage asset;  
vii. Any impacts on biodiversity and important trees;  
viii. Ensuring that the form of development would not prevent the 
development of adjoining sites.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
157 
 Reuse of Buildings in the Cou ntryside for Residential Use  
 
7.63 South Cambridgeshire has a rich heritage of agricultural buildings, some which are 
no longer ne eded for agricultural purposes.  Where there is no prospect of their 
being used to provide local employment, the Council is supportive of allowing rural 
buildings to be adapted to make a contribution to meeting local housing needs. The 
reuse of existing rural buildings that are no longer  needed for their original purpose 
provides an opportunity for development without the impact that new bu ildings have 
on the landscape. Reuse may therefore be allowed in situations where new 
buildings would not. It is important, however, to consider the po tential impact in 
terms of the character of  the building and the locality.  Not all buildings in the 
countryside are suitable for conversion or adaptation to new uses, as they may be 
of insubstantial construction, of poor design, or not in keeping with thei r 
surroundings.   
 
Working at Home  
 Policy H/18: Working at Home  
 
The partial conversion, extension or change of use of residential dwellings to 
enable the residents to work at or from part of the dwelling will be permitted 
subject to:  
a. The rest of the property remaining in residential use;   
b. There being no significant harm to the residential amenity of neighbours 
or to the character of the locality arising from the appearance of the 
property, noise, hours and days of operation, fumes, vi bration, dust, 
odours, car and pedestrian traffic generation, car parking impacts, safe 
vehicular access and advertising.  Policy H/17: Reuse of Buildings in the Countryside for Residential Use  
 
The change of use and adaptation of redunda nt or disused buildings in rural 
areas to residential use will only be permitted where:  
a. The buildings are unsuitable for employment use, or it being 
demonstrated through marketing the development opportunity for at 
least 12 months at a realistic price, tha t there is no demand for their 
development for employment use;   
b. The buildings are structurally sound, not makeshift in nature and are of 
permanent, substantial construction;  
c. There will be an enhancement to the immediate setting of the buildings;  
d. The form,  bulk, design, landscaping and materials used in the change of 
use and adaptation and any associated extensions are sensitive to the 
character and appearance of the building and locality;  
e. There is a safe vehicular site access.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
158 
 7.64 A growing number of people are working at or from home either full time or part time 
and in self -employment or as an alterna tive to going into the office. Many successful 
businesses have been set up and operated from residential properties before 
moving on to purpose  built business accommodation. Home working can help to 
maintain economic prosperity and employment and re lieve commuting pressure on 
our roads, and can be expected to grow further as rural broadband speeds 
increase.   
 
7.65 Some small -scale manufacturing and service industries are operated by people 
working in their own homes, for example the manufacture of craft items and 
foodstuffs or the carrying out of cl othing alterations or repairs. Planning permission 
is not normally required so long as such activities do not affect the overall dome stic 
character of the building.  However, if the non -residential use ceases to  be ancillary, 
because the business has expanded, planning permission will be required.  
Indicators that a material change of use has occurred include:  
• a significant alteration to the appearance of the dwelling;  
• a significant increase in the volume of visitors or traffic;  
• a significant increase in noise, fumes or odour coming from the dwelling;  
• the installation of special machinery or equipment not normally found in a 
dwelling; and the laying out of rooms in suc h a way that they could not easily 
revert to residential use at the end of the working day.  
 
Dwellings to Support a Rural -based Enterprise  
 
 Policy H/19: Dwellings to Support a Rural -based Enterprise  
 
1. Proposals for permanent dwellings in the countryside f or full -time 
workers in agriculture or forestry or in another business where a rural 
location is essential, will be permitted if special circumstances can be 
demonstrated by it meeting all of the following criteria:  
a. There is a clear existing functional nee d for one or more workers 
to be readily available at most times;  
b. The enterprise has been established for at least three years and 
is, and should remain financially viable;  
c. There is no other accommodation within the site / holding or 
nearby which is current ly suitable and available, or could be made 
available and suitable through conversion and change of use;  
d. A dwelling or building suitable for conversion to a dwelling within 
the site/holding has not been sold on the open housing market 
without an agricultur al or other occupancy condition in the last 
year;  
e. The proposed dwelling is no larger than that required to meet the 
reasonable needs of the enterprise.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
159 
  
7.66 In many instances it will be possible for workers in agricultural and land -based 
occupations to live in a town or village near to their business location. However, 
occasionally the nature of agricultural and other rural enterprises make i t essential 
for someone to live on, or in clo se proximity to the enterprise.  Applications for 
planning permission in such circumstances will need to demonstrate that the 
enterprise or intention to engage in one is genuine and will be sustained for a 
reason able period of time that is sufficient to warrant a dwelling in the countryside 
where it wo uld not otherwise be permitted.  It will be necessary to establish that the 
enterprise needs one or more workers to be readily available at most times, for 
example to  provide essential care to animals or processes at short notice and to 
deal quickly with emergencies that could cause serious loss of crops or produce.  
Such dwellings may be exceptionally permitted in open countryside only because o f 
the needs of the ente rprise. National planning policy guidance allows for this as a 
special circumstance which can justify the national policy against new isol ated 
homes in the countryside. As this is a departure from policy, the planning 
permission will be subject to a condit ion restricting occupation.   
 
7.67 In general, preference will be given to the re -use or replacement of existing 
buildings over those which propose  the erection of a new dwelling in order to avoid 
further d evelopment in the countryside. The erection of a new d welling could not be 
justified where an existing dwelling serving the site  / holding  / enterprise or closely 2. Where criterion (b) cannot be met or it is a new enterprise on a well 
established  site / holding, the development of a temporary dwelling may 
be permitted for up to three years where all the other criteria above are 
met, and there is clear evidence demonstrating:  
f. A firm intention and ability to develop the enterprise;  
g. That the enterpri se has been planned on a sound financial basis;  
h. That the functional need cannot be fulfilled by another existing 
building on the  site/holding or any existing accommodation.  
 
3. Where a new dwelling is permitted, this will be the subject of a condition 
ensuring  the occupation will be limited to a person solely or mainly 
working, or last working in the locality in agriculture, forestry or in 
another business where a rural location is essential, or a surviving 
partner of such a person, and to any resident dependents.  
 
4. The relaxation of an occupancy condition will only be permitted where it 
can be demonstrated that:  
i. There is no longer a continued need for the dwelling on the site / 
holding or for the enterprise, or to house surviving partners and 
any resident dependents;  
j. There is no long term need for a dwelling with restricted 
occupancy to serve need in the locality;  
k. The property has been marketed locally for a reasonable period 
(minimum 12 months) at a price which reflects the existence of the 
occupa ncy condition .   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
160 
 associated with it has either recently been sold off or in some other way  effectively 
separated from it.  The assessment of the design quality, scal e, countryside impact, 
and effect on local character of the proposed development will be considered 
against the other policies of the plan.   
 
7.68 The Council will seek advice on the viability of proposed enterprises and where 
future viability is uncertain wil l resist new permanent dwellin gs in the countryside. In 
these circumstances a temporary planning permission for a caravan may be 
granted to enable the enterprise an opportunity to demonstrate viability.   
 
7.69 The size and nature of such dwellings should be co mmensurate with the reasonabl e 
needs of the enterprise. Unusually large dwellings in relation to the staff needs of 
the enterprise, or expensive construction in relation to the income it can sustain, 
should not be permitted.   
 
7.70 Regarding equestrian based rural enterprises, it should be noted that the security of 
horses is not considered to be sufficient in itself to justify the provision of a dwelling 
as site security can be achieved by other methods.  
 
7.71 When marketing a dwelling subject to an occupancy condition, if other buildings are 
associated with the dwelling, the marketing must include the dwelling being offered 
for sale independently of the other buildings.   
 
Provision for Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople  
 
 
7.72 The Government’s Planning Policy for Traveller Sites  requires that l ocal planning 
authorities set targets for the provision of Gypsies and Traveller pitches and 
Travelling Showpeople plots which address the likely site accommodation needs of 
travellers in their area, working collaboratively with neighbouring local planning 
authorities. This planning guidance was revised in 2015, in particular revising the 
definition of Gypsies and Travellers for the purposes of planning.  
 
 Policy H/20: Provision for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  
 
1. Provision will be made for at least 11 plots for Travelling Showpeople 
between 2011 and 2031, as indicated in the Cambridgeshire, King’s 
Lynn & West Norfo lk, Peterborough and West Suffolk Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2016.  
 
2. Sites that have unrestricted planning permission for Gypsy and 
Traveller or Travelling Showpeople site use are safeguarded for this 
use. Planning permission for alternati ve development or changes of use 
will not be permitted.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
161 
 7.73 Responding to the new guidance and the need for up to date evidence on the level 
of need, the Council joined forces w ith other local authorities in Cambridgeshire, as 
well as parts of Norfolk and Suffolk, to commission a new Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA), which was completed in 2016.  
 
7.74  Government policy requires Councils to maintain a five year land supply of 
Travellers sites, in a similar way to housing, and identify deliverable sites to meet 
the needs to meet identified for the first five years. The GTAA identified no need for 
Gypsy an d Traveller pitches during the plan period, taking account of existing 
available supply. The Local Plan does not propose any further allocations.   
 
7.75  The GTAA identified a need for additional Travelling Showpeople Plots, particularly 
arising from overcrowd ing on existing plots.   
 
7.76  The assessment acknowledges that it was not possible to determine the travelling 
status of a number of households, and a proportion of these may meet the definition 
provided in the PPTS. Any proposals for sites in the district wi ll be considered 
according to Policies H/22 and H/23 . The GTAA will be reviewed regularly. There 
will be a need to monitor the plan and review it as necessary to take account of 
more up to date evidence.  
 
Figure 9: Gypsy and Travell er need in South Cambrid geshire  
 
Period  Need for Gypsy 
and Traveller 
Pitches  Need for 
Travelling 
Showpeople 
Plots  
2016 - 2021  -17 9 
2021 - 2026  2 1 
2026 – 2031  3 1 
TOTAL  
2016 to 2031  -12 11 
 
Source: Cambridgeshire, King’s Lynn & West Norfolk, Peterborough and West 
Suffolk Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2016.  
 
7.77 To ensure that the levels of Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
accommodation are maintained, sites are safeguarded to meet the continuing 
housing needs of these communities. Safeguarding will ensure that sites are not 
lost to competing uses. This could be a particular issue in Chesterton Fen Road 
where major developments are taking place close by. Unrestricted means not 
subject to conditions restricting the time of occupancy such as a temporary  or 
personal planning permission. The policy will apply to any new permission granted 
as well existing sites.  It excludes former publicly owned sites at Meadow Lane , 
Willingham and Mettle Hill , Meldreth, where the use has been discontinued.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
162 
 7.78 The Council wa s planning to produce a separate Gypsy and Traveller Development 
Plan Document, and consulted on principles in 2006, and site  options and policies 
in 2009. Following significant changes to government policy, including the removal 
of regional plans, it was determined that Gypsy and Traveller issues should be 
addressed as part of a single Local plan, rather than continuing to prepare a 
separate document.  
 
7.79 Needs Assessme nts are reviewed periodically. There will be a need to monitor the 
plan and review it as n ecessary to take account of more up to date evidence.  
 
7.80 The Government’s Planning Policy for Travellers Sites requires plans to identify 
specific sites, or where not possible broad locations, where future need will be met.  
The Council considers that major developments provide an opportunity to deliver 
provision to meet longer term needs should they arise.  
 
7.81 In respect of those Gypsies and Travellers or Travelling Showpeople who do not 
lead a nomadic lifestyle according to the planning definition, South Cambr idgeshire 
will continue to assess and plan to meet their needs, as part of its wider 
responsibilities to plan to meet the accommodation needs of its settled community. 
The Housing Act 1985 (as amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016) 
includes a requir ement to consider the needs of people residing in or resorting to 
the District with respect to the provision of sites on which caravans can be 
stationed, or places on inland waterways where houseboats can be moored. Policy 
S/13 includes a commitment to con sider the implications of an assessment, 
including whether any site allocations should be made to meet any need identified, 
working with the local housing authority, through an early review of the Local Plan . 
 
Gypsy and Traveller Provision at New Communities   
Policy H/21: Gypsy and Traveller Provision at New Communities  
 
1. If need is identified opportunities to deliver Gypsy and Traveller sites 
will be sought as part of large scale new communities and significant 
major development sites.  The need and opportunities should be kept 
under review through the planning of future phases of such 
developments as they come forward during life of the Local Plan.  
 
2. The location of site provision will be identified through the 
masterplanning and design process. Sites provided will meet the 
following criteria:  
a. Sites will  be located within but on the edge of the major 
development, or outside but in close proximity to the major 
development. Sites in the Green Belt would not be appropriate, 
unless exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated at the 
masterplanning and planni ng application stage. The site will not 
be located in identified green separation;  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
163 
  
7.82 If need is identified, major developments provide an opportunity to deliver pitches as 
part of mainstream development, ensuring they meet the needs of all sectors of the 
community, in sustainable locations close to services and facilities, where  sites can 
be planned into the  developments from the outset. As stated in The Road Ahead: 
Final Report of the Independent Task Group on Site Provision and Enforcement for 
Gypsies and Travellers published by the Department of Communities and Local 
Governmen t in December 2007, the approach of integrating the provision of Gypsy 
and Traveller accommodation as part of new development helps to erod e 
misconceptions and distrust. Development that accommodates both Gypsies and 
Travellers and the settled community fr om its conception can remove the potential 
for friction, and can also be physically planned in a coordinated and integrated 
manner.  
 
7.83 The Local Plan has not identified specific sites for Gypsy and Traveller pitch 
provision at each of the major developments it includes.  Instead a criteria -based 
policy is included which will guide the identification of a site through the 
maste rplanning of the developments. This would allow design issues and the 
relationship between land uses to be conside red fully at the desig n stage. There 
would then be further consultation through the planning application process.  The 
policy provides flexibility with regard to the location of provision, in order that the 
best location(s) can be identified through the masterplanning and desig n process.  
Phasing plans would also need to consider the availability of services and facilities 
when sites were to be occupied.  
 
7.84 Many Gypsies and Travellers express a preference for a rural location, which is on 
the edge of or closely located to a large town or city consistent with traditional 
lifestyles and means of employment.   
 
7.85 Generally individual sites delivered through this p olicy should be bet ween 5 and 10 
pitches in scale.  If sites are delivered as affordable sites, they will count towards the 
affordable housing requirement of the development.  However, provision could also 
be private, and sold or leased to Gypsies and Travel lers, and tenure issues will be 
determined through site -specific negotiations, and evidence of loca l need at the 
time of delivery.  
 
7.86 When applications for planning permission or reserved matters approval come 
forward for large scale new communities or significant major development sites 
consideration will be made of whether there is a current need for Gypsy and 
Traveller site provision, and the opportunity to deliver appropriately a site or sites 
within that phase of the development will be reviewed.  
 b. The sites will be well related to the major development, enabling 
good access to the services and facilities of the development, 
providing safe access to the major development on foot, cycle and 
public transport. Access should not rely on minor residential  roads.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
164 
 Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople Sites on 
Unallocated Land Outside Development Frameworks   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy H/22: Proposals for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople Sites on Unallocated Land Outside Development 
Frameworks  
 
Plann ing permission for Gypsy and Traveller caravan sites and sites for 
Travelling Showpeople (as defined in the Government’s Planning Policy for 
Travellers) on unallocated land outside development frameworks, and 
outside the Cambridge Green Belt, will only be granted where:  
a. The Council is satisfied that the applicant has adequately demonstrated 
a clear need for a site in the district, and the number, type and tenure of 
pitches proposed, which cannot be met by a lawful existing or available 
allocated site;  
b. The site is located in a sustainable location, well related to a settlement 
with a range of services and facilities, including a primary school, a food 
shop and healthcare facilities, and is, or can be made, safely accessible 
on foot, by cycle or public tr ansport;  
c. The needs of residents of the site can be met appropriately by local 
facilities and services without placing undue pressure on them;  
d. The number and nature of pitches provided on the site is appropriate to 
the site size and location, will address the identified need;  
e. The site would not present unacceptable adverse or detrimental impact 
on the health, safety and living conditions of the residents of the site by 
virtue of its location;  
f. The site, or the cumulative impact of the site, in combination w ith 
existing or planned sites, would respect the scale of, and not dominate, 
the nearest settled community;  
g. The site, or the cumulative impact of the site in combination with 
existing or planned sites, would not have an unacceptable adverse 
impact on the a menity of surrounding land uses, the countryside and 
landscape character, village character, on heritage or biodiversity 
interests, or from traffic generated;  
h. The site location would not have an unacceptable adverse impact on 
the effectiveness and amenity  of existing or proposed public rights of 
way;  
i. Sites for Travelling Showpeople must also be suitable for the storage, 
maintenance and testing of items of mobile equipment.  
 
Gypsy and Traveller sites are inappropriate development in the Green Belt. 
Any pro posals in the Green Belt would have to demonstrate they comply with 
National and Local Policy regarding development in the Green Belt. If, 
through the application of such Policy, provision of a Gypsy and Traveller site 
in the Green Belt is considered accep table in principle, the proposed 
development is required to comply with the criteria set out within this policy.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
165 
 7.87 This policy will be used to assess planning applications for Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches and Travelling Showpeople plots which come forward on sites which have 
not been allocated through the Local Plan, often referred to as windfall proposals. 
The GTAA 201 6 identified that there could be additional need from existing 
households where need could not be appropriately assessed. Proposals for 
additional sites will be assessed using this policy. Applicants will need to 
demonstrate that they meet the definitions provided by the Government’s Planning 
Policy for Travellers Sites.   
 
7.88 Proposals for Gypsy and Traveller caravan sites are predominantly residential uses 
and will be acceptable within development frameworks where policies in the Local 
Plan are met; in partic ular in terms of the scale and design of development being 
appropriate to the settlement. Development outside development frameworks is 
tightly controlled, and applicants seeking planning permission for sites will need to 
demonstrate the need for a site in the district.   
 
7.89 The Government’s Planning Policy for Travellers Sites establishes that t he exi sting 
level of provision and need for sites, the availability of alternative accommodation, 
and the personal circumstances of the applicant are material considerations when 
considering planning applications.   
 
7.90 Note: The GTAA identifies a need for 9 additional Travelling Showpeople plots in 
the next 5 years plus an additional 2 by the end of the plan period. This is beyond 
current levels of supply. The new need for Travelling Showpeople plots has arisen 
well into the plan making process and there was  no need identified in the previous 
study. It is considered that the criteria based policy approach in Policy H/2 2 is a 
reasonable, pragmatic and proportionate response to the current situation for the 
Local Plan and the stage it has reached. It can provide  an appropriate response to 
any proposals received to address the modest level of identified need. In parallel 
with the Local Plan process, the Council is continuing to move forward via 
discussions the Showmen’s Guild and with neighbouring authorities to i dentify a site 
close to the strategic highway network that is sufficient to meet this modest need.  
 
7.91 The policy excludes land in the Green Belt. National planning policy establishes a 
general presumption against inappropriate development in the Green Belt. The 
definition of inappropriate development includes Gypsy and Traveller sites an d 
Travelling Showpeople sites.  Subject to the best interests of the child, personal  
circumstances and unmet need are unlikely to clearly outweigh harm to the Green 
Belt and an y other harm so as to establish very special circumstances.  If future 
need arises for affordable sites, which cannot be met outside the Green Belt, 
consideration of Gypsy and Traveller caravan site provision in the Green Belt will be 
treated in accordance with the approach to affordable housing exceptions sites.  
 
7.92 Issues of sustainability apply to Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
sites, emphasised by government policy. National planning guidance also requires 
that l ocal planning authorities very strictly limit new traveller site development in 
open countryside that is away from existing settlements.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
166 
 7.93 Sites must be sited in locations that provide a safe environment for the occupants 
including in terms of their general health well -being, and shoul d avoid locations in 
the vicinity of dangerous roads, railway lines, water bodies, or power lines unless 
impacts can be satisfacto rily mitigated. The use of unstable or contaminated land, 
or hazardous areas will not be permitted unless appropriate mitigati on can be 
achieved.  Sites must also app ropriately address flood risk. Caravans and mobile 
homes intended for permanent use will not be permitted in areas of a high 
probability of flood risk or on the functional floodplain or where sites would increase 
risk of flooding elsewhere.  
 
7.94 Proposals will need to be served by a vehicular access point which adheres to the 
highway authority’s guidance and standards. There will also need to be sufficient 
capacity in the local highway network to accommodate the site.  
 
7.95 Travelling Showpeople sites differ in that they need to provide secure, permanent 
bases for the storage of equipment when not in use. Most Showpeople need to live 
alongside their equipment, so sites must be suitable for both residential and 
business use, and  be capable of accommodating equipment which is sometimes 
large. Care needs to be taken that such activities are appropriately designed and 
located in order to avoid nuisance to neighbouring uses.  
 
Design of Gypsy and Traveller Sites, and Travelling Showpeople Sites  
Policy H/23: Design of Gypsy and Traveller Sites, and Travelling 
Showpeople Sites  
 
Proposals for Gypsies and Traveller sites and Travelling Showpeople sites 
will only be granted planning permission where they are of a good design 
layout, have regard to government good practice guidance, and where:  
a. The propos al clearly demarcates the site and pitch boundaries using 
appropriate boundary treatment and landscaping sympathetic to, and in 
keeping with, the surrounding area. There should also be clear 
delineation of public communal areas and private space, and betwe en 
residential areas and any non -residential areas;  
b. Site design takes account of the needs of residents, and provides an 
appropriate pitch layout that ensures security and safety of residents, 
and allows ease of movement, whether walking, cycling or drivin g; 
c. There is safe access for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, including 
for turning and parking, vehicles towing caravans, emergency vehicles 
and servicing requirements, including waste collection;  
d. All necessary utilities can be provided on the site including mains 
water, electricity supply, drainage, sanitation and provision for the 
screened storage and collection of refuse, including recyclable 
materials;  
e. The site is not located on contaminated land, unless the land is 
capable of adequate ameliorati on prior to occupation;  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
167 
  
7.96 This policy addresses specific design principles that should be met by all new 
Gypsy and Traveller sites or Tra velling Showpeop le sites. Guidance  will be included 
in the District Design Guide  SPD.  
 
7.97 Gypsy and Traveller caravan sites are predominantly residential uses  as is reflected 
in South Cambridgeshire.  Any employment uses would require planning permission, 
and could therefore  be considered on their merits in the partic ular location. 
However, Travelling Showpeople may require space for the storage and 
maintenance  of large pieces of equipment. The site design and layout should 
ensure the amenity and safety of residents is protec ted by locating non -residential 
uses away from the residential and communal areas.  
 
7.98 The site design and layout should ensure the safety and security of residents.  If 
external lighting will help achieve this, it should be designed into the proposal at the  
outset to ensure it is the minimum required and  appropriate for the location. Safe 
access to, and movement within, the site for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles is 
essential, as well as ensuring access is retained at all times for emergency vehicles 
and servicing requirements, including refuse collection.   
 
7.99 Sites must be capable of being serviced by all necessary utilities in order to provide 
an appropriate residential environment. Foul drainage to a public sewer should be 
provided wherever possible. Where foul drainage to a public sewer is not feasible 
sites will only be permitted if proposed alternative facilities are considered adequate 
and would not pose an unacceptable risk to the quality or quantity of ground or 
surface water, pollution of local di tches, watercourses or sites of biodive rsity 
importance. Sites must incorporate appropriate measures for surface water 
drainage, utilising sustainable drainage systems where practicable.  
 
7.100  Each pitch should be designed to provide appropriate accommodation for a 
household, and should normally allow for the siting of at least one trailer / mobile 
home and a touring cara van and space for car parking. Transit site pitches, f. The proposal would avoid any unacceptable adverse or detrimental 
impact on the health and living conditions of the residents of the site or 
on neig hbouring uses , including as a result of excessive noise, dust, 
fumes, lighting, traffic generation or activity;  
g. Built development in the countryside is kept to the minimum required, 
in order to minimise harm to the surrounding area. Any amenity 
buildings proposed are of an appropriate scale and reasonably related 
to the size of the pitch, and are of an appropriate design for the 
location;  
h. Pitches should be an appropriate scale for the size and number of 
caravans to be accommodated, without over -crowding or  unnecessary 
sprawl at an appropriate density;  
i. Provision of space for play should be made on larger sites (10 or more 
pitches).  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 7        Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
168 
 providing short term accommodation, are likely to be smaller, as national design 
guidance  states, each pitch should be capable of accommodating touring caravans, 
rather than space for a static caravan.  
 
7.101  Proposals for family sites, such as to accommodate an extended family with a 
number of caravans, will be required to establish the number of pitches the site is 
capable of providing if it were occupied by separate family units, in order that the 
impacts of a site are fully considered.  
 
7.102  The number of parking spaces will be considered against car parking standards 
contained in the development pla n, based on the anticipated number of  residents.  If 
appropriate planning conditions will be applied to any planning permission, 
restricting the parking of larger vehicles or the number of commercial vehicles.   
 
7.103  Built development in the countryside will be  kept to the minimum required in order to 
minimise  harm to the surrounding area. Amenity blocks, which typically include 
kitchen and bathroom facilities, will be considered on their merits and must be 
compatible with the scale of development and the pitch on which it is to be 
accommodated.  Energy and water efficiency of built development should be 
considered, reflecting policies contained else where in the development plan. All 
private and communal buildings will need to comply with mobility standards as 
required by building regulations.  
 
7.104  Proposals for stables will be considered on their merits. Sites will need to include 
sufficient space to exercise horses or be readily accessible to local bridleways and 
other permitted rights of way.  
 
7.105  Improvement or provisi on of infrastructure may be necessary to make the 
developmen t acceptable in planning terms.  It is important to ensure that children 
have safe access to space for play. In order to meet the needs of residents , larger 
sites should include distinct areas for children to play. Separate contributions to play 
space will not normally be sought.  Chapter 8Chapter 8   
Building a Strong and Building a Strong and   
Competitive EconomyCompetitive Economy   
Cambridge Research Park, Landbeach, South CambridgeshireCambridge Research Park, Landbeach, South Cambridgeshire   Genome Campus, Hinxton, South CambridgeshireGenome Campus, Hinxton, South Cambridgeshire   Cambourne Business Park, Cambourne, South CambridgeshireCambourne Business Park, Cambourne, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
171 
 Chapter 8     Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
8.1 This chapter sets out how the Council will assist the achievement of strong and 
sustainable local economic growth, where entrepreneurship, innovation and inward 
investment are actively encouraged.  
 
8.2 During the l ast 30 years, the Cambridge Sub -Region has developed into one of the 
premier location s for high technology research and development in Europe. 
Planning policies favouring research and development and discouraging large scale 
office and warehouse development have helped foster one of the highest rates of 
job growth outside any of the UK’s majo r cities.  
 
8.3 The Council has an adopted Economic Development Strategy that seeks to 
maintain a progressive, modern, innovative, balanced and resilient economy and be 
open for new business. The Strategy was supported by an economic assessment, 
and developed t hrough consultation with partners, stakeholders, businesses and 
residents. The findings and priorities of the Strategy have guided the Local Plan 
which aims to anticipate growth sectors and capture opportunities provided by 
planned growth areas including N orthstowe, and the urban extensions to 
Cambridge.  
 
8.4 Recent evidence suggests that the local high -tech cluster is ‘maturing’ and that 
growth in the research and development sector will be slower than in the past, and 
other sectors will account for a higher proportion of growth. New sectors are likely to 
include renewable technologies, the creative ICT sectors, digital, health/bioscience, 
high-technology manufacturing, professional business services, tourism and leisure.    
 
8.5 The Local Plan provides more flexibility than recent past policies as part of 
delivering the objective to support economic growth by maintaining South 
Cambridgeshire's position as a world leader in research and technology based 
industries, research, and ed ucation by continuing to support proposals that build on 
the successful employment clusters; whilst alongside this providing opportunities for 
a wider range of other employment that supports sustainable economic growth 
through a suite of policies  and the d evelopment of existing and new employment 
sites.   
 
8.6 The Local Plan aims to ensure there is sufficient employment land available, in the 
right places to support the economy, and provide the right balance between 
supporting growth, whilst protecting the qual ity of the built and natural environment.   
The Council may prepare Local Development Orders to facilitate the effective 
implementation of new employment proposals.   
 
8.7 The Local Plan also addresses issues which underpin economic development 
including delive ring strategic infrastructure such as affordable homes and services, 
and considers transport issues by providing jobs close to people’s homes, and 
where jobs can be accessed by means other than the car.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
172 
  
New Employment Provision  
 
8.8 Policy S/5 establishes a target of 22,000  new jobs to be provided in the district by 
2031.    
 
8.9 South Cambridgeshire has a good supply and range of existing employment sites. 
Additionally existing commitments with planning permission provide a wide variety 
and types o f employment development, including significant opportunities at 
research parks for high technology and R esearch  & Development  (R&D) , including 
at:  
• Granta Park,  
• Babraham Institute,  
• Wellcome Trust Genome Campus and  
• Cambridge Research Park.   
 
8.10 The Council will consider the case for removing restrictive planning conditions and 
planning obligations imposed under previous development plans which have served 
their purpose of supporting the embryonic high tech R&D sector and are not 
consistent with our current approach to local econom ic development .   
 Key Facts:  
• The district has a diverse high value economy with 81,200 jobs in 2011 
(Source: Cambridge Econometrics).  
• Sectors anticipated to grow in future include professional services, 
computing and business services, construction, and health.  
• Unemployment at 1.4% is lower than national level of 4%, and median 
pay levels are higher.  
• The area has proved resilient to the impacts of the downturn with a 
range of successful business and research parks including Cambridge 
Science Park, Granta Park, and the Babraham Institute.  
• Despite policies protecting employm ent in villages there is a gradual 
loss of premises.  
• There is a significant agricultural sector with many farms diversifying 
into other sectors, particularly tourism.                                 
• There are a significantly higher proportion of micro busi nesses than 
regionally or nationally with 86% of businesses employing fewer than 
10 people.  
• Homeworking is growing, making access to broadband more important.  
• Important local tourist attractions include Duxford Imperial War 
Museum, Wimpole Hall, the American Military Cemetery, Chilford Hall, 
Linton Zoo and RSPB Reserves at Fen Drayton and Fowlmere.   
• Primary retail and service centres are outside the district (C ambridge 
and market towns), but some larger villages provide services to smaller 
villages, and village shops are a vital service. New High Street facilities 
are planned for Cambourne and Northstowe.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
173 
 8.11 At March 2012 planning permissi on had been granted for 238,298 m2 
(80.3  hectares) of employment us es. In addition, there are opportunities for 
significant further provision at:  
• Northstowe (20 hectares of employment land), and  
• Cambridge University’s North West Cambridge development (for 100,000 m2 
of research fac ilities, including up to 40,000 m2 for research institutes and 
private research facilities linked to the University).   
 
New Settlements  at Waterbeach and Bourn Airfield  
 
8.12 New settlements are allocated in the Local Plan for a new town at Waterbeach and 
a new village at Bourn Airfield. Polic ies SS/6 and SS/7  require a range of uses 
appropriate to the new settlements including  employment provision of a quantum, 
type and mix to meet the needs of the settlements, to be established through an 
Economic Development Strategy prepared in partnership with the local authority 
and key stakeholders.   
 
New Employment Provision near Cambrid ge 
 
 
8.13 South Cambridgeshire has a good supply and range of existing employment sites. 
Additionally existing commitments with planning permission provide a wide variety 
and types of employment development, including significant opportunities at 
research parks for high technology and R&D , including at Granta Park , Babraham 
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus  and Cambridge Research  Park. At 
March 2012 planning permissi on had been granted for 238,298 m2 (80.3 hectares) 
of employment . In addition, th ere are opportunities for significant further provision at 
Northstowe, and Cambridge University’s North West Cambridge development.  
 
8.14 The Employment Land Review (2012) identified a particular need for office space in 
or on the edge of Cambridge. Opportunities have been identified on the northern 
fringe of Cambridge for additional employment development, taking advantage of 
the increased accessibility of the area as a result of by the  Guided Bus way and the 
planned Cambridge Science Park railway sta tion. Cambridge Science Park has 
played a crucial role in establishing and supporting the research and development 
and high tech sectors since the 1970’s. Some of the early phases were built at low 
densities and are forty years old, and there is scope for intensification or even 
redevelopment. Proposals will need to demonstrate they are compli ant with other 
policies in the Local P lan, particularly in relation to design and transport.  
 Policy E/1: New Employment Provision near Cambridge – Cambridge 
Science Park  
 
Appropriate proposals for employment development and redevelopment on 
Cambridge Science Park (as defined on the Policies Map) will be supported, 
where they enable the continued development of the Cambridge Cluster of 
high technology research and developmen t companies.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
174 
 8.15 The area around the Cambridge North  Station itself has been identified f or a high 
density mixed employment led development, providing a new gateway to the 
northern part of Cambridge ( Policy SS/4 ).   
 
 Policy E/ 2: Cambridge Biomedical Campus Extension  
 
1. An extension to the Cambridge Biomedical Campus will be supported 
on lan d shown on the Policies Map for biomedical and biotechnology 
research and development within class B1(b) and related higher 
education and sui -generis medical research institutes.   
 
2. Proposals for development should:  
a. Create substantial and attractive landscaped edges to the 
western, eastern and southern boundaries retaining and 
reinforcing existing planting on the southern and western  
boundaries.  
b. Provide an appropriate landscaped setting for the Nine Wells 
Local Nature Reserve and set back built devel opment away from 
the south -western corner of the site.   
c. Demonstrate and incorporate suitable measures to ensure that 
there will be no material adverse impact on the volume, pattern of 
flow or water quality of the chalk springs at Nine Wells and 
Hobson’s B rook and Conduit.   
d. Demonstrate and incorporate suitable measures to ensure that 
surface water flood risks can be appropriately managed and 
mitigated to avoid flood risks to the site and to not increase flood 
risks elsewhere ; and to make appropriate arrang ements for foul 
drainage and sewage disposal through the preparation of a Foul 
Drainage Strategy .   
e. Not include any pedestrian access from the site to the western, 
southern and eastern boundaries in order to  minimise visitor 
pressures on the Nine Wells LNR.  
f. Provide suitable measures to mitigate any adverse ecological 
impacts, in particular any potential for increased visitor pressures 
on Nine Wells LNR that may arise from the development not 
withstanding sub -section e, and demonstrate regard for the 
conservation of farmland biodiversity and deliver an overall net 
gain in biodiversity.  
g. Have building heights which are no higher than those on the 
adjoining part of the Cambridge Biomedical Campus and which 
provide  a suitable transition in reflection of the site’s edge of 
settlement location.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
175 
  
8.16 The Cambridge Biomedical Campus (CBC) is an international centre of excellence 
for patient care, biomedical research and healthca re education. It plays a local, 
regional and national role in providing medical facilities and medical research. The 
local plan will support its continuing development as such, and as a high quality, 
legible and sustainable campus. It also reinforces the e xisting biomedical and 
biotechnology cluster in the Cambridge area.   
 
8.17 Policy S/6 ‘The Development Strategy to 2031’ sets out a spatial strategy for the 
location of new employment development, the preferred location being on the edge 
of Cambridge, subject to the purposes of the Cambridge Green Belt.   
 
8.18 The Employment Land Review 2012 has identified a particular need for office space 
in or on the edge of Cambridge. Opportunities have been identified on the northern 
fringe of Cambridge at Cambridge Northern F ringe East and through densification of 
the Cambridge Science Park. On the southern fringe, the delivery of development of 
the CBC has been brought forward by the planned relocation of Astra Zeneca to the 
site.   
 
8.19 The Cambridge Inner Green Belt Boundary St udy (November 2015), has looked at 
the whole inner Green Belt including land south of the CBC. It has concluded that 
development south of CBC could be undertaken without significant harm to Green 
Belt purposes provided that it avoid rising ground near Whit e Hill, provide a setting 
for Nine Wells Local Nature Reserve, provide a soft green edge to the city and that 
new development be no more prominent in views from elevated land to the south 
east than the existing buildings at Addenbrooke’s. The Council consi ders that the 
need for jobs can comprise exceptional circumstances justifying a review of the 
Green Belt so far as this would not cause significant harm to Green Belt purposes. 
Whilst there is no overall shortage of employment land within South Cambridgesh ire 
for high -tech and research and development companies and organisations, the 
findings of the new study provide an opportunity to allocate land for an extension to 
the CBC to provide high quality biomedical development on the edge of Cambridge 
with its l ocational benefits, without causing significant harm to the purposes of the 
Cambridge Green Belt.  
 h. Provide high quality new public realm and open space, retaining 
and enhancing existing watercourses.  
i. Include measures to enhance access to and within the Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus including provision for cyclists, pedestrians, 
wheelchair users and people with other disabilities, and mitigate 
impacts on the wider road network and parking in the surrounding 
area.  
j. Connect any new clinical buildings for the C ambridge University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust to the Addenbrooke’s Hospital 
energy network, where feasible and viable.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
176 
 8.20 Addenbrooke’s Hospital is to develop a new clinical waste facility (energy from 
waste) to replace an existing facility which will supply energy to clinical buildings for 
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. Appropriate developments 
within the site should, therefore, seek to connect to this energy network, subject to 
feasibility and viability.  
 
8.21 Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Tru st (the Trust) has a strategic 
masterplan for the extended campus area which includes the following:  
• key routes and street hierarchy;  
• public realm strategy and open space;  
• building massing;  
• potential uses;  
• development phasing; and  
• sustainability.  
 
8.22 This sit e should be included in future updates to the strategic masterplan and the 
site developed having regard to its provisions.   
 
8.23 The Transport Strategy for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire (2014) identifies 
a need to investigate the case for a new railway station in this area to serve the 
CBC and southern Cambridge. Should a need be demonstrated for a new station 
and if the prefer red location is nearby, the layout of the site should allow for such 
provision. The development of this site should also take account of any proposals 
which may emerge from the City Deal A1307 corridor project.   
 
8.24 Nine Wells is a historically important sit e containing several chalk springs, which 
form the source of the Hobson Conduit. The reserve is a mix of woodland, scrub 
and water. Previously a SSSI (Site of Special Scientific Interest) Nine Wells once 
contained some rare freshwater invertebrates, howeve r following the drought of 
1976 these were lost. Today the chalk watercourses are being managed with the 
aim of re -creating the conditions favourable for a possible re -introduction of these 
rare species. It is important that the chalk springs not be compro mised in terms of 
their volume, p attern of flow or water quality.   
 
8.25 Parts of the site have been identified as subject to surface water flood risks. 
Evidence indicates that surface water flood risks can be appropriately managed and 
mitigated through the cre ation of a new boundary ditch around the eastern, 
southern and western site boundaries. The policy requires that any application will 
need to demonstrate that there will be no material adverse impact on the volume, 
pattern of flow or water quality of the c halk springs at Nine Wells and Hobson’s 
Brook and Conduit.  Measures will also need to be taken to minimise visitor 
pressures on the LNR from people working on the site. This can partly be achieved 
by ensuring there are no convenient pedestrian access link s between the sites and 
also by providing high quality new public realm and open space on the development 
site itself.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
177 
 8.26 There is some uncertainty regarding the availability of access to the site. This is a 
matter which will be considered further through the early revi ew of the Plan.  
 
8.27 The Employment Land Review identified demand for employment land on the edge 
of Cambridge. The Inner Green Belt Study Review (2012) highlighted an opportunity 
to provide additional  employment land next to  the Peterhouse Technology Park  
whilst avoiding significant impacts on the Green Belt. There are also two areas 
allocated in the Cambridge Local Plan to the west of the existing development.  
 
8.28 The Technology Park is cut into rising ground, and cannot be seen from higher 
ground to the south. Similar treatment will be required for this site. It is bound by an 
existing hedgerow, which should be retained and enhanced, together with a new 
landscaped boundary to the south and east.  
 
New Employment Provision at Villages  
 
 Policy E/4 : Allocations for Class B1 Employment Uses  
 
The following sites are allocated for employment development for uses within 
Use Class  B1: Offices; Research and Development; and Light Industry:  
1. Longstanton: N of Hattons Road up to the bypass (6.7 ha.)  
2. Pampisford: West of Eastern Counties Leather, London Road (residue) 
(1.9 ha.)  
Policy E/5 : Allocations for Class B1, B2 and B8 Employment Uses  
 
The following sites are allocat ed for employment development for uses within 
Classes B1: Offices; Research and Development, B2: Light Industry and B8: 
General Industry and Storage uses:  
1. Over: Norman Way (residue) (1.7 ha.)  
2. Papworth Everard: Ermine Street South (residue) (2.5 ha.)  Policy E/3 : Fulbourn Road East (Fulbourn) 6.9 hectares  
 
1. Land adjoining Peterhouse Technology Park is allocated for 
employment use.  
 
2. Development proposals will need to demonstrate how the site can be 
designed and landscaped to effectively mitigate impact on the wider 
Cambridge Green Belt. This will include excavation to achieve 
appropriate profile and setting against the Cambridge Green  Belt and 
agricultural land, and the creation of landscaped buffers on the 
southern and eastern boundaries.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
178 
 Policy E/6 : Papworth Hospital  
 
1. The reuse or redevelopment of the Papworth Hospital site, as defined 
on the Policies Map, will be permitted based on a sequential approach 
to finding  replacement uses beginning with healthcare.  
 
2. Only if a suitable healthcare use or uses cannot be found after the site 
has been marketed for healthcare for a period of no less than 2 years 
would other employment uses  within the B1 Business Use Class 
compatible with this location in the centre of Papworth Everard be 
permitted.  
 
3. Any scheme must:  
a. Maintain the vitality and viability of Papworth Everard village;  
b. Maintain the housing and employment balance of the village;  
c. Maintain or enhance the setting of Papworth Hall; and  
d. Preserve or enhance  buildings on the site identified in the 
Papworth Everard Conservation Area Appraisal that contribute to 
the setting of the village and history of the site.  
 
4. New housing  development a nd/or redevelopment for housing will not 
be permitted. Conversion of existing buildings of character for 
residential use may exceptionally be permitted where it would be the 
most appropriate use of the buildings and recreate the character of the 
original P apworth Hospital buildings fronting the historic landscaped 
parkland setting of Papworth Hall.  
 
 
  
8.29 These  two policies carry forwar d employment allocations  in villages from previous 
plans. Most  form the residue of the original allocation where sites have been 
partially developed. The site at Longstanton forms part of the Home Farm 
development. They are i nclud ed in the Local P lan to enable their completion.  
 
Papworth Hospital  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.30 A policy for the reuse or redevelopment of the Papworth Hospital site was originally 
included in the Site Specific  Policies Development Plan Document  (DPD)  (adopted 
January 2010). Papworth Hospital is the UK’s largest specialist cardiothoracic 
hospital and the country’s main heart and lung transplant centre. In 2005, Papworth 
Hospital decided to move to the Biomedical  Campus at Addenbrooke’s in 
Cambridge. This will provide new facilities for the hospital with the benefit of 
immediate access to a range of services, facilities and research that takes place 
there.  
 
8.31 The Papworth Hospital site is within the Papworth Everar d Conservation Area. The 
Papworth Everard  Conservation Area Appraisal (June 2011) identifies specific 
buildings within the hospital site as buildings of local architectural or historic interest, South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
179 
 and as making a positive contri bution to the c onservation area. The buildings 
identified include the Bernhard Baron Hospital Building and Princess Hospital 
Building (both are examples of hospital buildings designed specifically for 
tuberculosis patients with design features to ensure access to sunlight and fresh air ) 
and the Sims Woodhead  Memorial Laboratory  (Lakeside Lodge). Other buildings 
within the hospital site are identified as having a negative or neutral contribution to 
the c onservation area either because views of the building are screened by modern 
development or due to their current unattractive appearance. The Appraisal sets out 
guidelines for any new development within or affecting the conservation area. For 
Papworth Hospital, any dev elopment proposals should seek to enhance the site, for 
example through enhancing the parkland, removing poor quality extensions or 
modern buildings, and by ensuring that new buildings are of a high quality that 
respond to the context.  
 
8.32 Papworth Everard i s synonymous with healthcare provision and medical facilities in 
the village have ranged from the treatment and convalescence of tuberculosis 
sufferers to the current provision of residential rehabilitation facilities for the disabled 
by the independent Pa pworth Trust, and the treatment of people with life 
threatening cardio -vascular problems by the Papworth Hospital NHS Trust.  
Healthcare provides a breadth of employment opportunities and the hospital 
employs a large number of local residents from the unsk illed to highly specialised 
doctors and therefore the decision to relocate Papworth Hospital to Cambridge is a 
major threat to the future viability of the village and the maintenance of a 
sustainable community.  
 
8.33 Healthcare is therefore the preferred use fo r the site following the relocation of 
Papworth Hospital. This could include a continued role within the NHS or could 
include private healthcare facilities trading on the world renowned Papworth 
Hospital name. A long -term approach will need to be taken to securing a healthcare 
future. If it is necessary to consider other forms of employment use for the Papworth 
Hospital site, then a mix of uses within the B1 Business Use C lasses would be the 
most appropriate in this historic parkland setting.  
 
8.34 Residential d evelopment would not be acceptable other than exceptionally for the 
conversion of any existing buildings of character where it is the most appropriate 
use of the buildings and would make the most appropriate contribution to enhancing 
the his toric setting o f Papworth Hall.  Residential redevelopment as an alternative to 
healthcare / employment uses is not compatible with the long term strategy to make 
Papworth Everard a sustainable village and would make the village a dormitory 
settlement unrelated to the mai n focus of jobs growth in and on the edge of 
Cambridge . 
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
180 
 Imperial Wa r Museum at Duxford  
 
8.35 The Imperial War Museum Duxford (IWM Duxford) is an integral element of the 
multi branch Imperial War Museums and is a major tourist / visitor attraction, 
educational and commercial facility based o n a long established airfield. It is 
established as the European centre of aviation history together with restoration, 
conservation, storage and research functions. There is a working airfield and the 
visitor offer is unique in combining static and dynamic aircraft exhibits through its 
own ac tivities and those of its onsite partners. IWM Duxford receives some 440,000 
visitors per annum and has a key remit to provide a substantial educational 
programme for both  formal and informal learners. The site also includes a memorial 
to honour soldiers f rom the Royal Anglian Regiment who have lost their lives since 
1959. Duxford is regarded as the finest and best -preserved example of a fighter 
base representative of the period up to 1945 in Britain, with an exceptionally 
complete group of First World War technical buildings in addition to technical and 
domestic buildings typical of both inter -war Expansion Periods of the RAF. It also 
has important associations with the Battle of Britain and the American fighter 
support for the Eighth Air Force. Development  proposals will need to consider the 
impact on this  nationally  important heritage asset, in accordance with the National 
Planning Policy Framework  (NPPF, 2012) and Policy NH/14 . IWM Duxford sees its 
long term  future as a vibrant, sustainable and effective visitor attraction, education 
provider and commercial venue with jobs and investment beyond the direct effects 
of the museum and its partners.    
 
8.36 Given its national significance, the District Council will give IWM Duxford special 
consideration within the context of protecting the quality of the surrounding 
landscape in this sensitive site on the edge of the Cambridge Green Belt.  
 Policy E/7: Imperial War Museum at Duxford  
 
1. The Imperial War Museum site at Duxford Airfield will be treated as a 
special case as a museum which is a major tourist / visitor attraction, 
educational and commercial facility.  
 
2. Proposals will be considered with regard to the particular needs and 
opport unities of the site and any proposals involving the use of the 
estate and its facilities for museum uses or non -museum uses must be 
complementary to the character, vitality and sustainability of the site as 
a branch of the Imperial War Museum.  
 
3. Details of projected increases in noise will be required with all proposals 
which would lead to an increase in commercial or flying activity and 
details concerning the scale, form and design will be required to 
accompany any outline planning application.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
181 
 Mixed -Use Development i n Histon & Impington Station Area  
 
8.37 Histon and Impington Parish Council has aspirations to rejuvenate the area around 
the former  railway station in Histon and Impington to create a vibran t gateway into 
this community. The southern section of the settlement lacks a focus, with no key 
points a nd few shops to generate the footfal l for success.  The Guided Busway 
provides an opportunity to create a second local focus for the village, not simply a 
gateway but a destination in its own right.   
 
8.38 The aspiration  is to make better use of vacant and unde rused land to provide a 
wider mix of uses to attract more use of the area at different times of the day, 
including outside of the peak hours. These uses could include small (artisan) Policy E/ 8: Mixe d-Use Development in Histon & Impington Station Area  
 
1. To create an attractive and vibrant gateway to the settlements from the 
Guided Busway stop, redevelopment of land around Station Road in 
Histon and Impington, as shown on the Policies Map, will deliver  mixed -
use development, including:  
a. Commercial uses – workshops, retail, café / restaurant (in Use 
Classes B1, A1 and A3);  
b. Community uses;  
c. Residential development including work / live units.  
 
2. Development proposals for the sites known as former Bishops 
Hardware  Store site, Old Railway Good s Yard, and Kendall Court 
should include commercial and/or community uses in addition to any 
residential development.  
 
3. The former station building and the Railway Vue public house are of 
local importance and should be r etained and reused as appropriate for 
commercial or a community use.  
 
4. All schemes must integrate with surrounding uses, respect the character 
and maintain the vitality and viability of Histon and Impington village 
centre, and retain the significant wooded area known as ‘The Copse’.   
 
5. Planning permission will only be granted for development proposals 
where the applicant can demonstrate that their proposals will contribute 
to achieving the objectives for the area outlined above. The preferred 
approach would be through masterplanning the whole policy area, in 
consultation with landowners and stakeholders.  
 
6. A Supplementary Planning Document may be produced to support the 
application of the policy.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
182 
 workshops, small scale retail and destination shops (e.g. for craft made items, 
specialist foods) as well as food outlets including café / restaurants. The new uses 
should complement facilities offered elsewhere in the village and should not detract 
from or undermine them.   
 
8.39 There are several development opportunity sites including; the warehouse site, 
Kendall Court and the old railway goods yard to the north west of the former station 
building. These should be redeveloped for mixed -use development, including 
commercial and retail uses, to try to rebalance the ratio of empl oyment uses to 
residential in the village as this ratio has halved in six years. Small and Medium 
Enterprises are the villages' (and the nation's) growth engines for new jobs and 
there are currently few start up premises or work and live opportunities in t he 
village.  
 
8.40 The opportunity for new residential development will be limited but attractive due to 
the proximity to the Guided Busway and convenience of other local facilities. The 
opening of the Cambridge North station with Busway access will increase its  
attractiveness and provide an opportunity for sustainable living with minimal reliance 
upon the private car.  
 
8.41 The two Victorian buildings; the form er station building and Railway Vue public 
house are landmark buildings which are important to the local com munity. Located 
in key positions they should be retained in commercial use or as a community 
asset.  
 
8.42 The Copse is an attractive wooded area which provides an important informal 
amenity and recreation area for local residents, and has been designated a Loc al 
Green Space. Many of the trees are protected by Tree Preservation Orders.   
 
8.43 An exemplar of 21st Century design, redevelopment will be based on the highest 
standards of sustainability and latest architectural styles in a way that will co -exist in    
harmony with its surroundings whilst creating an area that is visually striking. It will 
maximise opportunities for local access on foot and by cycle, as well as by public 
transport, reducing reliance upon the car.     
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
183 
 Promotion of Clusters  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.44 The N PPF (2012) (paragraph 21 4th bullet point) requires l ocal planning authorities 
to plan positively for the location, promotion and expansion of clusters or networks 
of knowledge driven, creative or high technology indu stries. The Council’s 
Economic Development Strategy identified a particular need for premises to support 
start-ups and enterprise, and low cost lab/office space.  
 
8.45 Previous development plans for the district have incl uded policies which selectively 
managed employment development, restricting the occupancy of new employment 
buildings to firms that can demonstrate a need to be located in the Cambridge area.  
The purpose has been to recognise the Cambridge areas role as a  world leader in 
research, manage development pressure by reserving land for uses needing a 
Cambridge location, and encourage uses that do not need to be close to Cambridge 
to locate elsewhere.   
  
8.46 Recent evidence  in the E mployment Land Review, building on the Cambridge 
Cluster at 50 S tudy, suggests that the high tech cluster is maturing. Greater 
flexibility is needed  to support its diversification enabling  associated high tech 
manufacturing and headquarters functions.  A significant element of future growth in 
the district is expected to come from other office sectors, which could be restricted 
by previous policies.  
 
8.47 Many local b usinesses t ake risks to innovate and a  high number of business start -
ups and failures is one of the characteristics of the Cambridge high tech sector and 
there is a risk that a more flexible policy could affect the future of the sector, by 
increasing compe tition for land and buildings, and inc reasing rents.  However, there Policy E/9: Promotion of Clusters  
 
1. Development proposals in suitable locations will be permitted which 
support the development of employment clusters, drawing on the 
specialisms of the Cambridge area in the following sectors:  
• Biotechnology and biomedical;  
• Computer services;  
• Electronic engineering;  
• High-technology manufacturing;  
• Information technology / telecommunications;  
• Healthcare, teaching and research;  
• Research and development;  
• Clean Technology;  
• Other locally driven clusters as they emerge.  
 
2. Employment land allo cations especially suited for cluster development 
are Northstowe, North -west Cambridge, and the new employment 
provision on the edge of Cambridge (Policies E/1 and SS/4). These 
areas will be expected to include provision of a range of suitable units, 
including for start -ups, SMEs, and incubator units.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
184 
 is now a larger  amount of employment land that is available  than in the past , and 
Policy E/9 seeks to ensure major sites continue to deliver land and buildings 
suitable for the future development  of the high tech clusters .   
 
8.48 On balance the evidence suggests the benefits of removing the policy currently 
outweigh the costs. It will however be important  that the impact on the district 
economy, and in particular the high technology research & development clusters, is 
closely monit ored, and a policy reinstated through plan review if evidence indicates 
harmful impacts.   
 
Shared Social Spaces as part of Employment Areas  
 
8.49 The Cambridge Cluster at 50 identif ied that some  business parks were considered 
isolated, and the lack of a social aspect could be making them less attractive places 
to locate to. It highlighted the importance of social spaces for doing business.  
 
8.50 The policy supports the development of com plimentary facilities in order to help 
develop the social milieu of free standing business parks  which are not close to 
existing comparable village facilities . The need for such complementary facilities will 
vary according to the location of indivi dual business p arks. In smaller employment 
areas facilities are likely to be available nearby, such as in village centres.   
 
Large Scale W arehousing and Distribution Centres  
 
 
8.51 This element of the ‘Selective Management of Employment ’ policies for the 
Cambridge area warrants retention. These uses require a large land area, but 
generate relatively low numbers of jobs.  They could quickly reduce the available 
land supply, and increase pressure on transport networks, which could harm the 
continued prosperity of the high technology clusters.  Whilst proposals for Policy E/10: Shared Social Spaces in Employment Areas  
 
Appropriately scaled leisure, eating and social hub facilities will be permitted 
in business parks and employment areas where:  
a. The use is ancillary or complementary to existing or proposed B -Use 
Classes, and supports the functionality of the employment area;  
b. The use will not have unacceptably adverse effects on existing 
businesses or future business use of  the site;  
c. The facility is intended primarily to meet the needs of workers in the 
business park, and does not attract significant levels of visitor traffic into 
the area.  
Policy E/11: Large Scale Warehousing and Distribution Centres  
 
Large scale warehousing and distribution centres will not be permitted in the 
district.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
185 
 warehousing supporting other employment uses or meeting local needs will be 
supported subject to other policy requirements, large scale proposals serving a 
wider regional or national  function will not be supported.   
 
New Employment Development in Villages  
 
8.52 Sensitive small -scale employment development can help sustain  the rural economy, 
and achieve a wider range of local employment opportunities.  It can enhance the 
vitality of Rural C entres, and reduce the need to travel. There is also potential for 
cluster related firms to develop on an appropriate scale. Proposals mu st be in scale 
with the location. This means that larger proposals are more likely to be considered 
favourably in Rural Centres, whilst only very small scale proposals are likely to be 
acceptable at Group or Infill villages.  
 
New Employment D evelopment on the Edges of Villages  Policy E/12: New Employment Development in Villages  
 
Within development frameworks in villages, planning permission will be 
granted for new employment development (B1, B2 and B8 uses) or 
expansion of existing premises  provided that the scale of development would 
be in keeping with the category and scale of the village, and be in character 
and scale with the location.   
Policy E/13: New Employmen t Development on the Edges of Villages  
 
Subject to Green Belt policy, new development for employment development 
(B1, B2 and B8 Use Classes) will be permitted on sites adjoining or very 
close to the development frameworks of villages where:  
a. It is demonstrated that there are no suitable buildings or sites within the 
settlement or nearby, or suitable buildings to reuse or replace in the 
countryside nearby.  
b. The site comprises previously developed land.  If greenfield sites are 
proposed they will need to demonstrate no suitable previously 
developed sites are available.  
c. The proposal is justified by a business case, demonstrating that the 
business is viable.  
d. There is a named user for the development, who shall be the first 
occupant. A planning condition will be attached to any permission to 
this effect.  
e. The proposal is logically related to the built form of the settlement, the 
scale and form of the development would be in keeping with the 
category and scale of the village.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
186 
  
8.53 Sensitive small scale employment development can help sustain the rural economy, 
and achieve a wider range of local employment opportunities. Where it can be 
demonstrated there are no suitable buildings in the area, the Council will support 
develop ment on the edges of villages in appropriate circumstances.  
 
Loss of Employment to Non -Employment Uses  
 
8.54 Employment sites at villages are a scarce resource, which should be retained.  
Making best use of existing employment sites reduces the pressure for 
development of new sites, including new sites in the countryside. It also provides a 
greater range of employment opportunities and reduces the need to travel. Sites 
should be retained to provide local employment, unless specific factors indicate 
otherwise.   f. The proposal would not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the 
character and appearance of the area and in particular the village edge, 
and is in scale with the location.  
g. The site can be easily accessed on foot or cycle.  
Policy E/14: Loss of Employment Land to Non Employment Uses  
 
1. The conversion, change of use or redevelopment of existing 
employment sites to non -employment uses within or on the edge of 
development frameworks will be resisted unless one of the following 
criteria is met:  
a. It is demonstrated that the site is inappropriate for any 
employment use to continue having regard to market demand. 
Applications will need to be accompanied by documentar y 
evidence that the site is not suitable or capable of being made 
suitable for continued employment use.  Evidence would be 
required that the property has been adequately marketed for a 
period of not less than twelve months on terms that reflect the 
lawful  use and condition of the premises.   
b. The overall benefit to the community of the proposal outweighs 
any adverse effect on employment opportunities and the range of 
available employment land and premises.  
c. The existing use is generating environmental proble ms such as 
noise, pollution, or unacceptable levels of traffic and any 
alternative employment use would continue to generate similar 
environmental problems.  
 
2. Redevelopment proposals which propose the loss of all employment 
uses will need to be accompanied by clear viability or other evidence 
as to why it is not possible to deliver an element of employment 
development as part of the scheme.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
187 
  
8.55 The Council will require robust evidence that a site or building is no longer 
appropriate for employment use. Any marketing exercise should  include extensive 
advertising.  Both freehold and leasehold options should be made available without 
restrictive covenants preventing re use as an employment use.  All details of offers 
should be provided to the Council during the marketing period together with full 
reasons as to why a ny offer has not been accepted. The facility should only be 
marketed at an appropriate value agreed by the Council and an independent 
assessor for its existing use .  
 
Established Employment Areas  
 
8.56 South Cambridgeshire contains a number of ‘Established Employment Areas ’, 
which are identified on the Policies Map. The policy provides a context for 
considering plannin g applications on these sites, to support their role and function 
as employment sites.  
 
8.57 Within these areas, appropriate development and redevelopment will be permitted, 
subject to consideration of land supply across the district, and other policy 
concerns . This will enable more efficient use of the sites, and allow them to be 
adapted for the needs of existing and future users.  Policy E/15: Established Employment Areas  
 
1. In defined Established Employment Areas, rede velopment of existing 
buildings  and appropriate development for employment use will be 
permitted.  
 
2. The following Established Employment Areas are defined on the 
Policies Map:  
a. Cambourne Business Park, Cambourne;  
b. Brookfields  Business Estate / Park, Twentypence Road, 
Cottenham;  
c. Land at Hinxton Road, South of Duxford;  
d. Granta Park, Great Abington;  
e. Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton;  
f. Cambridge Research Park, Landbeach;  
g. Site to North of Cambridge Research Park, Landbeach;  
h. Daleshead Foods Ltd, Cambridge Road, Linton;  
i. Eternit site, Meldreth;  
j. Norman Way Industrial Estate, Over;  
k. Former Spicers site, Sawston;  
l. Buckingway Business Park, Swavesey;  
m. Convent Drive / Pembroke Avenue site, Waterbeach.  
 
3. Permission will be refused where there would be a negative impact on 
surrounding countryside, or landscape character.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
188 
 8.58 The sites identified are outside development  frameworks , and not in the Green Belt. 
Employment sites created from the conversion of agricultural buildings have not 
been included, as these were permitted through specific policies, and are not 
intended for extension.  
 
Expansion of Existing Businesses in the Coun tryside  
 
8.59 There are many existing businesses located in the countryside, which play a 
valuable part in the economy of the district. Whilst the Local Plan generally restricts 
new development in the countryside, the expansion of these firms will be supported 
if certain conditions are met. A business case will be required, to demonstrate the 
proposal will secure jobs or create new jobs.  
 
8.60 The scale of growth must not confl ict with other policies in the P lan, and must not 
result in an unsustainable level of development in a particular location.  
 
  
  Policy E/16: Expansion of Existing Businesses in the Countryside  
 
Subject to Green Belt policy, and outside the areas listed in Policy E/15, the 
expansion of established existing firms which are outside development 
frameworks will be permitted where:  
a. The proposal is justified by a business case, demonstrating that the 
business is viable, and has been operating successfully for a minimum 
of 2 years.  
b. There is a named user for the development, who shall be the first 
occupant. A planning condition will be attached to any permission to 
this effect.  
c. The proposal is of a scale a ppropriate in this location, adjacent to 
existing premises and appropriate to the existing development.  
d. There is no unacceptable adverse impact on the countryside with 
regard to scale, character and appearance of new buildings and/or 
changes of use of land . 
e. Existing buildings are reused where possible.  
f. The proposed development would not (by itself or cumulatively) have a 
significant adverse impact in terms of the amount or nature of traffic 
generated.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
189 
 Conversion or Replacement of Rural Buildings for Employment  
 
8.61 The N PPF (2012) requires that Local Plans support the sustainable growth and 
expansion of all types of business and enterprise in rural areas, both through 
conversion of existing buildings and well designed new buildings.  
 
  Policy E/17: Conversion or Replacement of Rural Buildings for 
Employment  
 
1. The change of use or adaptation of buildings in the countryside for 
employment use  will be permitted provided the following apply:  
a. The buildings are structurally sound, not makeshift in nature and 
are of permanent, substantial construction;  
b. The buildings are capable of re -use without materially changing 
their existing character or impac t upon the surrounding 
countryside;  
c. The form, bulk and general design of the buildings are in keeping 
with their surroundings.  
 
2. The replacement of suitably located, existing buildings of permanent 
design and construction in the countryside for economic dev elopment 
purposes with well -designed new buildings will be permitted where it 
would bring about environmental improvement, and result in a more 
sustainable development.  
 
3. Any increase in floor area must enhance the design, and ensure the 
building remains in  scale and character with its rural surroundings.  
 
4. Incidental uses such as car parking and storage should be 
accommodated within the group of buildings, or on well related land 
where landscaping can reduce the visual impact of the new site.  
 
5. Employment generated must be in scale with the rural location. 
Developments resulting in significant numbers of employees or visitors 
must only be located near to larger settlements or accessible by public 
transport, cycling, or walking. Proposals which would have a significant 
adverse impact in terms of the amount or nature of traffic generated will 
be refused.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
190 
 Farm Diversification  
 
 
8.62 Agriculture still makes an important contribution to the South  Cambridgeshire 
economy, but increasingly farms are diversifying  into non -agricultural activities, for 
the business to remain viable. This could include planting of woodland, farm shops, 
farm-based food processing and packaging, craft workshops, sporting facilities, 
fishing lakes, equestrian businesses, nature trails , holiday accommodation  or 
renewable energy infrastructure . In order to protect the quality and distinctiveness of 
the local landscape, the Council wishes to prevent uncoordinated development in 
rural areas and the piecemeal stripping of assets from farms wi thout regard for the 
viability of the holding.  
 
8.63 It is important that diversification proposals are well founded in terms of effectively 
contributing to the agricultural business and the rural economy and integrating new 
activities into the e nvironment and the rural scene.  Farmers are required to submit a 
Business Plan with any planning application for diversification. This should include 
details of existing farm activities, the need for diversification, details of the proposal 
and implications of the propos al on, for example, the rural economy and the 
environment.  
 Policy E/18: Farm Diversification  
 
1. Well-conceived diversification schemes to support agricultural and  other 
land-based rural businesses, will be permitted if:  
a. They are consistent in scale with their rural location;  
b. Existing buildings are reused where possible, and if not replaced, 
in accordance with Policy E/17;  
c. Any new development is part of an existing group of buildings.  
 
2. Applications must include a Business Plan, to demonstrate how the 
proposal will support the continued operation of the agricultural and 
other land based rural businesses.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
191 
 Tour ist Facilities and Visitor Attractions  
 
 
8.64 Within the d istrict, there are a number of assets which have become major tourist 
visitor attractions, such as the W orld War II airfield at Duxford which is now home to 
the Imperial War Museum, and Wimpole Hall which is owned by the National Trust.  
Facilities such as these can only be developed where the assets exist.  
 
8.65 The N PPF (2012) requires support for sustainable rural touris m and leisure 
developments that benefit businesses in rural areas, communities and visitors, and 
which respect the character of the countryside. Tourist facilities and attractions 
could include visitor and information centres, t oilets, tea rooms, or picnic  sites. The 
policy is intended to support the districts existing attractions and assets. It is not the 
intention of the policy to encourage new major tourist attractions.  
 
  Policy E/19: Tourist Facilities and Visitor Attractions  
 
Proposals for new or extended tourist facilities and visitor attractions 
(excluding accommodation) in the countryside will be supported where it can 
be demonstrated that:  
a. The development utilises and enhances the areas existing tourism 
assets;  
b. There is an identified need for a rural location, and all opportunities for 
reuse / replacement of existing rural buildings have been explored 
appro priate to the proposal;  
c. There would be no significant adverse impact on the character and 
appearance of the area;  
d. The scheme is in scale with its location  and the nature of the  facility it 
supports;  
e. The proposal maximises sustainable travel opportunities, including 
walking, cycling, and public transport. Proposals which would have a 
significant adverse impact in terms of the amount or nature of traffic 
generated will be refused;  
f. The proposal does not require on site accommodation (e.g. for 
security).   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
192 
 Tourist Accommodation  
 
8.66 The Cambridge area draws large numbers of visitors every year generating 
significant de mand for vis itor accommodation. The primary attraction is the City of 
Cambridge. Cambridge City Council has undertaken a study of the need for hotel 
accommodation for Cambridge , and the Local Plan addresses the need for City 
Centre accommodation. Taking account of exi sting and planned facilities in and on 
the edge of the city, additional need is limited. The South Cambridgeshire Local 
Plan therefore does not allocate any specific sites for new hotel accommodation.  
Holiday accommodation will be limited to no longer than  4 week lets to ensure it is 
retained as tourist accommodation and not used as long term or permanent 
residential accommodation.  
 
Retail  
 
Retail Hierarchy   
 Policy E/21: Retail Hierarchy  
 
A retail hierarchy of preferred centres will be taken into account  in 
considering proposals for retail development. Any proposals for new retail 
provision in these centres should be in scale with their position in the 
hierarchy. The hierarchy of centres in South Cambridgeshire is as follows:  
a. Northstowe and Waterbeach (n ew towns) town centres;  
b. Rural Centres’ village centres;  
c. Other village centres (Minor Rural Centres, Group Villages and Infill 
Villages).  Policy E/20: Tourist Accommodation  
 
1. Development which will provide tourist accommodation within 
development frameworks will be supported where the scale and type of 
development is directly related to the role and function of the centre.  
 
2. Outside development frameworks, development to provide overnight 
visitor accommodation, holid ay accommodation and public houses will 
be permitted by the change of use / conversion / replacement of 
suitable buildings and by small scale new developments appropriate to 
local circumstances.   
 
3. Development of holiday accommodation will be limited to sh ort term 
holiday lets through conditions or legal agreement. Permitted 
development rights may be removed in the interests of amenity.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
193 
 8.67 The NPPF (2012) requires Local Planning Authorities to recognise town centres as 
the heart of their communities and pursue policies to support their viability and 
vitality. To assist this they should define a network and hierarchy of centres that is 
resilient to anticipated future economic changes.  
 
8.68 Cambridge is the relevant city centre in the local hier archy while the ring of market 
towns just outside the district represent town centres.  
 
8.69 The centre s at the new towns of Northstowe and Waterbeach will also be 
considered a s town centre s in the hierarchy. For both new towns , there will be a 
need for convenience and comparison floor area provision of a scale necessary to 
ensure that the settlement s are  sustainable. However, the  Council does not intend 
that either new town  should perform a sub regional shopping role that has a 
significant impact on the role of Cambridge.  
 
8.70 The v illage centres in Rural Centre  Villages  can fulfil the role of local centres but are 
not appropriate locations for shopping development to serve larger /dispersed  
catchment areas . Rural Centres are the appropriate location for shopp ing 
development to serve their local catchment area only. The same principle applies to 
Minor Rural Centres, Group Villages and Infill Villages, which serve even smaller 
catchment areas than Rural Centres and cater for very localised shopping needs.  It 
is not practicable to define the extent of local centres on the Policies Map due to the 
dispersed distribution of most town centre uses in our villages.   
 
Applications for New Retail Development  
 
Policy E/22: Applications for New Retail Development  
 
1. Proposals for new shops, redevelopment or extension of existing 
shops, or the change of use of buildings to shops within a development 
framework will only be permitted where the size and attraction of the 
shopping development is of a scale appropriate to t he function and size 
of village. Wherever possible retail uses will be located in close 
proximity to each other in the centre of villages, unless serving very 
local catchments e.g. corner shops.  
 
2. Proposals involving additional retail floorspace resulting i n a retail unit 
in excess of the following thresholds should be accompanied by a 
Retail Impact Assessment:  
a. Rural Centre village centres  500m2 (gross)  
b. Outside such centres   250m2 (gross)  
 
3. Proposals for retail developments up to and including the above 
floorspace thresholds will generally be regarded as being of a scale 
that would not result in significant adverse impacts.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
194 
  
8.71 Village shops play a vital role in achieving sustainability in villages, reducing the 
need for residents to travel to meet everyday needs. In smaller villages they also 
play an important community function, supporting those who have difficul ty 
travelling further afield, and forming a hub to village life. The Council will, wherever 
possible, support provision of new shops and facilities of an appropriate scale to the 
village.  Wherever possible retail uses will be encouraged to locate in close proximity 
to each other in order to allow for easier access and provide for greater 
convenience, thereby strengthening existing provision.  
 
8.72 The NPPF (2012) sets a default threshold of 2 ,500m2 gross retail floorspace above 
which impact assessments would be required. Only the very largest superstores in 
the district would reach this threshold. Given the rural nature of the district it is likely 
that a m uch smaller development could impact on the viability of other village 
centres. A higher threshold is included in the village centres of Rural Centres, 
reflecting that these often include small scale supermarkets. However, the location 
of such a facility o n the edge of the village, or in or on the edge of smaller village, 
could impact on the viability of village centres, and therefore a lower threshold has 
been included for proposals outside these areas.    
 
8.73 In order to explore future needs for retail devel opment, Cambridge City Council and 
South Cambridgeshire District Council commissioned the Cambridge Sub -Region al 
Retail Study 2008.  This showed that retail in Cambridge was performing well and 
provided an assessment of the need for new floorspace for both  comparison goods 
(items not generally purchased on a frequent basis e.g. clothing, shoes, electrical 
goods, furniture, books.) and convenience goods (everyday and essential items e.g. 
food and drink) to 2021. It identified that additional needs were gener ally related to 
serving the planned major developments such as Northstowe.  
 
8.74 New major developments will require retail development of an appropriate scale to 
meet the needs generated. Northstowe will require convenience and comparison 
floor area provision  of a scale, which ensures that the settlement is sustainable. 
However, the Council does not intend that Northstowe should perform a sub  
regional shopping role that has a significant impact on the role of Cambridge. 
Further guidance on proposals for conven ience and comparison retail in Northstowe 
is contained in the Northstowe Area Action Plan.  
 
  4. Where impact assessments indicate significant adverse impacts on an 
existing town or village centre, development wil l be refused.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 8       Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
195 
 Retai ling in the Countryside  
 
8.75  Sporadic development for retail uses in the countryside could result in 
unsustainable patterns of development, and could harm the vitality and viability of 
village centres.  
 
 
 Policy E/23: Retailing in the Countryside  
 
1. Planning permission for the sale of goods in the countryside will not be 
granted except for:  
a. Sales from farms and nurseries of produce and/or craft goods, 
where the majority of goods are produced on the farm or in the 
locality; or  
b. Exceptionally, the sale of convenience goods, ancillary to other 
uses, where proposals, either individually or cumula tively, do not 
have a significant adverse impact on the viability of surrounding 
village shops, or the vitality of Rural Centres or other village 
centres.  
 
2. Where permission is granted, conditions may be imposed on the types 
of goods that may be sold.   Chapter 9Chapter 9   
Promoting Successful CommunitiesPromoting Successful Communities   
Park Life Event, Milton Country Park, South CambridgeshirePark Life Event, Milton Country Park, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
199 
 Chapter 9     Promoting Successful Communities  
 
9.1 Communitie s are about places and people. As well as being well designed our new 
developments need to promote good health, include necessary services and 
facilities when they are needed, provide open space, and allow safe mo vement by 
walking and cycling. The people that move into these new places will form 
successful new communities and the Local Plan will ensure they are given the ri ght 
support to do this.  
 
9.2 A number of new communities are already planned in South Cambridgeshire, at the 
new town of Northstowe and in a number of urban extensions to Cambridge. These 
follow on from Cambourne, which in over a decade has grown into a rural centre 
with a range of facilities and a thriving community. The development strategy is set 
out in Chapter 2 and identifies further new communities to be created during the 
plan period and beyond.  
 
9.3 The Local Plan will also affect existing communities. South Cambridgeshire is a 
mostly rural authority of 105 villages providing a variety of services and facilitie s for 
their local communities. Larger villages usually provide a greater choice since they 
serve larger populations and a larger catchment area.  Many smaller villages have 
very few facilities, but those facilities can be important in ensuring that a basic level 
of services is available locally. The Council aims to play its part in protecting and 
improving rural services, in order to support exis ting communities. The Localism Act 
requires the Council to keep a ‘List of Assets of Community Value’ which will help to 
identify what facilities and services local communities co nsider to be valuable within 
their villages.   
Key Facts:  
• The ‘health’ of people living in the district is generally better than the 
average for England.   
• Good health leads to an aging population with the highest growth 
expected to occur in the 65+ age group.  
• In national indices of multiple deprivation (2010), o ut of 326 English 
local authorities where a rank of 1 is the most deprived authority in 
England, and a rank of 326 the least deprived authority, our score was 
322 (meaning we are one of the most successful areas in England).  
The indices take account of in come, employment, health and disability, 
education skills and training, barriers to housing and other services, 
crime, and the environment.  
• Age structure is a key factor for planners and service providers as it 
affects requirements for services such as edu cation, health, leisure, 
arts and sports facilities. It influences household composition and 
therefore the overall size of a new development’s population.  
• People who move into new developments can have very different 
population characteristics to the surr ounding area.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
200 
  
Allocation for Open Space  
 
9.4 The Co uncil has published an updated Recreation and Open Space Study 2013. 
This has provided information on the provision of open space within the district and 
how this is meeting local need. As a result of this review  sites for open space and 
recreation uses have been car ried forward from the previous P lan and others have 
been identified in conju nction with the relevant local parish c ouncil in areas  where 
there is an identified shortage of existing provision. Where other shortages may 
exist or arise during the plan period, Parish Councils have the option of preparing 
Neighbourhood Plans. These provide a further means of achieving open space 
allocatio ns in parishes to meet local needs, particularly given the circumstances of 
site delivery and maintenance arrangements that are typical in South 
Cambridgeshire Parishes.  • Initial populations tend to have a young age structure, with many young 
couples and young children, and very few older people.  
• Population age structures change markedly over time as developments 
mature, wi th children and adults ageing and the age structure gradually 
becoming older and more similar to the surrounding population. This 
process may take as long as 30 years.  
• Rural shops and services are vital for maintaining communities and 
supporting access fo r the less mobile members of society.  
• Sport and play space is important for supporting healthy lifestyles and 
improving both the physical and mental wellbeing of communities.  
• There are high levels of demand for new allotments, which provide 
opportunities t o support healthy lifestyles.  
• Areas around the A14 north of Cambridge, and the centre of 
Cambridge, are designated as Air Quality Management Areas.  
• National Noise Action Plans First Priority Locations have been identified 
within the district in areas clos e to the M11, A14 and A10, and other 
busy roads.   
Policy SC/1: Allocation for Open Space  
 
The following sites are allocated to meet local need for open space:  
 
1. Extensions to existing recreation grounds:  
a. Land east of Bar Lane, Stapleford and west of the access road to 
Green Hedge Farm - 1.42ha.  
b. Land north of Ha tton’s Road, Longstanton - 2.65ha. 
c. Land north of former E DF site, Ely Road, Milton - 3.1ha. 
 
2. New Sites:  
d. Land known as Bypass Farm, west  of Cottenha m Road, Histon -
3.5ha. 
e. Land south of Gran hams Road, Great Shelford - 4.8ha. South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
201 
 9.5 The site south of Granhams Road, Great Shelford is only suitable for informal 
recreati on uses due to its character and parkland sett ing. Road access is also very 
limited. Sites at Great Shelford, Stapleford, Histon and Milton remain in the Green 
Belt. 
 
Health Impact Assessment  
 
9.6 A key role for the Local Plan is to provide for development in a way that supports 
and encourages active and healthy lifestyles.   
 
9.7 Health Impact Assessment (HIA) is a method of considering the positive and 
negative impacts of development on the health of different groups in the population, 
in order to enhance the benefits and  minimise any risks to health. To ensure that 
new developments have a positiv e impact on the health and we llbeing of new and 
existing residents the Council will require an HIA of development proposals to a 
level of detail appropriate to its scale and nature. It is recognised that HIAs are most 
effective for large scale developments and therefore for developmen ts of less than 
100 dwellings or 5,000m2 the Council will accept less detailed assessments.   
 
9.8 Detailed guidance on how this policy will be implemented will be provided in a 
Supplementary Planning Document.   
 
Protection of Existing Village Services and Facilities  Policy SC/2: Health Impact Assessment  
 
New development will have a positive impact on the health and wellbeing of 
new and existing residents. Planning applications for developments o f 20 or 
more dwellings or 1,000 m2 or more floorspace will be accompanied by a 
Health Impact Assessment to demonstrate this.   
a. For dev elopments of  100 or more dwellings or 5,000 m2  or more 
floorspace a full Health Impact Assessment will be required;  
b. For developments between 20 to 100 dwellings or 1,000 to 5,000 m2 or 
more floorspace the Health Impact Assessment will take the form of an 
extended screening or rapid Health Impact Assessment.  
Policy SC/3: Protection of Village Services  and Facilities  
 
1. Planning permission will be refused for proposals which would result in 
the loss of a village service, including village pubs, shops, post offices, 
banks and building societies, community buildings and meeting places, 
sports venues, cul tural buildings, places of worship or health facilities, 
where such loss would cause an unacceptable reduction in the level of 
community or service provision in the locality.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
202 
  
9.9 Village services and facilities in South Cambridgeshire perfo rm a vital function in 
rural communities, pa rticularly for the less mobile.  The National Planning Policy 
Framework  (NPPF , 2012 ) advises that plans should guard against the unnecessary 
loss of valued facilities and services, particularly where this would re duce the 
community’s ability to meet its day -to-day needs.  The local community can highlight 
the facilities it values within its parish by applying for them to be included on the 
register of Community Assets held by the Council.  
 
Meeting Community Needs  2. The following matters will be considered in determining the significance 
of the loss:  
a. The established use of the premises and its existing and potential 
contribution to the social amenity of the local population;  
b. The presence of other village services and faci lities which provide 
an alternative, with convenient access by good local public 
transport services, or by cycling or walking; and how these 
remaining uses will cope with displaced users; and any 
unacceptable impact of those alternative services or facilit ies; 
c. The future economic viability of the use including the results of 
marketing of the premises for a minimum of 12 months at a 
realistic price and in appropriate cases financial information.  
Policy SC/4: Meeting Community Needs  
 
1. All housing developments will include or contribute to the provision of 
the services and facilities necessary to meet the needs of the 
development. The scale and range of this provision or contribution will 
be appropriate to the level of n eed generated by the development and 
will address the specific needs of different age groups, of people with 
disabilities, and faith groups and will be adaptable to population growth 
and demographic changes. The full range of services and facilities are 
likely to be required in new settlements and similar developments.   
 
2. The community needs of large scale major developments (individual 
sites with 200 or more dwellings, or groups of smaller sites which 
cumulatively exceed this figure), will be established through detailed 
assessments and strategies prepared in consultation with service 
providers, and approved by the local authority in partnership with the 
landowners and stakeholders.  
 
3. In making assessments of need and the timing of delivery of the service 
or facility, account will be taken of capacity at existing facilities  in the 
locality, their accessibility and of other local circumstances.   
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
203 
  
 
 
 
 
 Range of Services and Facilities to be Provided  
 
4. The community facilities and services to be provided include:  
a. Primary and secondary schools ; 
b. Meeting places;  
c. Health facilities;  
d. Libraries;  
e. Sports facilities;  
f. Commercial facilities important to community life including 
childcare nurseries, local shops restaurants and cafes, and public 
houses;  
g. Provision for faith groups;  
h. Provision for burials;   
i. Provision for waste and recycling;  
 
5. New retail provision should not undermine the vitality and viability of 
nearby ‘town centres’ as defined in the National Planning Policy 
Framework having regard to the hierarchy of centres.   
 
6. Provision can include build ings, land (serviced if to be built on), and 
financial contributions.   
 
Location of Services and Facilities  
 
7. Services and facilities should be provided in accessible locations.  
Opportunities for joint provision and co -location of compatible services 
and facilities should be examined and such provision made where this is 
practical and cost efficient to service an d facility providers. In new 
settlements provision will be focused in town, district or local centres 
where appropriate to the service and facility being provided.  
  
Community Involvement and Development  
 
8. A community development strategy will be prepared for large scale 
major developments (Waterbeach New Town, Bourn Airfield New 
Village and Cambourne West) to demonstrate how the new 
communities will be effectively supported throughout the build phase of 
the developments, including at the outset of developm ent.   
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
204 
  
9.10 The sites allocated in the Local Plan identify where new communities will be 
developed over the plan period. Experience from d eveloping Cambourne, and the 
ongoing work to deliver Northstowe and the urban extensions to Cambridge, have 
inform ed the content of this pol icy. New large scale major developments will need to 
include a wide range of services and facilities to become successful communities.  
Smaller village developments will not usually need to include new services and 
facilities on -site but may need to contri bute to the expansion of existing facilities and 
sometimes p rovide land for that expansion.  The provision of facilities and services 
will be secured via a planning obligation when mitigating a site specific impact or 
more generally through a Community Infr astructure Levy contribution (CIL) (s ee 
Chapter 10 for a more detailed reference to CIL).   
 
9.11  Reflecting Planning Practice Guidance, the Council will not seek tariff style Section 
106 contributions for general off site infrastructure improvements from site s under 
10 dwellings (and which have a combined gross floor space of no more than 
1,000m2). If, through consultation, a service or facility provider identifies a particular 
requirement arising directly from a development and w hich is  necessary to mitigate 
the impact of that development, it would be legitimate to secure a financial 
contribution towards its provision or (where an existing infrastructure item) its 
improvement / upkeep . 
 
9.12 The work of different agencies needs to be coordinated to deliver public, 
commercial and voluntary services, of the right nature and s ize, and when they are 
needed. Depending on the scale and nature of development, assessments and 
strategies for service provision will be required, prepared in partnership with the 
landowner and s takeholders, which will also address future management and 
governance issues.  
 
9.13 New developments take time to develop into new communities especially  if they are 
of a large scale. Support is needed to help people to settle and start the groups, 
clubs and a ctivities found in mo re established neighbourhoods. Community Implementation  
 
9. The timely delivery of services and facilities when they are needed will 
be required, including the provision of key services and facilities for early 
phases of the development. Phasing will be established through planning 
obligations or conditions. Phasing may require the provision and use of 
interim facilities from first occupation until permanent facilities are 
delivered, to help build a sense of community and minimise car 
dependency . 
 
10. As appropriate to t he nature of facilities provided, the developer will 
prepare management and maintenance strategies, to be approved by the 
Local Planning Authority, to ensure robust and effective implementation, 
adoption and maintenance in the long term.  
 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
205 
 Development Strategies provide a way to help plan community development rat her 
than leaving it to chance. This could include support to help establish good 
communication and information for new residents, establish new community groups, 
organise community activities, and support the growth of new spor ts clubs and 
community groups. The development of a Public Art Strategy within a new 
community can play a role in linking existing and new residents  in a community and 
help bring exis ting and new residents together (s ee Chapter 5 for Policy HQ/2 
Public Art and New Development).   
 
9.14 The timely delivery of key services and facilities in the early phases of the 
development is vital and the provision of places where the community can meet 
should be prioritised. If a new dwelling in a first phase is put forward to be used by 
the community  this can provide a starting point for community development.  
 
9.15 With regard to provision for sports facilities, the Council has worked with Cambridge 
City Council and Sport England to develop two sports strategies: a Playing Pitch 
Strategy 2015 -2031 for grass and all weather pitches covering both areas; and an 
Indoor Sports Facility Strategy 2015 -2031 to guide future provision of indoor sports 
halls, swimming pools and outdoor cycling facilities to serve existing and new 
communities in Cambridge and South  Cambridgeshire. In line with the Framework, 
the strategies assess existing facilities, the future need for sport and active 
recreation facilities, and opportunities for new provision. The Playing Pitch Strategy 
and Indoor Sports Facility Strategy take int o account planned growth to 2031. 
Where large windfall sites come forward, which have not been accounted for in the 
strategies, applicants should provide a sports strategy (also known as a facilities 
development plan) setting out the details of specific fa cilities to be developed, the 
rationale and need for these. The process will involve consultation with Sport 
England and the relevant National Governing Bodies for sport . 
 
9.16 Smaller extensions to existing villages will not be required to provide as wide a 
range of services and facilities as large scale major developments, however 
consideration will need to be given to the impact of developments on the edge of 
existing villages so that the extra demands for services and facilities from new 
residents are provid ed for in ways that minimise impacts on the existing community.   
 
9.17 Some public services can successfully share facilities such as libraries, health 
facilities and meeting rooms. The dual use of sports facilities and community spaces 
by the local community and the school population in village colleges is a successful 
part of the way of life in South Cambridgeshire that shoul d be continued in new 
schools.  Such sharing of facilities can assist in the ensuring that a wider range of 
services is available to a co mmunity.  
 
9.18 A number of facilities some of sub regional significance have been identified in 
studies prepared by Cambridgeshire Horizons, an organisation which was charged 
to help implement earlier development proposals in the Cambridge area but which 
was w ound up in 2011.  
 
9.19 Recognising the desirability of such facilities, Cambridge City Council and South 
Cambridgeshire District Council explored whether there was a need and possible site South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
206 
 options for accommodating a community stadium, ice rink and concert hall in updating 
their Local Plans. Public consultation revealed that sites explored through the Local Plan 
outside the Green Belt were unlikely to be made available by their owners for su ch 
facilities. On the evidence available and the results of public consultation, the two 
Councils were not convinced that a compelling case exists amounting to the exceptional 
circumstances necessary in national planning policy for allocating a community s tadium 
or other facilities in the Green Belt.   
 
9.20 In the absence of policies in the P lan, should any proposals subsequently come forward 
they would be considered on an exceptional basis on the evidence at the time . If 
proposed in the Green Belt  it would have  to comply with the national policy  and local 
plan policy regarding Green Belt . It would also have to  comply with the National Planning 
Policy Framework1, and in particular the sequential approach to town centre uses, and 
other policies in the Local Plan.  
 
Community Healthcare Facility  Provision  
 
9.21 Community healthcare facilities provide a range of care services designed to support 
patients in the community and who might previously have been treated as inpatients or 
day patients in hospital. The Council would be supportive of appropriately located and 
scaled proposals which will be assessed using relevant  Local Plan policies. Proposals 
within the Green Belt would have to demonstrate very special circumstances, in 
particular why they were unable to locate outside the Green Belt.  
 
Indoor Community Facilities  
                                                           
1 National Planning Policy Framework  (2012)  Policy SC/6: Indoor Community Facilities   
 
1. All housing developments will contribute towards the provision of indoor 
community facilities to meet the need generated by the development.   
 
2. Developments of sufficient scale to generate the need for new on -site 
facilities will be required to do so, unle ss it can be demonstrated that 
there would be advantages in delivery off -site such as a more 
accessible location or the delivery of a larger and better facility . 
 
3. Other developments will contribute to off -site provision, through 
planning obligations or thr ough the Community Infrastructure Levy as 
appropriate.  Contributions will be based on a standard of 111m2 of 
such floorspace per 1,000 additional population.   Policy SC/5: Community Healthcare Facility Provision  
 
Proposals for Community healthcare facilities  will be supported within 
development frameworks.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
207 
 9.22 Indoor community facilities, including village halls, community halls, church halls 
and other publicly accessible buildings, play a crucial role in maintaining a sense of 
local identity, as well as providing a base for a variety of different groups and 
activities, from pre -school groups, to indoor carpet and short mat bowls, yoga , 
meetings or coffee mornings. The Council is keen to ensure that all residents have 
access to facilities which are appropriate and suitable for their needs.  
 
9.23 The Council commissioned a community facilities assessment in 2009 to 
understand the size and condition of village halls, community halls, church halls and 
other publicly accessible facilities. It identified a standard approach for indoor 
community space per capita that can be used when considering the needs 
generated by new development, w hich has been used to guide negotiations on 
planning o bligations since January 2010. Only very large developments could justify 
provision of new facilities within the development, therefore contributions for off -site 
provision will be sought, whether via a  planning obligation or through a Community 
Infrastructure Levy.  
 
9.24 The standard within the policy is for the main hall only and does not include ancillary 
rooms such as kitchen, store, lobby, toilets and offices which will also form part of 
the building at a scale proportionate to the development. At recent developments 
the main hall has equated to in the region of 25% of the total floor area.  
 
Outdoor Play Space, Informal Open Space and New Developments  
Policy SC/7: Outdoor Play Space, Informal Open Space and New 
Developments  
 
1. All housing developments will contribute towards Outdoor Playing 
Space (including children’s play space and formal outdoor sports 
facilities), and Informal Open Space to meet the need generated by the 
development in accordance with the following minimum st andards:  
 
a. Outdoor play space, informal open space and allotments and 
community allotments: 3.2 hectares per 1,000 people comprising:  
i. Outdoor Sport      1.6ha. per 1,000 people  
ii. Open Space     1.2ha. per 1,000 people  
iii. Allotments and community orchards  0.4ha. per 1,000 people  
 
b. Subject to the needs of the development the open space requirement 
will consist of:  
iv. Formal Children’s Play Space   0.4ha. per 1,000 people  
v. Informal Children’s Play Space   0.4ha. per 1,000 people  
vi. Informal Open Space     0.4ha. per 1,000 people  
 
2. Only family dwellings of two or more bedrooms will be required to 
contribute to the provision of Children’s Play Space.   
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September 2018  
Chapt
er 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
208 
  
9.25 The NPPF (2012) paragraph 73 addresses the importance that access to open 
space
 has to the health and wellbeing of a community. It states that local authorities 
should set locally derived standards for the provision of open space, sports and 
recreational facilities after they have assessed the quantity and quality of what is 
available within their area. 
 
9.26 The Council carried out an assessment of open space, sports and recreation 
facilities across the district (Recreation and Open Space Study, 2013). This includes 
an audit of the quality, quantity and accessibility of existing facilities and an 
assessment of future needs, with input from stakeholders including parish councils, 
sports clubs, and sports governing bodies. In 2016 South Cambridgeshire District 
Council and Cambridge City Council in partnership with Sport England, completed 
two sports strategies: a Playing Pitch Strategy 2015-2031 for grass and all weather 
pitches covering both areas; and an Indoor Sports Facility Strategy 2015-2031 to 
guide future provision and management of indoor sports halls, swimming pools and 
outdoor cycling  facilities to serve existing and new communities in Cambridge and 
South Cambridgeshire. In line with the NPPF (2012), the strategies set out to 3. Housing provision consisting of Sheltered housing, Extra Care housing, 
and residential and nursing homes will not be required to provide 
Outdoor Play Space except Informal Open Space.  
 
4. Where appropriate, provision will be on -site so that provision is 
integrated into the development and benefits to the health and wellbeing 
of new residents are maximised, guided by Figure 10. However, an 
appropriate contribution will be required for “off -site” provision of the 
types of space not provided on -site. This may be for new facilities 
and/or improvements to existing facilities. On individual sites negotiation 
may take place on the types of space provided on site, taking account 
of the needs of the area, existing provision and any identified 
deficiencies in provision.  
 
5. In developments of less than 10 homes, it is expected that only the 
Informal Open Space element will be provided on -site. Where an 
individual phase comprises 10 or fewer dwellings, bu t will form part of a 
larger scheme exceeding that total, a proportional contribution to future 
on-site provision will be required.  
 
6. Depending on the nature of provision, contributions may also be 
required to meet maintenance and/or operating costs either  as pump 
priming or in perpetuity.  
 
7. Where on -site provision is required, the Council may seek the option of 
a commuted capital sum to construct the facility. In these 
circumstances, a serviced site (as appropriate for the facility concerned) 
will be transferred to the Council free of charge by the developer.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
209 
 assess existing facilities, the futu re need for sport and active recreation facilities, 
and opportunities for new provision. These strategies will need to be taken into 
account when considering future provision.  
 
9.27 The standards within this policy are expressed as minimum standards. Whether 
open space provision is required in excess of the minimum standards will be 
determined having regard to the particular considerations to which a development 
proposal gives rise, including the needs of the area, existing provision and any 
identified deficienc ies. 
 
9.28 Policies in adopted Area Action Plans provide specific guidance for the areas that 
they cover, which are defined on the Policies Map. Policy LP/1 identifies where 
policies of the Local Development Framework referred to in adopted Area Action 
Plans are supe rseded by policies of this Local Plan. Paragraph D10.2 of the 
Northstowe Area Action Plan refers to district wide standards set out in policy SF/11 
of the Development Control Policies DPD. This policy is superseded by this Local 
Plan Policy . 
 
9.29 The villages of South Cambridgeshire and the parts of the district on the edge of 
Cambridge have a range of sports pitches and pavilions, children’s play spaces, 
and informal open spaces suitable for play and for activities such as dog walking.  
These are primarily own ed and operated by parish c ouncils, although the use of 
management companies is becoming more common within new developments.  
Access to good quality open space and children’s play facilities has significant 
benefits for c ommunity health and wellbeing. It is important that new developments 
provide new open spaces or contribute to the improvement of existing facilities to 
address the new needs generated. Depending on the scale of the development 
there is a hier archy of open space provision. Larger schemes wil l be expected to 
provide for more types of open space.  
 
9.30 Allotments and community orchards are important and valued forms of green space 
and should be included in new housing developments.  Allotments provide fresh 
local fruit and vegetables as well as inv aluable exercise and encourage a healthier 
life style. Orchards provide a range of benefits, including biodiversity, landscape 
enhancement, fruit for local communities and are a catalyst for t he community to 
come together. The Council is supporting local p eople to establish or restore 
community orchards.  It is important to ensure more of these areas are developed 
or conserved in a similar way as allotments have developed over time.  New areas 
of allotments and community orchards form important community ass ets and are 
well used. The standard stated in the policy is equivalent to 32 allotments per 1,000 
households.  
 
9.31 The Council secures the provision of, or funding for, open space for all residential 
developmen t to meet the needs generated. On-site provision is preferable, where 
practicable, to provide accessible spaces integral to the developm ent close to 
where people live.  Generally smaller developments can only deliver informal open 
space or play areas, whilst larger sites are capable of delivering a wider range of 
spaces, incl uding sports pitches. Contributions for off -site provision will be sought, 
whether via a planning obligation or through a Community Infrastructure Levy.  The South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
210 
 approach to tariff style contributions outlined in paragraph 9.11 will also ap ply to this 
policy.  
 
9.32 On individual sites negotiation may take place on the types of space provided 
on-site, taking account of the needs of the area, existing provision and any identified 
deficiencies in provision.  
 
9.33 Figure 10 below provides a guide for when  on-site provision will be sought. This 
means direct provision of a space or facility within the agreed development site 
boundary. On individual sites negotiation may take place on the types of space 
provided on -site, taking account of the needs of the are a, existing provision and any 
identified deficiencies.  Regard should also be made to the Playing Pitch Strategy 
and Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy.   
 
Figure 10: Guide for On -site P rovision of Open S pace  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.34 It is important that there is provision made for open space that meets all the 
different needs of a community across the age ranges from play areas for toddlers 
to tranquil informal spaces with seating for older people to enjoy. Such open space 
will be des igned carefully within a development so that the green spaces are fit for 
purpose and areas with potentially noisy uses such as playing fields for team sports 
will not cause disturbance and that children’s play areas are within sight of housing 
so that the y are a safe environment in which children can play.  
  Type of space  On-site provision 
sought  on 
developments 
above:  Minimum activity 
zone (minimum 
buffer zone)  
Informal Open 
Space  Informal open 
space  All scales of 
development   
Allotments and 
community 
orchards  200 dwellings   
Open Space for 
Formal Sport  Sports Pitches  200 dwellings   
Other Outdoor 
Sport  200 dwellings   
Children’s  
Play Space  Local Area for Play 
(LAP)  10 dwellings  
 100m2 (5m) 
Local Equipped 
Area for  
Play (LEAP)  50 dwellings  
 500m2 (20m)  
Neighbourhood 
Equipped  
Area for Play 
(NEAP)  200 dwellings  
 1,200m2 (30m for 
equipped play 
areas and  
80-100m fo r skate 
parks and informal 
MUGA s.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
211 
 9.35 Further guidance on the quantity, quality, and accessibility of open space will be 
provided in an Open Space Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).  
 
9.36 Other forms of larger open space are also important resources for local people, such as 
country parks; and access to the countryside for leisure is a lso valuable to health and 
wellbeing. The provision of green infrastructure is dealt with in Chapter 6: Protecting and 
Enhancing the Natural and Historic Envir onment – Policy NH/6: Green Infrastructure.   
 
Protecting Existing Leisure an d Recreation Facilities within Villages including 
Allotments and Community O rchards  
 
 
9.37 The NPPF  (2012) states that existing open space, sports and recreational buildings 
and land, including playing fields, should be protected from development.  
 
9.38 Most villages in the district have playing fields, recreation grounds, pavilions, or 
buildings providing sport and play fac ilities for local communities. These form an 
important part of village life, and are a valuable resource worthy of protection.   
 
9.39 Allotments and community orchards are important resources to have within a village 
and are valued by the local community – this is reflected in how many such sites are 
now de signated as Local Green Space (s ee Chapter 6 - Policy NH/12 Local Green 
Space).  The Council will resist development that adversely impacts on these green 
features.  
 
9.40 There is demand for more allotments within the district and the Council would not 
want com munities to lose existing allotments unless suitable replacement land can 
be provided that is acceptable to the local community.  
 Policy SC/8 : Protection of Existing Recreation Areas, Playing fields  
Allotments and Community Orchards  
 
Planning Permission will not be granted for proposals resulting in the loss of 
land or buildings providing for recreational use, playing fields or for the loss of 
allotments or community orchards except where:  
a. They would  be replaced by an area of equivalent or better quantity and 
quality and in a suitable location; or  
b. The proposed development includes provision of open space, or sports 
and recreation facilities of sufficient benefit to outweigh the loss; or  
c. An excess of p rovision in quantitative and qualitative terms is clearly 
demonstrated in all the functions played by the land or buildings to be 
lost, taking into account potential future demand and in consultation with 
local people and users  
d. Where replacement open space  is to be provided in an alternative 
location, the replacement site / facility must be fully available for use 
before the area of open space to be lost can be redeveloped.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
212 
 Artificial Lighting  
 
9.41 The NPPF  (2012)  states that by encouraging good design, planning policies and 
decisions should limit the impact of light pollution from art ificial light on local 
amenity,  intrinsically dark lan dscapes and nature conservation (paragraph 125 of 
the NPPF , 201 2). 
 
9.42 Artificial lighting is essential for reasons of safety or security  and for living, working 
and recreational purposes.  In some cases it can also add to the amenity of the built 
environment by highlighting buildings and open spaces of c haracter.  However, 
insensitive lighting can cause light pollution (or obtrusive light), with various 
negative effects which can take the form of sky glow, glare and light trespass / 
spillage. Light spillage to residential premises can cause annoyance, disturb sleep  
and can have adverse health impacts.  
 
9.43 South Cambridgeshire, as a predominantly rural area, is sensitive to light pollution 
through sky glow which can affect the tr anquillity of the countryside. Light pollution 
can have a negative impact upon biodiversity  by affecting the normal diurnal (daily) 
patterns of plants, animals and insects  and can be a waste of energy and resources 
(including carbon).  
 
9.44 External lighting is needed for living, industrial, commercial business and transport 
including parking purpose s and for some community and sports facilities su ch as 
floodlit sports pitches. Whilst the lighting has to be adequate for the purpose, it is 
important that there is no significant adverse impact on the amenity of surrounding 
properties.   
 
 Policy SC/9 : Lighting Proposals  
 
1. Development proposals which include new external lighting will only be 
permitted where it  can be demonstrated that:  
a. The proposed lighting scheme and levels are the minimum 
required for reasons of public safety, crime prevention / security, 
and living, working and recreational purposes;  
b. Light spillage and glare are minimised;  
c. There is no unacce ptable adverse impact on the local amenity of 
neighbouring or nearby properties, or on the surrounding 
countryside;  
d. There is no dazzling or distraction to road users including cyclists, 
equestrians and pedestrians;  
e. Road and footway lighting meets the Count y Council’s adopted 
standards.  
 
2. Proposed development that is adversely affected by existing artificial 
lighting outside the development site will not be permitted unless any 
significant impact can be mitigated to an acceptable level.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
213 
 9.45 Existing or proposed external lighting which may have an adverse impact will need 
to be accompanied by an assessment of impact on sensitive pr emises both on and 
off site and/ or will require a light mitigation scheme or strategy as appropriate 
designed by a suitably qu alified lighting engineer in accordance with the latest 
industry and or government / national best practice guidance and relevant British 
Standards publications. This may require the use of planning conditions and Section  
106 agreements including limiting the times when lighting is used to mitigate and 
minimise any unacceptable adverse impact.   
 
9.46 Although artificial light is needed for safety and amenity, it can have negative effects 
if is it not properly selected and designed or appropriately lo cated. The Local Plan 
needs to ensure development proposals avoid adverse impact on nearby uses or 
the surrounding countryside and deliver positive benefits to society and local 
communities in terms of the reduction in energy use / carbon emissions and light 
pollutio n. 
 
Noise Pollution  
Policy SC/10: Noise Pollution  
 
1. Planning permission will not be granted for development which:  
a. Has an unacceptable adverse impact on the indoor and outdoor 
acoustic environment of existing or planned development;  
b. Has an unacceptable adverse impact on  countryside areas of 
tranquillity which are important for wildlife and countryside 
recreation;  
c. Would be subject to unacceptable noise levels from existing noise 
sources, both ambient levels and having regard to noise 
characteristics such as impulses wheth er irregular or tonal.  
 
2. Conditions may be attached to any planning permission to ensure 
adequate attenuation of noise emissions or to control the noise at 
source. Consideration will be given to the increase in road traffic that 
may arise due to development  and conditions or Section 106 
agreements may be used to minimise such noise.  
 
3. Where a planning application for residential development is near an 
existing noise source, the applicant will be required to demonstrate that 
the proposal would not be subject t o an unacceptable noise levels both 
internally and externally.  
 
4. The Council will seek to ensure that noise from proposed commercial, 
industrial, recreational or transport use does not cause any significant 
increase in the background noise level at nearby e xisting noise sensitive 
premises which includes dwellings, hospitals, residential institutions, 
nursing homes, hotels, guesthouses, and schools and other educational 
establishments.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
214 
 9.47 The NPPF  (2012) advises that planning policies should aim to avoid noise giving 
rise to significant adverse impacts on health and quality of life a s a result of new 
development. Adverse impacts on health and quality of life should be mitigated and 
reduced to a minimum including through the use of conditions, whil e recognising 
that many develo pments will create some noise  (paragraph 123 of the NPPF , 
2012 ).  
 
9.48 Noise including vibration can have a significant adverse impact upon environmental 
quality, health and qual ity of life including amenity. Annoyance is probably  the most 
widespread adverse effect of noise, including speech interference and it can have 
an adverse impact on s leep during the sensitive night time period.  Noise has also 
been shown to effect educational performance and achievement.  
 
9.49 Typical sources of environmental noise within the d istrict include transport: road,  rail 
and air traffic; industrial; commercial and business premises; la ndfill operations; 
construction;  and also sport and recreation / entertainment venues.   
 
9.50 The NPPF (2012) affirms that the National Noise Policy Statement for England 2010 
forms part of the overall framework of national planning policy, and should be a 
material consideration in decis ions on planning applications. The Noise Policy 
Statement sets out the long term vision of government noise policy which is to 
“promote good health and a good quality of life through the effective management 
and control of all forms of noise within the context of g overnment policy on 
sustainable development.”  
 
9.51 In addition the Environmental Noise (England) Regulations 2006 and accompanying 
National Noise Action Plans have the aim of avoiding, preventing or reducing the 
harmful effects of environmental noise from roads, rail, aviation and industry.   
 
9.52 There are ce rtain parts of the dis trict close to the M11, A14, A10 and other busy 
roads that experience significant levels of traffic noise which have been identified as 
major road priority locations for traffic noise action.  
 
9.53 Local authorities have no specific obliga tions under the Noise Action Plans but are 
encouraged to review planning policy and practice for the management of noise 
from indust rial / commercial sources. The p lans acknowledge that the current 
complimentary land use planning system and pollution contr ol regimes provide a 
vital contribution to the proactive management and control of the adverse effects of 
such noise sources that may ari se as a result of development. This will ensure that 
measures are incorporated into development proposals which mitigat e against 
increased population exposure to noise levels by the development.  
 
9.54 Where necessary, the Council will require a noise impact assessment undertaken in 
accordance with the latest industry and or government / national best practice 
guidance and relev ant British Standards publications, which will be expected to:  
• identify all significant sources of noise either existing or proposed;  
• assess the likely short and long term impacts of noise generated or exposure 
to noise;  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
215 
 • assess the suitability of the site  for development proposed, having regard to 
noise impact on quality of life and health both internally and externally; and  
• propose noise protection measures to achieve acceptable internal and 
external noise levels, including consideration of adequate dist ance 
separation from noise sources, site and building layout / orientation, provision 
and retention of acoustic barriers, acoustic insulation of buildings / noise 
sources, noise limits at site boundaries, restrictions on types of activity, 
limitations on h ours of operation. Where acceptable internal noise levels 
cannot be met with open windows, alternative means of ventilation may be 
required. Noise should be mitigated at source in the hierarchy of mitigation 
measures . 
 
9.55 Further guidance is included in the current District Design Guide SPD  and will be 
included in an Environmental SPD to support the Local Plan.  
 
9.56 The overarching objective is to ensure development is appropriate and compatible 
for its location. It is importa nt that noise sensitive developments are located away 
from existing sources of significant noise, and that potentially noisy developments 
are located in areas where noise will not have an unacceptable impact on 
surrounding land uses or the environment, unl ess its impact can be mitigated by 
planning conditions or obligations to provide an adequate protection against noise 
both internally and exter nally.  Aviation -related development proposals must also 
comply with Policy TI/5 in Chapter 10.    
 
Land Contamination  
 
9.57 The adoption of a contaminated land policy at a local level is supported by the 
NPPF  (2012) , which states that policies and decisions should ensure that  land is 
suitable for its new use taking account of ground co nditions and land instability. 
After remediation, as a minimum, land should not be capable of being determined 
as contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990  
(paragr aph 120 of the NPPF  2012 ). 
 
9.58 Land contamination has the potential to affect adversely public health and safety, 
and unless dealt with appropriately, can inh ibit the re use of otherwise su itable 
brownfield sites.  It is important that potential contamination is identified at the 
earliest stage in the development process to ensure that appropriate remediation 
measures are identified and addressed early in the preparation of proposals for a 
site. Remediation should r emove unacceptable risk and make a site suitable for its 
new use.  Policy SC/11 : Contaminated Land  
 
Where development is proposed on contaminated land or land suspected of 
being impacted by contaminants the Council will require developers to include 
an assessment of the extent of contamination and any possible risks. 
Proposals w ill only be permitted where land is, or can be made, suitable for 
the proposed use.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
216 
  
9.59 Further guidance is included in the current District Design Guide SPD and will be 
included in an Environmental SPD to support the Local Plan.  
 
Air Quality  
 Policy SC/12: Air Quality  
 
1. Where develop ment proposals would be subject to unacceptable air 
quality standards or would have an unacceptable impact on air quality 
standards they will be refused.  
 
2. Where emissions from the proposed development are prescribed by EU 
limit values or national objectives, the applicant will need to assess the 
impact on local air quality by undertaking an appropriate air quality 
assessment and detailed modelling exercise h aving regard to guidance 
current at the time of the application to show that the national objectives 
will still be achieved.   
 
3. Development will not be permitted where it would adversely affect air 
quality in an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA); or lead to the 
declaration of a new AQMA through causing a significant deterioration in 
local air quality by increasing pollutant levels either directly or indirectly; 
or if it would expose future occupiers to unacceptable pollutant levels.  
 
4. Larger development pr oposals that require a Transport Assessment and 
a Travel Plan as set out in Policy TI/2 will be required to produce a site 
based Low Emission Strategy. This will be a condition of any planning 
permission given for any proposed development which may result in the 
deterioration of local air quality and will be required to ensure the 
implementation of suitable mitigation measures.  
 
5. Development will be permitted where:  
a. It can be demonstrated that it does not lead to significant adverse 
effects on health, the en vironment or amenity from emissions to 
air; or  
b. Where a development is a sensitive end use, that there will not be 
any significant adverse effects on health, the environment or 
amenity arising from existing poor air quality.  
  
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
217 
  
9.60 Air pollution and poor air quality can have detrimental impacts on health and the 
environment. Emissions arising from any development including indirect emissions 
such as those attributable to associated traffic generation must therefore be 
considered in dete rmining planning applications. Where emissions from industrial 
processes are subject to pollution control legislation the regulatory authority will be 
consulted with respect to control of these emissions.  NPPF (2012) paragraph 124 
require s that planning policies should sustain compliance with and contribute 
towards EU limit values or national objectives for pollutants, taking into account the 
presence of Air Quality Management Areas and the cumulative impacts on air 
quality from individual  sites in local areas. Planning decisions should ensure that 
any new development in Air Quality Management Areas is consistent with the local 
Air Quality Action Plan.  
 
9.61 The Local Air Quality Management regime places a duty on the Council to protect 
its local area from air pollution.  
 
9.62 Air quality issues within South Cambridgeshire have been linked directly to the 
volume of  traffic that runs through the d istrict, specifically along the A14.  The A14 is 
congested on a regular basis between Bar Hill (to the w est of Cambridge) and 
Milton (t o the north north -east of Cambridge).  This has resulted in the declaration of 
an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) for nitrogen dioxide (NO 2) and PM 10 along 
a stretch of the A1 4 between Bar Hill and Milton. There is also an AQMA in 
Cambridge city centre.  An AQMA is designated when reviews of air quality identify 
that levels of certain pollutants are high and or are not forecast to meet health 
based target levels required by the UK Air Quality S trategy.   6. Specifically applicants must demonstrate that:  
c. There is no adverse effect on air quality in an Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA) from the development;  
d. Pollution levels within the AQMA will not have a significant 
adverse effect on the proposed use / users;  
e. The development will not lead to the declaration of a new AQMA;  
f. The development will not interfere with the implementation of and 
should be consistent with the current Air Quality Action Plan;  
g. The development will not lead to an increase in emissions, 
degradation of air quality or increase in exposure to pollutants at 
or above the health based air quality objective;  
h. Any impacts on the proposed use from existing poor air quality, 
are appropriately mitigated;  
i. The development promotes sustainable transport me asures and 
use of low emission vehicles in order to reduce the air quality 
impacts of vehicles.  
 
7. Applicants shall, where appropriate, prepare and submit with their 
application , a relevant assessment, taking into account guidance 
current at the time of the application.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
218 
 9.63 The Joint Air Qualit y Action Plan for Huntingdonshire, Cambridge City and South 
Cambridgeshire incorporates priority actions for tackling air quality issues through 
the land use planning process.  Improvements can be achieved by re ducing the 
need to travel by co -locating uses,  and promoting smarter and cleaner transport 
choices. Site-based Low Emission Strategies can help minimise emissions from 
developments, by integrating design and low emissions transport related measures.  
Examples of measures include travel to work plans, residential travel plans, priority 
parking for low emission vehicles and provision of infrastructure for recharging 
electric vehicles.   
 
9.64 Low Emission S trategies provide a package of measures to help specifically 
mitigate the transport emi ssions impacts of  development. They complement other 
design and mitigation options, such as travel planning and the provision of pu blic 
transport infrastructure. Strategies are often secured through a combination of 
planning condit ions and planning obligations. They may in corporate policy 
measures and/or require financial investments in and contributions to the delivery of 
low emission transport projects and plans, including strategic air quality monitoring 
and assessment activities.  
 
9.65 Further guidance is included in the cu rrent Di strict Design Guide SPD  and will be 
included in an Environmental SPD to support the Local Plan.   
 
Hazardous I nstallations  
 
 
9.66 Hazardous installations, no tifiable pipelines and licensed explosive sites are 
installations handling o r storing hazardous materials. The siting of installations 
handling hazardous substances are subject to planning controls aimed at keeping 
them separate from housing and other land  uses with which such installations might 
be incompatible from th e safety viewpoint. The operators of such installations are 
required to notify the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) on  certain types of 
development. The Council is required to consult the HS E on proposals for certain 
types of development within specified distances of notifiable installations. The 
Council will therefore seek the advice of the HSE and other regulatory authorities 
about off -site risks to the public arising from any proposed deve lopment which 
would introduce one or more hazardous substances.  
 
9.67 Within South Cambridgeshire there are 9 installations handling hazardous 
subs tances and 11 high pressure natur al gas transmission pipelines. Whilst they 
are subject to stringent controls unde r existing health and safety legislation, it is 
necessary to control the kinds of development permitted in the vi cinity of these Policy SC/13 : Hazardous Installations  
 
In considering proposals for hazardous substances consent or development 
in the vicinity of hazardous installations, account will be taken of the amount, 
type and location of hazardous substances present, and the need for special 
precautions to protect future users of the site and any other affected land.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 9        Promoting Successful Communities  
 
219 
 installations. In determining a planning application on land within the specified 
consultation zone of one of these installatio ns, the Council will take account of 
advice from the HSE and other regulatory authorities.  
 
9.68 Under the present system of controls over hazardous development and over 
development within the vicinity of hazardous installations, the activities and 
substances (and quantities) to which the above statements apply are set out in the  
web based planning pr actice guidance (PPG) in a specific section on hazardous 
substances which is updated as new regulations are implemented.  
 
Odour Pol lution  
 
 
9.69 Potential sources of odour and other fugitive emissions to air include food, 
industrial, commercial or business premises and agricultural / farm buildings and 
activities. Odour is noted as a form of pollution by the NPPF  (2012) .  
 
9.70 The planning system has a n important role in preventing or minimising odour 
impacts from new or changed developments by regulating the location and, to a 
certain extent, the specification of some design and control parameters of these 
activities by the use of planning conditions a nd Section 106 agreements.  
 
9.71 Some industrial trades and agricultural / farming activities are inherently odorous by 
virtue of the materials they process, generate, use or store and even with the use of 
best industrial practice; from time to time such facili ties ma y give rise to offensive 
odour.  In some circumstances the ability to adequately disperse or abate the 
release of offensive odour may be limited and planning permission should not be 
granted for facilities in inappropriate locations.  
 
9.72 Particular issues in relation to odour from sewage treatment works are addressed in 
the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Minerals and Waste LDF , which identifies 
areas around sewage treatment w orks with a capacity exceeding 2 ,000 population 
where odour asse ssment is required for development proposals within safeguarding 
areas.  
 Policy SC/14: Odour and Other Fugitive Emissions to Air  
 
1. Development likely to generate malodours and emissions to air such as 
dust, fumes, smoke, heat, radiation, gases, steam or other forms of 
pollution will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that it will 
not have significant adverse effects on:  
a. Health;  
b. The amenity of existing or proposed sensitive end users;  
c. The wider environment.   
 
2. In appropriate circumstances an odour or other emissions to air impact 
assessment may be required to be submitted.   Chapter 10Chapter 10   
Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Promoting and Delivering Sustainable 
Transport and InfrastructureTransport and Infrastructure   
Guided Bus Stop, Histon, South CambridgeshireGuided Bus Stop, Histon, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
223 
 Chapter 10     Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
10.1 The t ransport  choices  we make are a key factor  in achieving sustainable 
development  and can have a direct  impact , through congestion  and vehicle 
emissions , on quality of life and the environment . The transport system needs to be 
balanced in favour of sustainable modes; walking, cycling and public transport, in 
order to provide people with a re al choice about how they travel. Cambridgeshire 
County Council, as the local transport authority, is responsible for producing the 
Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan (LTP) which seeks to address existing 
transport challenges as well the needs generated by n ew development, and plan for 
the delivery of new transport infrastructure, such as road improvements.  
 
10.2 Cambridgeshire County Council prepared  a new Transport Strategy for Cambridge 
and South Cambridgeshire  in parallel with the Local Plan . Cambridge and Sou th 
Cambridgeshire are popular places to live and work, and have experience d high 
levels of jobs, housing and population growth. This is helping to drive a strong local 
economy but also means that there is pressure on local transport infrastructure.  
Growth is set to  continue into the future to meet local needs. The Transport Strategy 
will ensure that current and future transport needs are met, that people can access 
work and services, and that the character of the area can be preserved , helping to 
ensure tha t people in the area continue to enjoy a high quality of life. The Local Plan 
will assist with the delivery of requirements and aspirations within current and 
emerging transport plans and strategies.  
 
10.3 South Cambridgeshire is located at the crossroads of th e M11 / A14 roads and has 
direct rail access to London and Stansted Airport.  The A14 is a major east / west 
route linking the east coast ports with the Midlands and the north, and carries 
considerable international freight traffic. The A14 is also a key ro ute for local and 
regional commuter, business and freight traffic and, like some other major routes, 
has high traffic flows and congestion, particularly around Cambridge,  and high 
levels of accidents. In July  2012  the Government announced a package of 
proposals for major investment along the A14 corridor in Cambridgeshire  to address 
congestion and long term capacity issues . The Secretary of State approved  (in May 
2016) the A14 Cambridge to Huntingdon Improvement Scheme Development 
Consent Order applicat ion and building work began  in November 2016. It is 
anticipated the new road will be opened in late 2020.   
 
10.4 Air quality issues within South Cambridgeshire have been linked directly to the 
volume of traffic that runs through the district, specifically along  the A14. Regular 
congestion  between Bar Hill  and Milton has resulted in the declaration of an Air 
Quality Manage ment Area (AQMA) in this area. An Air Quality Action Plan has been 
formulated outlining how the Council intends to bring about improvements in air 
quali ty. This incorporates priority actions for tackling air quality issues through the 
land use planning process and is an integral part of the LTP.    
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
224 
 10.5 A few rural parts of the district are well served by rail, for example the A10 corridor 
both north and south of Cambridge, while others rely on the market towns and 
Cambridge for access to the railway network. Improved access to stations and 
interchanges, for example improved cycle access via cycle path networks or quiet 
routes, can help encourage more people to cycle and more people to travel by train 
rather than car. In Cambridge, the new Cambridge North  Station and Interchange 
will contribute to the grow th of rail use and will be essential to provide interchange 
facilities.  
 
10.6 There are a number of major road corridors between the market towns and 
Cambridge, and villages located along these routes tend to be well served by public 
transpo rt and cycling infra structure. Away from these corridors, rural parts of the 
district are mo re isolated.  In these areas Community Transport is particularly 
important, and the Council has adopted a Community Transport Strategy to help 
coordinate and develop services.  A signifi cant improvement to public transport is 
the Guided Busway between Cambridge and St. Ives. It provides services to a 
number of villages as well as the p lanned new town at Northstowe. This also link s to 
the new Cambridge North railway station at Chesterton o n the edge of Cambridge.  
 
10.7 South Cambridgeshire is a predominantly rural district with several  relatively 
isolated villages lacking essential facilities and services  to meet day to day needs , 
meaning the car will remain an essential mode of travel  for some . However, 
considerable benefits can be delivered by enabling trav el by other means than the 
car. These include improved health through increased walking and cycling, 
reductions in carbon emissions, enabling social inclusion and reducing the impact of 
cong estion , and are particularly important in light of highway capacity issues and 
projected future growth.  Other ‘smart’ measures, including home working (with 
significant increases in broadband speed), encouraging the use of low emission 
vehicles, and demand  responsive pu blic and/or community transport. Car share 
schemes should be considered as appropriate to individual developments.   
 
10.8 Nearly all of South Cambridgeshire is within 10km of Cambridge or a market town, 
which is a reasonable cycling distance  for many people and particularly where good 
quality routes exist . New and improved cycle infrastructure (cycle paths and 
parking) is continually being provided through new developments and throu gh 
national funding of schemes.  In addition, many businesses insta ll showers as part of 
their Travel Plan s, to encourage cy cling to work. The costs of motoring are rising 
and the increasingly publicised health benefits of cycling are causing people to 
switch to cycling, and evidence shows that cycling is on the increase in the district.   
 
10.9 Development places additional pressure s on infrastructure, services and facilities.  It 
is important that  the needs generated by development are appropriately planned 
and that infrastructure i s available when it is needed. Development must ensure the  
needs of communities are met, including transport, telecommunications, waste 
management, water supply, wastewater, flood risk, the provision of minerals and 
energy (including heat), health, security, community and cultural infrastructu re an d 
other local facilities. This will help to ensure that people in the area continue to 
enjoy a high quality of life.        South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
225 
  
Rail Station and Interchange  
 
 
10.10  Cambridgeshire & Peterborough S tructure Plan ‘saved’ Policy P8/10 and the Local 
Transport Plan proposed  the development of a rail station and interchange facility at 
Chesterton Sidings to provide a high quality interchange between  all modes, 
including with the  Guided Busway.  The new Cambridge North station opened in 
May 2017.    
 
10.11  Not all the land at Chesterton Sidings will be required for the ra ilway station and  
public transport interchange. Some of the remaining land will be used by Network 
Rail for train stabling and at least until the completion of the planned upgrade to the 
A14 trunk road for the delivery of aggregates and the ma nufacture of coated 
roadstone. Even with these uses present at the s idings there will be land to the rear 
of the Cambridge Business Park available for redevelopment in the short term.  
 
10.12  Chesterton Sidings forms part of a larger area of land with development potential 
which includ es land within Cambridge City. The Council is working jointly with 
Cambridge City Council and Cambridgeshire County Council on a coordinated 
approach to the development of this area (see Policy SS/4 ). Central to the 
development of this area will be a multimodal transport interchange.  Key Facts:  
• There are high levels of congestion on radial routes into Cambridge at 
peak times.  
• Average commuting distances have increased (10.2 miles by all modes 
in 2010 compared to 8.1 miles in 2009), and 64% of those journeys are 
by car or van (2011).  
• High levels of traffic on the A14 and radial routes into Cambridge at 
peak times.  
• Areas around the A14 north of Cambridge are de signated as Air Quality 
Management Areas.  
• National Noise Action Plans First Priority Locations have been 
identified within the district at areas close to the M11, A14 and A10 and 
other busy roads.  
• A few rural parts of the district, for example the A10 cor ridor both north 
and south of Cambridge, are well served by rail, while others rely on 
the market towns and Cambridge for access to the railway network.   
• Good public transport services to larger villages, but limited services to 
many smaller villages away from transport corridors.  
• Cycling levels are higher than the national average, and rising.  
Policy TI/1: Chesterton Rail Station and Interchange  
 
Land at Chesterton Sidings is safeguarded for the development of a railway 
station and interchange facility.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
226 
 10.13  Chesterton Sidings inclu des an area of Jersey Cudweed. This is a protected 
species under Schedule 8 of the  Wildlife and Countryside Act. Development will 
need to incorporate measures for protecting this species.  
 
Plan ning for Sustainable Travel   
 
 Policy TI/2: Planning for Sustainable Travel  
 
1. Development must be located and designed to reduce the need to 
travel, particularly by car, and promote sustainable travel appropriate to 
its location.  
 
2. Planning permission will only be granted for development likely to give 
rise to increased  travel demands, where the site has (or will attain) 
sufficient integration and accessibility by walking, cycling or public and 
community transport, including:  
a. Provision of safe, direct route s within permeable layouts that 
facilitate and encourage short distance trips by walking and 
cycling between home and nearby centres of attraction, and to 
bus stops or railway stations, to provide real travel choice for 
some or all of the journey, in accor dance with Policy HQ/1;  
b. Provision of new cycle  and walking routes that connect to existing 
networks, including the wider Rights of Way network, to 
strengthen connections between villages, Northstowe, 
Cambridge, market towns, and the wider countryside;  
c. Protection and improvement of existing cycle  and walking  routes, 
including the Rights of Way network, to ensure the effectiveness 
and amenity of these routes is maintained, including through 
maintenance, crossings, signposting and waymarking, and, where 
approp riate, widening and lighting;  
d. Provision of secure, accessible and convenient cycle parking in 
accordance with Policy TI/3;  
e. Securing appropriate improvements to public and community 
transport (including infrastructure requirements) in accordance 
with the a ims of the Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan and 
South Cambridgeshire Community Transport Strategy.  
 
3. Developers will be required to demonstrate they will make adequate 
provision to mitigate the likely impacts (including cumulative impacts) of 
their propo sal including environmental impacts (such as noise and 
pollution) and impact on amenity and health. This will be achieved 
through direct improvements and Section 106 contributions and/or the 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), to address transport 
infrast ructure in the wider area including across the district boundary.  
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
227 
  
10.14  The National Planning Policy Framework ( NPPF , 2012 ) requires that plans and 
decisions ensure developments that generate significant movement are located 
where the need to travel will be minimised and the use of sustainable transport 
modes can be maximised , and that development should only be prevented or 
refused on transport grounds where the residual cumulative impacts of 
development are severe.  The d evelopment strategy in Chapter 2 addresses  the 
development needs of the district  and where that  development should be focused , 
ensuring that distances and lin ks between homes and employment, education, 
health, shopping, leisure and other services and facilities, are practical. Achieving 
sustainable transport has been a key consideration influencing the  strategy . 
Transport impacts of individual developments will  still need to be considered at the 
planning application stage.  
 
10.15  In assessing whether the development proposal is likely to give rise to a material 
increase in travel demand, the Council will consider the existing use of the 
building(s) / site, existing transport conditions in the immediate and wider area, 
and likely transport generation from the development proposals.  4. Developers of ‘larger developments’1 or where a proposal is likely to 
have ‘ significant  transport implications’2 will be required to demonstrate 
they have maximised opportunities for sustainable travel and will make 
adequate provision to mitigate the likely impacts through provision of a  
Transport Assessment and Travel Plan. All other developments will be 
required to submit a Transport Statement. Where a Transport 
Assessment / Statement or Travel Plan is required, a Low Emissions 
Strategy Statement should be integrated.  
 
5. Travel Plans  must have measurable outputs, be related to the aims and 
objectives in the Local Transport Plan and provide monitoring and 
enforcement arrangements. Planning obligations may be an 
appropriate means of securing the provision of some or all of a Travel 
Plan,  including the requirement  for an annual monitoring and progress 
report.  Submission of area -wide Travel Plans will be considered in 
appropriate situations. Outline planning applications are required to 
submit a framework for the preparation of a Travel Pl an. 
 
1 Larger development includes proposals of over 20 dwellings or 0.5 
hectares for residential development and over 1,000m2 or 1 hectares for 
other development.  
 
2 Developments with ‘significant transport implications’ are those:  
• In particularly congest ed locations and/or generating larger numbers of 
trips;  
• Where there are particular local travel problems;  
• That will have an adverse impact on an existing, or will result in the 
declaration of new, Air Quality Management Area or an unacceptable 
adverse im pact on local air quality.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
228 
  
10.16  All development should strive to offer real travel choice for all people by non -car 
modes appropriate in scale and kind to the developmen t. Development must be 
designed to promote road safety, and to create places where walking and cycling 
have priority over motorised tra ffic, so that people feel safe.  Development should 
ensure good accessibility by walking and cycling to local facilities, services and to 
bus stops or railway stations . For the average person c ycling has the potential to 
substitute for short car trips, particularly under 5 kilometres , and walking under 
1km. 
 
10.17  The measures applicable to each development proposal will vary on a case -by-
case basis, according to the type and scale of development proposed, its location, 
and the level of existing transport infrastructure and services in the immediate 
area. This could  also include a financial contribution for the implementation of 
schemes beyond the scope of an individual development to deliver.    
 
10.18  Development must also mitigate  its traffic impacts , including its environmental 
impacts  and impacts on amenity and health . Measures designed to encourage 
people to make sustainable travel choices, such as car clubs, car sharing, 
infrastructure / facilities for electric charging  plug-in points  and other ultra -low 
emissions vehicles , provision of cycle lanes and parking , and en couraging the 
accelerated uptake of cleaner fuels and technologies resulting in carbon and vehicle 
emission reductions  can assist with reducing these impacts . Well designed 
developments may actively help to enhance air quality, manage exposure and 
reduce overall emissions, therefore reducing possible health impacts.  Further 
information on addressing air quality, including Air Quality Management Areas,  
noise and health impacts is contained in Chapter 9  Promoting Successful 
Communities .   
 
10.19  Planning applicati ons need to address the transport implication s of the proposed 
development. Many schemes will require the submission of a Transport 
Assessment  and Travel Plan to explore the transport impacts of their proposals, 
how they will be addressed, and how sustaina ble travel will be delivered in the long 
term.  These should be agreed with the highway authority.  For smaller developments 
with lower impacts, a simpler ‘Transport Statement’ is required , which should  
demonstrate how it will encourage travel planning activities. A Low Emissions 
Strategy S tatement should be integrated within this work.  
 
10.20  Information on producing Travel Plans is available on the Department for Transport 
website: Smarter Choices . Detailed g uidance on workplace Travel Plans is available 
from Travel for  Cambridgeshire . Area -wide Travel Plans will be acceptable where 
appropriate, such as on business parks, which would enable businesses to 
coordinate their efforts and pool resources for the bene fit of everyone using the 
business park.   
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
229 
 Parking Provision  
 
 
10.21  South Cambridgeshire is a mainly rural district and many remoter areas  are quite 
isolated with  limited public transport, therefore the car has a role in improving 
access to  local services and facilities.  At the same time, nearly all of South 
Cambridgeshire is within reasonable cycling distance  of a market town or 
Cambridge . Car and cycle p arking ca n be used as part of a comprehensive 
approach to encouraging use of mo re sustainable modes of travel , whilst 
recognising that car ownership levels are expected to continue rising until 2021 .   
 Policy TI/3: Parking Provision  
 
1. Car parking provision should be provided through a design -led 
approach in accordance with the indicative  standards set out in Figure 
11. Cycle parking should  be provided to at least the minimum standards 
set out in Figure 1 1.   
 
2. Car parking provision will take into consideration the site location, type 
and mix of uses, car ownership levels, availability of local services, 
facilities and public transport, and h ighway and user safety issues, as 
well as ensuring appropriate parking for people with impaired mobility.1   
 
3. The Council will encourage innovative solutions to car parking, including 
shared spaces where the location and patterns of use permit, and 
incorpo ration of measures such as car clubs and electric charging 
points.  
 
4. Residential garages will only be counted towards car and cycle parking 
provision where they meet a minimum size requirement.2   
 
5. All parking provision must be provided in a manner that acc ords with 
Policy HQ/1 and the developer must provide clear justification for the 
level and type of parking proposed in the Design and Access Statement 
and/or Travel Plan.  
 
1 Minimum levels of car parking for people with impaired mobility will be required i n 
accordance with national guidance. Detailed advice on the provision and design of parking 
for disabled car users can be found in Traffic Advisory Leaflet 5/95 (Department for 
Transport (DfT)), Inclusive Mobility: A Guide to Best Practice on Access to Ped estrians and 
Transport Infrastructure, (DfT, 2005) and BS 8300: Design of buildings and their approaches 
to meet the needs of disabled people Code of practice (British Standards Institute, 2009).  
 
2 Minimum size of residential garage (or car port) should b e 3.3m x 6m for a car, with an 
additional 1m at the end and/or 650 -750mm at the side of a garage to park cycles.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
230 
 10.22  Provision of car parking has a significant influence on the design of development 
and the amen ity of its eventual occupiers. Under provision of car parking may lead 
to inappropriate on -street car parking, creating potential highway safety problems 
and unsightly street environments , whilst over provision may equally  result in 
unsightly , and sometimes unsafe,  car dominated developments.  A balance needs to 
be struck to ensure sufficient parking is provided in the right locations whilst not 
creating excessive provision which will undermine sustainability objectives to r educe 
travel by car.   
 
10.23  The Government’s Residential Car Parking Research shows that allocating car 
parking spaces to individual properties reduces the efficiency of car parking 
provision across the whole development, a s not all households own a car.  A 
combination of allocated and unallocated spaces provide s greatest flexibility in 
providing appropriate levels of parking. As a guide, at least one space should be 
allocated within the curtilage of  the residential property, which would  provide 
householde rs with access to their property to charge electric vehicles.  
 
10.24  The car parking standards in Figure 11 are indicative, providing a guide to 
developers as part of a design -led approach whereby car parking provision is 
tailored to reflect the specific develop ment in terms of its location (whether there are 
local services available which may reduce the need to travel long distances by car), 
the density of development, the mix of uses proposed, together with consideration 
of any ‘smart’ measures being incorporat ed into the development, (such as car 
clubs), which may reduce the level of  need for private car parking. The Council will 
encourage innovative solutions such as shared parking areas, for example where 
there are a mix of day and night uses, car clubs and p rovisio n of electric charging 
points. The developer must provide clear justification for the level and type of 
parking proposed in the Design and Access Statement and/or Travel Plan , and will 
need to demonstrate they have addressed  highway safety  issues .   
 
10.25  Provision of cycle parking to at least the minimum standards in Figure 11 will assist 
in encouraging more people to cycle for some journeys in that they will be assured 
of a safe and secure place to park their bicycle at each end of their journey. For 
residential purposes cycle parking should be within a covered, lockable enclosure ; 
for houses this could be in the form of a shed or garage , for flats either individual 
lockers or cycle stands within a lockable, covered enclosure are required . For all 
other developments  cycle parking should be covered and in a convenient, secure 
location, with visitor parking located as near as possible to t he main entrance of 
buildings. All cycle parking should be designed and located to minimise conflict 
between cycles,  pedestrians and vehicles. Some flexibility will be applied to 
applications where it can be demonstrated that strict adherence to the standards for 
a multi -purpose site is likely to result in a duplication of provision.  Guidance on the 
design and dimensions of  cycle racks or stands  will be provided in a District Design 
Guide Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) . 
 
10.26  Recent experience in South Cambridgeshire shows that r esidential garages 
provided in new developments are often too small to accommodate modern, larger, 
cars and householders  frequently use garages for storage, due to inadequate  
storage provided within homes.  Garages will only be considered as part of the car  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
231 
 parking provision where they are of a minimum size, particularly if they are also 
being counted as provid ing secure parking for cycles. Where a single garage 
provides the only parking space within the curtilage of the property , a planning 
condition may be  applied to prevent its loss, for example, through conversion into a 
habitable room . 
 
Figure 11: Parking Provision  
Use Class / 
nature of activity  Indicative Car 
Parking Provision  
(gross floor area)  Minimum Cycle 
Parking Provision  
(gross floor area)  Notes  
RETAIL AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  
A1: Retail  (food)  1 space per 14m2  1 space per 25m2 Most single shops need 
short stay parking in 
front of shop.  Rear 
parking for longer stay / 
staff parking.  Where 
on-site parking is not 
possible 1 space per 
28m2 sales area is a 
good average for 
increase in on -street 
parking demand in peak 
times.  A1: Retail  (non-
food)  1 space per 20m2 1 space per 25m2 
A1: Retail 
warehouses   1 space per 25m2 1 space per 25m2 
A2: Financial and 
professional 
services   1 space per 25m2 1 space per 30m2  
FOOD AND DRINK  
A3: Restaurants, 
snack bars, cafes 
and roadside 
restaurants*  1 space per 5m2 1 space per 10m2 * Roadside restaurants 
on trunk roads or other 
main roads, often 
attached to petrol 
stations.  
A3: Transport 
cafes   2 lorry spaces per 
3 seats   Essential all commercial 
vehicles can enter and 
leave the site in forward 
gear.  
A4: Pubs and 
bars  1 space per 10m2  1 space per 20m2  
A5: Take -aways  
(hot food)  On merit  On merit   
A: Sui Generis  
(including retail 
warehouse clubs, 
launderettes, 
amusement 
centres)  7 spaces per 10 
employees  On merit   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
232 
 Use Class / 
nature of activity  Indicative Car 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Minimum Cycle 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Notes  
A: Sui Generis  
(including shops 
selling / displaying 
motor vehicles, 
taxi / car hire 
business, petrol 
filling stations)  1 space per 
45m2 display 
area, 1 per staff, 
1 per 35m2 for 
motor service 
centre and 1 per  
20m2 retail floor 
area at petrol 
filling stations 
plus space for 
requirements of 
servicing.  On merit   
BUSINESS  
B1: Business   1 space per 
25m2 (under 
2,500m2) 
1 space per 
30m2 (over 
2,500m2) 1 space per 
30m2  
B2: General 
Industrial  1 space per 
50m2 1 space per 
40m2  
B8: Storage and 
Distribution   1 space per 
100m2 On merit  Provision should take 
account of duration of 
storage.  
COMMUNAL ACCOMMODATION  
C1: Hotels 
(including hotels, 
boarding and 
guest houses)  13 spaces per 
10 guest 
bedrooms  1 space per 2 
members of 
staff working at 
the same time  Includes staff parking and 
allowance has been made 
for use of bars, restaurants 
and function rooms by 
general public.  
C2: Residential 
Institutions  
(hospitals)  1 space per 4 
staff plus 1 per 
3 daily visitors.  To be 
determined 
according to the 
needs of each 
proposal   
C2: Residential 
Institutions  
(nursing / 
convalescent 
homes)  1 space per 
residential staff 
plus 1 per 3 bed 
spaces  1 space per 2 
staff working at 
the same time   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
233 
 Use Class / 
nature of activity  Indicative Car 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Minimum Cycle 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Notes  
C2: Residential 
Institutions  
(residentia l 
schools and 
colleges)  On merit  On merit   
C3: Residential 
Dwellings   2 spaces per 
dwelling – 1 
space to be 
allocated within 
the curtilage  1 space per 
bedroom  Additional provision may be 
needed for visitors, service 
vehicles, salesmen.  
COMMUNITY FACILITIES  
D1: Non -
residential 
institutions   
(pre-schools, 
crèches and 
nurseries)  1.5 spaces per 
2 staff  1 space per 2 
staff working at 
the same time   
D1: Non -
residential 
institutions  
(primary & 
secondary 
schools)  1 space per 2 
staff plus 
waiting facilities 
/ 1.5 spaces per 
classroom  A rate of 30% 
for pupils over 5 
and 60% for 
pupils over 12 
years   
D1: Non -
residential 
institutions  (non-
residential 
colleges)  1 space per 2 
staff plus 1 
space per 15 
students  University 
development 
100% for the 
number  of 
pupils using the 
building at any 
one time   
D1: Non -
residential 
institutions 
(health centres 
and clinics)  1 space per 2 
staff plus 2 per 
consulting room  2 spaces per 
consulting room   
D1: Non -
residential 
institutions 
(churches)  1 space per 4 
seats or 1  per 
8m2   1 space per 
15m2  If site includes church hall, 
use D2 public assembly 
standard)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
234 
 Use Class / 
nature of activity  Indicative Car 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Minimum Cycle 
Parking 
Provision 
(gross floor 
area)  Notes  
D2: Assembly 
and leisure 
(places of public 
assembly 
including village 
halls and 
community 
centres)  1 space per 4 
seats or 1 per 
8m2  1 space per 3 
seats  Facilitie s which serve a 
wider hinterland rather than 
a primarily local function 
should be assessed on 
merit.  
D2: Assembly 
and leisure 
(cinemas / 
conferences)  1 space per 5 
seats  1 space per 3 
seats   
D2: Assembly 
and leisure 
(leisure)  1 space per 
22m2 (over 
1,000m2) 1 space per 
25m2 (net floor 
area) and for 
every 15 seats 
for spectators   
 
Rail Freight  
 
10.27  Cambridgeshire’s roads already have higher than the national average heavy 
commercial vehicle traffic and freight traffic is predicted to quadruple by 2030. Th e 
use of inappropriate routes can have considerable  impacts on villages. Given the 
importance of supporting the economic prosperity of the Cambridge area and 
existing levels of congestion, it is important that existing freight interchange sites are 
protected.  
 
10.28  Rail has an important role in the movement of freight. There is a general 
acceptance that the transfer of freight from road to rail will provide significant 
environmental improvement and will help to develop sustainable distribution. Whilst 
only some of the rail freight sites in the district are i n operation, the remaining are 
maintained.  New and upgraded existing facilities can help make the railway more Policy TI/4: Rail Freight and Interchanges  
 
1. In order to promote the use of rail for freight movements, freight 
interchange facilities will be permitted where they accord with other 
relevant proposals of this plan.   
 
2. Existing rail freight facilities and sidings at Duxford, Foxton, Fulbourn 
and Whitt lesford will be safeguarded.   South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
235 
 attractive to potential users. It is therefore important to retain and safeguard existing 
rail freight facilities within the district.  
 
10.29  A Transport Safeguarding Area has been designated in the Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Minerals and Waste Local Development Framework for the Foxton 
Sidings and the branch railway line to Barrington to enable the import of materials 
by rail for the partial fill and restoration of the quarry.  
 
Aviation -Related Development Proposals  
 
Policy TI/5: Aviation -Related Development Proposals  
 
1. In assessing any planning applications for new airfields or flying sites, 
or for the  expansion or intensification of use of any existing airfields or 
flying sites, the Council will take account of the following factors:  
a. The economic, employment or emergency services advantages 
likely to accrue to the area;  
b. The likely noise impact of the p roposal on local residents and the 
users / occupiers of any other noise -sensitive buildings in the 
area, including (where relevant) any cumulative impacts of flying 
in the area;  
c. The accessibility of the site in relation to the transport 
infrastructure;  
d. The effect of the proposal on nature conservation interests;  
e. The impact of the proposal on the landscape, including the effects 
of any lighting that would form a necessary part of the scheme;  
f. Any resulting increase in the range of recreation provision;  
g. Any sa fety issues arising from the proposal, including the safety 
of users of public rights of way close to, or crossing, the site;  
h. The effect of the proposal on sites with potential for renewable 
energy generation.  
 
2. Aircraft noise impacts, including engine testing, will usually need to be 
assessed in terms of aircraft noise exposure contours values for 
daytime and night -time using the noise exposure index (LAeq, 16hr - 
0700 to 2300hrs / LAeq, 8hr - 0700 to 2300hrs) supplemented as 
appropriate by other consid erations such as a single event levels (SEL) 
of individual events.   
 
3. In assessing the impact of noise, consideration will be given, where 
relevant, to the types of flying activities that are proposed at the site (or 
are likely to be associated with it), e .g. aerobatics, aero -towing, 
ballooning, flying training (including ab -initio flights), helicopters, 
historic aircraft, parachuting, and special event days. Applicants will be 
required to state what types of flying activities are proposed, and on 
what scal e. 
 
(continued)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
236 
  
10.30  South Cambridgeshire has a long association with flying and , in addition to 
Cambridge Airport  there are a number of established aerodromes and smal ler 
airfields in the district , including IWM Duxford with its large collection of flying 
historic aircraft  and internationally renowned air shows . Aviation contributes to 
national, regional and local economies and there are a number of industries 
established on local airfields. However , airfields can also raise environmental issues 
which need careful consideration to balance the different inte rests that can be in 4. Other factors relevant to a judgement as to whether or not a 
development  would give rise to an unacceptable amount of noise could 
be:  
i. The type and weight of aircraft to be operated from the airfield;  
j. The total number of proposed moveme nts in and out of the 
airfield;  
k. The type of aircraft activities proposed including any touch -and-go 
movements or circuit training;  
l. The proposed total number of daily movements;  
m. The proposed hours of operation .   
 
5. Where necessary or appropriate, conditions may be imposed to cover 
these and any other essential matters. In certain cases such conditions 
may allow for a limited number of exceptions above the imposed 
restriction.  
 
6. In all cases the Council will require applicants to state whether their 
proposals a re intended to provide for these kinds of activities and, if so, 
to describe their intended scale. In appropriate cases the significance 
of any potential adverse impact on quality of life / amenity arising from 
proposed flying activities may be assessed:  
n. By the use of on -site demonstrations;  
o. By the imposition of a temporary permission to give a reasonable 
‘trial run’ during which a careful programme of monitoring will be 
undertaken.  
 
7. In the case  of small airfields / airstrips in tranquil rural areas a speci al 
case would have to be demonstrated to justify the granting of planning 
permission for development that would generate activities of a type (or 
on a scale) that would be materially at odds with a primarily 
recreational function and low level of activity.  
 
8. Where planning  permission is granted conditions may be imposed in 
appropriate circumstances to restrict matters such as:  
p. The total number of take -offs and / or touch -and-go movements 
(normally on a daily maximum basis);  
q. The types or weights of aircraft to be operated; and  
r. The hours of operation of the site.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
237 
 conflict. In particular, noise resulting from flying activities has been a source of 
complaints in the past and is still a ve ry sensitive issue in some areas of the district.  
 
10.31  Policy TI/5  is intended to provide a flexible framework within which any individual 
proposal can be considered in the light of all the p articular local circumstances. 
Aircraft noise will usually be assesse d in terms of the daytime noise exposure index 
supplemented as appropriate by other considerations such as the maximum noi se 
level of individual events. It may also be necessary to adopt acceptability criteria for 
the noise exposure level appropriate to lo cal circumstances, for example to account 
for public perception of increased annoyance where local background noise 
conditions are unusually low or where flying activities are already experienced from 
the use of other local airfields.  
 
10.32  Certain types of fly ing activity may result in a different level or type of potential 
impact from that caused by conventional modern aeroplanes taking part in ‘normal’ 
flights. Such disturbance may often (but not always) be more severe.   
 
10.33  It will be helpful in the determinat ion of planning applications if the promoters of any 
proposal are able to demonstrate the existence (or proposed existence) of a local 
liaison committee comprising representatives of a suitable ran ge of interested local 
bodies. The completion of a Section 106 planning obligation may be an appropriate 
way of demonstrating this commitment .  
 
Cambridge Airport  
 
10.34  The Annex to Department for Transport Circular 1/2 010, Control of Development in 
Airport Public Safety Zones requires such zones be  safeguarded and identified in 
development p lans. P ublic safety zones have been establ ished around Cambridge 
Airport.  Within this area development is restricted whilst the airport is operational in 
order to minimise the number of people at risk of death or injury in the event of an 
aircraft crash on take -off or landing.  
 
Air Safeguarding Zones  
 
10.35  Applications for developme nt within Cambridge Airport’s Air Safeguarding Zones 
(shown in Figure 1 2) will be the subject of consultation with the operator of the 
airport and the Ministry of Defence. Restrictions in height, or changes to the detailed 
design of development may be nece ssary to mitigate the risk of aircraft accident 
and maintain the operational integrity of the airport.  
 Policy TI/6: Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone  
 
Within the Cambridge Airport Public Safety Zone, identified on the Policies 
Map, there is a general presumption against new development or changes of 
use except for a change of use which could not reasonably be expected to 
increase the numbers of people living, working or congregating on the land.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
238 
 10.36  The purpose of airport safeguarding is to take the measures necessary to ensure 
the safety of aircraft, their passengers and crew while taking off or la nding or while 
flying in the vicinity of Cambridge Airport. This is achieved by assessing proposed 
development so as to:  
• protect the air through which aircraft fly;  
• protect the integrity of radar and other electronic aids to air navigation;  
• protect visual aids, such as approach and runway lighting, by preventing 
them from being obscured, or preventing the installation of other lights; and  
• avoid any increase in the risk to aircraft of a birdstrike.  
 
10.37  A similar Aerodrome Safeguarding Zone applies to the Imperial War Museum 
Duxford (shown in Figure 1 3). Applications for development within Duxford’s Air 
Safeguarding Zones will be the subject of consultation with the aerodrome operator.  
   
 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
241 
 Lord’s Bridge Radio Telescope  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.38  The international importance of the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory at Lord’s 
Bridge  must be safeguarded.  The Observatory contains unique radio and optical 
telescopes operated by the Universities of Cambridge  and Manchester / Jodrell 
Bank. The telescopes measure signals that are very weak, and hence highly 
susceptible to many forms of interference, specifical ly electrical interference, light 
pollution and mechanical vibration from domestic, industrial plant and other sources 
such as vehicles and aircraft. Arrangements are made to consult the University of 
Cambridge about the technical consequences for the Obse rvatory of proposed 
development. Harm caused to the Observatory will be overcome with the use of 
conditions or planning obligations to regulate the installation and use of equipment 
likely to interfere with the operation of the Observatory.  
 
  Policy TI/7: Lord’s Bridge Radio Telescope  
 
1. Within the ‘Lord’s Bridge Restricted Area’ (defined on the Policies Map), 
planning permission will only be granted for development that would not 
result in any risk of interference to the Mullard Radio Astronomy 
Observatory at Lord’s Bridge.  
 
2. Within the ‘L ords Bridge Consultation Area 1’ (defined on the Policies 
Map), development proposals that could adversely affect the operation 
of the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory at Lord’s Bridge will be 
subject to consultation with the University of Cambridge, an d account 
will be taken of the risk of interference to the equipment being used at 
the Observatory. Planning permission will be refused where 
interference would be caused that could not be overcome by conditions 
or by the use of planning obligations.  
 
3. Within the ‘Lords Bridge Consultation Area 2’ (defined on the Policies 
Map), development proposals for telecommunications and microwave 
operations that could adversely affect the operation of the Mullard 
Radio Astronomy Observatory at Lord’s Bridge will be sub ject to 
consultation with the University of Cambridge, and account will be 
taken of the risk of interference to the equipment being used at the 
Observatory. Planning permission will be refused where interference 
would be caused that could not be overcome b y conditions or by the 
use of planning obligations.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
242 
 Provision of Infrastructure and Services  
 
10.39  The NPPF (2012) requires Local Plans to consider a wide variety of infrastructure 
needs, including transport, telecommunications, waste management, water supply, 
wastewater, flood risk and coastal change management, and the provision of 
minerals and energy (including heat), health, security, community and cultural 
infrast ructure and other local facilities.    
 
10.40  The Council ’s Infrastructure Delivery Study (IDS)  (updated in 2015) , produced in 
partnership with Cambridge City Council, explores infrastructure needs and costs, 
when and where infrastructure will need to be provided , the scale of funding needed 
to achieve this, an d potential sources of funding.  The IDS identifies infrastructure 
critical to the delivery of the Local Plan.   
 
10.41  Infrastructure provision will be funded through a number of sources. Mainstream 
funding, such as the County Council’s capital programmes, service providers’ 
investment programmes , and Governme nt grant will contribute  to infrastructure 
spending. However, de veloper funding, such as planning obligations and CIL, are 
an important additional resource for locally determined priorities.  
 
10.42  CIL is the Government ’s preferred mechanism for securing developer contributions 
towards local and strategic infrastructure impr ovements and, where possible, the 
Council intends using CIL to fund offsite provision of facilities and services.  
 
10.43  The provisions contained with the CIL Regulations mean that agreements under 
Section 106 of the Town and County Planning Act 1990 will revert  back to their 
original intention and mitigate site specific impacts only.  In certain circumstances it 
may be appropriate for the Council to secure planning obligations in addition to CIL 
where, in accordance with CIL Regulation 122, the obligation is:  
• Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
• Directly related to the development; and  
• Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development .  
 Policy TI/8: Infrastructure and New Developments   
 
1. Planning permission will only be granted for proposals that have made 
suitable arrangements for the improvement or provision of infrastructure 
necessary to make the scheme acceptable in planning terms. The 
natur e, scale and phasing of any planning obligations and/or 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) contributions sought will be related 
to the form of the development and its potential impact upon the 
surrounding area.  
 
2. Contributions may also be required towards the future maintenance and 
upkeep of facilities either in the form of initial support or in perpetuity in 
accordance with Government guidance.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
243 
 10.44  The Council will consult on and publish an infrastructure list under CIL Regulation 
123 which will clearly set out those items the Council intends spending CIL receipts 
on. Under the CIL Regulations the Council will be unable to secure planning 
obligations fo r items of infrastructure on the Regulation 123 list thereby providing 
clarity to developers and land owners that no ‘double counting’ will occur (i.e. the 
Council  will not secure a financial contribution through a section 106 agreement 
towards a piece of infrastructure that it could fund through CIL receipts).  
 
10.45  Should the Council revise the Regulation 123 list , it is to ensure that these changes 
are clearly  explained and subject to appropriate local consultation.  Should the 
Council not introduce a CIL Charging schedule, a CIL charging schedule is later 
withdrawn or the CIL Regulations are later repealed the Council will produce a 
Planning Obligations SPD to detail the specific infrastructure requirements from new 
development.  
 
10.46  Contributions  may be neces sary for some or all of the following:  
• Affordable housing, including for Key Workers;  
• Education (including nursery and pre -school care);   
• Health care;  
• Public open space, sport and recreation facilities (including Strategic Open 
Space);  
• Improvements (including infrastructure) for pedestrians, cyclists, equestrians, 
highways and public and community transport;  
• Other community facilities (e.g. community centres, youth facilities, library 
services social care, and the provision of emergency services);  
• Landscaping and biodiversity;  
• Drainage / flood prevention;  
• Waste management (pursuant to the Cambridgeshire & Peterborough  
Minerals and Waste Development Plan);  
• Arts and cultural provision;  
• Community development workers and youth workers;  
• Other u tilities and  telecommunications;  
• Preservation or enhancement of the historic landscape or townscape . 
 
10.47   There are some forms of development where contributions will not be sought as set 
out in planning practice guidance. These include custom and self -build housing 
schemes as well as starter homes.   
 
10.48  Depending on the nature of the services and facilities, co ntributions may also be 
required to meet maintenance and /or operating costs either as pump priming or in 
perpetuity, provided through an obligation.  
 
10.49  Development can create additional demands for physical infrastructure and social 
facilities, as well as ha ving impacts on the environment. In such cases planning 
obligations will be required, in accordance with government guidance, to make the 
necessary improvements, provide new facilities, or secure compensatory provision 
for any loss or damage created. Such obligations will take account of the wider 
needs of the Cambridge Sub -Region, in order to achieve wider planning objectives, 
with contributions pooled where appropriate to meet strategic requirements.  In such South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
244 
 cases, the nature and scale of contributi ons sought will be related to the size of the 
scheme and the extent to which it places additional demands upon the area.  
 
Waste Infrastructure  
 
10.50  Cambridgeshire County Council is responsible for minerals and wa ste planning in 
Cambridgeshire.  The Cambridgeshi re and Peterborough Minerals and Waste Plan  
was adopted , the Core Strategy in July 2011 and Site Specific Pr oposals Plan in 
February 2012. There is also an adopted Policies  Map, which shows allocated sites 
and areas of search for future minerals and waste  facilities, and safeguarding areas 
for existing and future facilities.  
 
10.51  The Site Specific Proposals Plan includes areas of search for waste recycling and 
recovery  facilities at Cambridge Northern Fringe East, Cambridge East (the airport 
site and North of Newmarket Road), and Northstowe.  
 
Education  
Policy TI/9: Education Facilities  
 
1. Local circumstances, including increasing pressure on provision of 
places, must be taken into account when assessing proposals for 
education facilities in order to achieve the most sustainable 
development.  In addition, new or enhanced education facilities should:  
a. Improve the scale, range, quality and accessibility of education 
provision;  
b. Be appropriately located to the community they serve;  
c. Mitigate the impact of any associated residential development; 
and 
d. Comply with the strategic objectives of Cambridgeshire County 
Council, the local Children’s Services Authority, and/or the 
ambition of the community they serve.  
 
2. The Council will work with the County Council to provide high quality 
and convenient local education services in all parts of the district, but 
particularly in areas of population growth.  
 
3. Developers should  engage with t he Children’s Services Authority at the 
earliest opportunity and work co -operatively to ensure the phasing of 
residential development and appropriate mitigation is identified in a 
timely manner to ensure appropriate education provision can be 
secured.  
 
4. Planning permission will be granted for new education facilities in 
locations accessible by walking, cycling and public transport, where this 
will meet an existing deficiency or support regeneration or new 
development.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
245 
 10.52  Cambridgeshire County Council is the local Children’s Services Authority. It has the 
statutory duty, established through the Education Act 1996, to secure sufficient 
places in state  funded schools for all children and young people of statutory school 
age (5 -16 years of age) who  want one. The Childcare Act 2005 and Education Act 
2011 introduced the duty on local authorities to commission sufficient early years 
and p ost-16 provision respectively. In addition, the Education Act 2011 cemented a 
shift in the County Council’s role as that of commissioner rather than as a di rect 
provider of school places.  Within this commissioning  role there is enhanced 
emphasis on the County Council working in partnership with a wide v ariety of 
education providers. Both the County Council and the schoo ls in Cambridgeshire 
recognise the importance of maintaining their long -established working relationships 
and working practices in order to ensure that the needs of Cambridgeshire’s 
residents, both current and those who will live in n ew communities, are ad dressed.  
 
10.53  Easy access to good quality educational provision  is important for supporting 
economic growth, developing strong sustainable communities and  promoting 
economic prosperity.  It is therefore appropriate for new residential development to 
contribute  towards the cost of education provision, either towards the expansion of 
existing facilities, or in some cases towards the funding of a new school, in line with 
Policy TI/ 8. Developers of residential sites should engage with the Children’s 
Services Author ity at the earliest opportunity to ensure appropriate education 
provision is delivered in a timely manner.  
 
10.54  Education facilities comprises those providing early -years and childcare, primary, 
secondary and further education places for all children and young  people aged 0 -19 
and up to 25 for those with Special Educatio nal Needs and/or disabilities.  Higher 
education and other types of education such as private language schools are not 
included in this definition of education.  
 
10.55  To ensure consistency and equity in school place planning across Cambridgeshire, 
the County Council has adopted principles  to underpin its duty in respect of th e 
commissioning school places. Although recent legislative and policy changes have 
resulted in a different approach to education planning, the principles set out below 
remain appropriate:  
• New schools and expansions of existing schools should provide high quality 
education provision; and  
• There should be minimal disruption to existing communities as a result of 
changes in provision; a nd 
• Schools should play a central role in the communities they serve; and  
• Schools should be located, where possible within the statutory walking 
distanc e of the communities they serve:  
o 2 miles for primary aged pupils (4 -10 years old); and  
o 3 miles for second ary aged pupils (11 -15 years old ). 
 
10.56  The education infrastructure required to mitigate the impact of the residential 
allocations originally identified in the Local Development Framework have been 
identified.  However, the new schools identified will only mitigate the impact of 
deve lopments they serve. The sites that have been secured will not allow for the 
schools to expand in response to demand arising from additional residential South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Chapter 10         Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
246 
 allocations in the Local Plan . Therefore, appropriate sites, and/or alternative 
solutions, will need to be secured to be agreed with the Children’s Services 
Authority in order for the education impact of further new housing developments to 
be appropriately miti gated.  
 
10.57  The Council will  work with the County Council (and neighbouring County Councils, 
as appropriate), as the local education authority, to ensure that school places are 
made available  to all new residents in appropriate locations and in a timely manner, 
including regular part nership reviews of where school places  will be needed in the 
future. Educational facilities will be expected, where appropriate and/or possible, 
reflecting on the County Council’s commissioning role, to include provision for 
community use, for example thro ugh making multi -use facilities accessible to the 
wider community.  
 
10.58  As part of this on -going process, a current shortfall (to 2021) of at least 1,050 (7FE) 
secondary school places has been identified. This need will be met by a new 
secondary school to serv e the eastern part of Cambridge, and the three Councils 
will continue to work together to find the most appropriate location.  
 
10.59  New education facilities should be located in highly accessible locations with good 
quality footpaths  and cycleways to encourage sustainable travel to and from the 
school by teachers, parents and pupils.  
 
Broadband  
 
 
10.60  Broadband is a key infrastructure element for the district.  Increasing broadband 
coverage in rural areas will encourage local enterprise, give more people the 
flexibility to work from home, save transport costs and reduce congestion. Wider 
access to broadba nd will also bring opportunities to provide health, education and 
public services in better ways. This includes supporting elderly and vulnerable 
people so they can live independently, and helping young people and adult learners 
to develop the skills they need to succeed.  It will s upport implementation of the 
South Cambridgeshire Economic Development Strategy and the Cambridgeshire 
and Peterborough Broadband Plan, prepared by the Connecting Cambridgeshire 
partnership.  
 Policy TI/10: Broadband  
 
New development (residential, employment and commercial) will be 
expected to contribute towards the provision of infrastructure suitable to 
enable the delivery of high speed broadband services across the district. As 
a minimum, suitable ducting to industry  standards should be provided to the 
public highway that can accept fibre optic cabling or other emerging 
technology. Other forms of infrastructure, such as facilities supporting mobile 
broadband and Wi-Fi, should be included where possible and viable.  AppendicesAppendices   
  
Histon, South CambridgeshireHiston, South Cambridgeshire    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix A  
 
249 
 Appendix A: Five-Year Housing Land Supply  
 
Five-year housing land supply will be calculated using the Liverpool methodology, which has 
been determined as appropriate for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire and which 
spreads any shortfall in supply at the point of calculation over the remainder of the plan 
period. A 20% buffer is also included in response to historic levels of delivery.  
 
The methodology for calculating five -year housing l and supply is set out in figure A1 below:  
 
Figure A1: Methodology for Calculating Five -Year Supply  
 
(a) Housing 
requirement in the 
plan period  Net number of new homes required in the plan period (2011 to 2031) 
as set out in Policy S/5 of the South Cambridg eshire Local Plan and 
Policy 3 of the Cambridge Local Plan.  
(b) Completions so far 
in the plan period  Net number of new homes completed so far in the plan period, as set 
out in the Annual Monitoring Report.   
(c ) Number of 
dwellings left to 
deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b)  Calculated by subtracting the net number of homes completed so far 
in the plan period from the housing requirement.  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  Number of years of the plan  period left in which to deliver the housing 
requirement.  
(e) Annualised 
average requirement 
for the remainder of 
the plan period  
(= c ÷ d)  Calculated by dividing the number of dwellings left to deliver by the 
number of years of the plan period left.  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  The requirement to meet in the next five year period. Calculated by 
multiplying the annualised average requirement by five.  
(g) 20% buffer to be 
added to the five year 
supply requirement  
(= f x 0.2)  A 20% buffer  in addition to the five year supply requirement should be 
added in response to historic levels of delivery  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  Five year supply requirement plus 20% buffer, against which predicted 
housing supply is  assessed.  
(i) Number of 
dwellings predicted to 
be completed in the 
five year period  Net number of new homes predicted to be completed in the five year 
period, as set out in the housing trajectory published in the Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
(j) Five year supply  
(= i ÷ h x 5)  Calculated by dividing the number of dwellings predicted to be 
completed in the five year period by the five year supply requirement 
with the 20% buffer, and then multiplying by five.  
 
Figures A2 and A3 below summarise the housing land supply position for South 
Cambridgeshire and Cambridge individually and jointly as at November 2017 for the five -year 
periods 2017 -2022 and 2018 -2023, as contained in the Annual Monitoring Reports 2017. Th e 
Councils both individually and jointly demonstrate a five year housing land supply using the 
methodology above. The Council’s five year supply will be published each year in their 
Annual Monitoring Reports. These should be consulted for the most up to da te position on 
housing supply.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix A  
 
250 
 Figure A2: Five -Year Housing Land Supply Position at November 2017 for 2017 -2022  
 
 Cambridge  South  
Cambridge -shire   Cambridge & South 
Cambridgeshire  
(a) Housing requirement 
2011 to 2031  14,000  19,500  33,500  
(b) Completions up to 
31 March 2017  4,932  3,970  8,902  
(c ) Number of dwellings 
left to deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b)  9,068  15,530  24,598  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  14 14 14 
(e) Annualised average 
requirement for the 
remainder of the plan 
period (= c ÷ d)  648 1,109  1,757  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  3,239  5,546  8,785  
(g) 20% buffer to be 
added to the five year 
supply requirement (= f 
x 0.2)  648 1,109  1,757  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  3,886  6,656  10,542  
(i) Number of dwellings 
predicted to be 
completed in the five 
year period (1 April 
2017 to 31 March 2022)  4,201  7,235  11,436  
(j) Five year supply (= i 
÷ h x 5)  5.4 5.4 5.4 
 
NOTE: the five year supply figure (row j) and each of the other figures in rows e -h have been 
calculated using formulae in a spreadsheet, and therefore have been calculated using accurate 
unrounded numbers. The numbers shown in rows e, f, g and h of this table are the rounded numbers, 
and therefore the numbers in this table may not sum due to rounding.  
 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring 
Report 2017  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix A  
 
251 
 Figure A3: Five -Year Housing Land Supply Position at November 2017 for 2018 -2023  
 
 Cambridge  South  
Cambridge -shire   Cambridge & South 
Cambridgeshire  
(a) Housing requirement 
2011 to 2031  14,000  19,500  33,500  
(b) Completions up to 
31 March 2018  6,267  4,629  10,896  
(c ) Number of dwellings 
left to deliver in the plan 
period (= a - b)  7,733  14,871  22,604  
(d) Number of years of 
plan period left  13 13 13 
(e) Annualised average 
requirement for the 
remainder of the plan 
period  
(= c ÷ d)  595 1,144  1,739  
(f) Five year supply 
requirement (= e x 5)  2,974  5,720  8,694  
(g) 20% buffer to be 
added to the five year 
supply requirement (= f 
x 0.2)  595 1,144  1,739  
(h) Five year supply 
requirement with 20% 
buffer (= f + g)  3,569  6,864  10,433  
(i) Number of dwellings 
predicted to be 
completed in the five 
year period (1 April 
2018 to 31 March 2023)  3,874  8,197  12,071  
(j) Five year supply  
(= i ÷ h x 5)  5.4 6.0 5.8 
 
NOTE: the five year supply figure (row j) and each of the other figures in rows e -h have been 
calculated using formulae in a spreadsheet, and therefore have been calculated using accurate 
unrounded numbers. The numbers shown in rows e, f, g and h of this table are the rounded numbers, 
and therefore the numbers in this table may n ot sum due to rounding.  
 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring 
Report 2017  
 
Figure A4 below shows that it is anticipated that based on the housing trajectory as at 
November 2017 it is anticipated that th ere will be a rolling five -year housing land supply 
continuing for the remainder of the plan period. The housing supply data will be updated 
annually and published in the Annual Monitoring Report.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix A  
 
252 
 Figure A4: Rolling Five Year Supply  
 
 2017 -
2022  2018 -
2023  2019 -
2024  2020 -
2025  2021 -
2026  2022 -
2027  2023 -
2028  2024 -
2029  2025 -
2030  2026 -
2031  
Cambridge  5.4 5.4 6.0 6.2 6.2 6.2 5.8 5.3 5.3 5.5 
South 
Cambridgeshire  5.4 6.0 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.9 7.7 8.9 11.4 
Cambridge & 
South 
Cambridgeshire  5.4 5.8 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.8 7.6 9.1 
 
Source: Cambridge Annual Monitoring Report 2017 and South Cambridgeshire Annual Monitoring 
Report 2017  
 
Figure A5 below shows past and projected completions for Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire over the plan period (2011/12 to 2030/31). In  total, the plans must make 
provision for a minimum of 33,500 homes over this period, which is represented in the graph 
by the black ‘plan’ line (the combined annual housing requirement of 1,675 net homes). It 
also includes a ‘manage’ line, which shows the  outstanding balance of completions relative 
to cumulative delivery.  
 
Figure A5: Past and Projected completions 2011/12 to 2030/31  
 
 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix A  
 
253 
  
Figure A6 below provides a summary of the broad distribution and main sources of supply of 
the housing provision set out in the plans.  
 
Figure A6: Distribution and supply of housing provision  
 
  2011/12 
- 
2015/16  2016/17
-
2020/21  2021/22
-
2025/26  2026/27
-
2030/31  Post 
2031  Totals  
Actual Completions  
Cambridge  3,754  1,178  - -  - 4,932  
South Cambridgeshire  3,427  543 - - - 3,970  
Cambridge Urban Area  
Cambridge  - existing allocations   - 226 304 289 0 819 
Cambridge  - new allocations  - 131 613 579 0 1,323  
South Cambridgeshire - existing 
allocations   - 42 105 0 0 147 
Cambridge Fringe Sites  
Cambridge  - existing allocations   - 2,227  2,595  521 0 5,343  
Cambridge  - new allocations   - 190 240 0 0 430 
South Cambridgeshire - existing 
allocations   - 894 1,879  1,378  250 4,151  
New Settlements  
South Cambridgeshire - existing 
allocations   - 703 1,250  1,250  6,784  3,203  
South Cambridgeshire - new 
allocations   - 0 1,660  2,000  8,840  3,660  
Rural Area  
South Cambridgeshire - existing 
allocations   - 522 100 53 0 675 
South Cambridgeshire - new 
allocations   - 674 1,185  750 935 2,609  
Unallocated Sites with Planning Permission or Resolution to Grant Planning Permission  
Cambridge   - 313 40 0 0 353 
South Cambridgeshire   - 2,608  613 0 0 3,221  
Windfall Allowance  
Cambridge   - 123 553 618 0 1,294  
South Cambridgeshire   - 50 900 1,000  0 1,950  
   7,181  10,424  12,037  8,438  16,809  38,080  
 
For more details on the individual sites that comprise the above joint housing trajectory, 
please refer to the latest Annual Monitoring Report for each authority.  
 
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix B  
 
255 
 Appendix B: Local Development Framework Policies referred to in Area Action 
Plans superseded by Local Plan Policies, as referenced in Policy LP/1  
 
Northstowe AAP  
 
Reference in AAP  Local  Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Policy NS/7:  
Northstowe Housing  
 
Affordable Housing,  
subsection 6  Policy HG/3:  
Affordable Housing  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/10:  
Affordable Housing  
Paragraph D3.8  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/7: Northstowe 
Housing  Policy HG/2:  
Housing Mix  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/9:  
Housing Mix  
Paragraph D3.9  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/7: Northstowe 
Housing  Policy HG/3:  
Affordable Housing  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/10:  
Affordable Housing  
Paragraph D4.3  
 
supporting  Policy 
NS/8: Northstowe 
Employment  Policy ST/8:  
Employment Provision  
 
Core Strategy DPD  Policy S/5:  
Provision of New 
Jobs and Homes  
Paragraph D5.12  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/9: Community 
Services, Facilities, 
Leisure, Arts and 
Culture  Policy SF/6:  
Public Art and New 
Development  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy HQ/2:  
Public Art and New 
Development  
Policy NS/11:  
Alternative Modes  
 
Car and Cycle 
Parking Standards,  
subsection 10  Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy TI/3: Parking 
Provision  
Paragraph D6.14  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/11: Alternative 
Modes  Travel Chapter of the 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy TI/3: Parking 
Provision  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix B  
 
256 
 Reference in AAP  Local  Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Paragraph D6.21  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/11: Alternative 
Modes  Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy TI/3: Parking 
Provision  
Paragraph D9.1  
 
supporting  Policy 
NS/18: Use of 
Existing Buildings  Policy CH/2: 
Archaeological Sites  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy NH/14: 
Heritage Assets  
Paragraph D10.2  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/19: Public Open 
Space and Sports 
Provision  Policy SF/11:  
Open Space 
Standards  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy SC/7: 
Outdoor Play 
Space, Informal 
Open Space and 
New Developments  
Paragraph D10.11   
 
supporting Policy 
NS/19: Public Open 
Space and Sports 
Provision  Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy SC/7: 
Outdoor Play 
Space, Informal 
Open Space and 
New Developments  
Paragraph D10.15  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/19: Public Open 
Space and Sports 
Provision  Policy SF/11:  Open 
Space Standards  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy SC/7: 
Outdoor Play 
Space, Informal 
Open Space and 
New Developments  
Paragraph D13.4  
 
supporting  Policy 
NS/23:  
An Exemplar in 
Sustainability  Policy NE/3:  
Renewable Energy 
Technologies in New 
Development  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy CC/3:  
Renewable and Low 
Carbon Energy in 
New Developments  
Paragraph D13.9  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/23: An Exemplar 
in Sustainability  Policy NE/1:  
Energy Efficiency  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  No replacement 
policy in the Local 
Plan.  
Paragraph D13.9  
 
supporting Policy 
NS/23: An Exemplar 
in Sustainability  Policy DP/1: 
Sustainable 
Development 
(subsection 1e)  
 Policy CC/6:  
Construction 
Methods  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix B  
 
257 
 Reference in AAP  Local  Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Development Control 
Policies DPD  
Paragraph E2.1  Policy DP/4:  
Infrastructure and 
New Developments  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy TI/8:  
Infrastructure and 
New Developments  
 
Cambridge East AAP  
 
Reference in AAP  Local Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Paragraph D3.11  
 
supporting  Policy 
CE/7: Cambridge 
East Housing  Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/10:  
Affordable Housing  
 
Cambridge Southern Fringe AAP  
 
Reference in AAP  Local Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Policy CSF/7:  
Trumpington West 
Housing  
 
Affordable Housing,  
subsection 5  Policy HG/3:  
Affordable Housing  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/10:  
Affordable Housing  
Paragraph D2.7  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/7:  
Trumpington West 
Housing  Policy HG/2:  
Housing Mix  
 
Development Control 
DPD  Policy H/9:  
Housing Mix  
Paragraph D2.8  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/7: Trumpington 
West Housing  Policy HG/3:  
Affordable Housing  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy H/10:  
Affordable Housing  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix B  
 
258 
 Reference in AAP  Local Development 
Framework Policy  
referred to  Replacement  
Local Plan Policy  
Paragraph D3.3  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/8:  
Employment  Policy ET/1:  
Limitations on the 
Occupancy of New 
Premises in South 
Cambridgeshire  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy E/11:  
Large Scale 
Warehousing and 
Distribution Centres  
Paragraph D4.12  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/9:  
Community 
Services, Facilities, 
Leisure, Arts and 
Culture  Policy SF/6:  
Public Art and New 
Development  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy HQ/2:  
Public Art and New 
Development  
Paragraph D8.5  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/16: 
Archaeology at 
Trumpington West  LDF Development 
Cont rol Policies  Policy NH/14:  
Heritage Assets  
Paragraph D12.3  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/21:  
An Exemplar in 
Sustainability  Development 
Principles and Natural 
Environment Chapters 
of Development 
Control Policies DPD  Policy CC/6:  
Construction 
Methods  
Paragraph E1.11  
 
supporting Policy 
CSF/22: 
Construction 
Strategy  Policy DP/1:  
Sustainable 
Development  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy CC/6:  
Construction 
Methods  
Paragraph E2.1  Policy DP/4:  
Infrastructure and 
New Developments  
 
Development Control 
Policies DPD  Policy TI/8:  
Infrastructure and 
New Developments  
 
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  C 
 
259 
 Appendix C: List of Local Green Space Sites  (shown on the Policies Map)  
 
NH/12 -001 - Village Green, Bar Hill  
NH/12 -002 - Recreation Ground, Bar Hill  
NH/12 -003 - Land south of Saxon Way,  Bar Hill  
NH/12 -004 - Church Close Nature Reserve, Barton  
NH/12 -005 - Ford Wood, Bassingbourn  
NH/12 -006 - Recreation Ground, Bassingbourn  
NH/12 -007 - Jubilee Recreation Ground, Bourn  
NH/12 -008 - Recreation Ground, Caldecote  
NH/12 -009 - Cambourne Recreation  Ground, Back Lane, Cambourne (1)  
NH/12 -010 - Land east of Greenbank, Cambourne  
NH/12 -011 - Land north of School Lane, west of Broad Street, Cambourne  
NH/12 -012 - Cambourne Recreation Ground, Back Lane, Cambourne (2)  
NH/12 -013 - Crow Hill (Country Park), Cambourne  
NH/12 -014 - Oaks Wood (Eco Park), Cambourne  
NH/12 -015 - Pitches next to Sports Centre, Cambourne  
NH/12 -016 - The Old Market Place, Caxton  
NH/12 -017 - All Saints Church, Cottenham  
NH/12 -018 - Broad Lane - High Street Junction, Cottenham  
NH/12 -019 - Old Recreation Ground, Cottenham  
NH/12 -020 - Broad Lane Amenity Area, Cottenham  
NH/12 -021 - Recreation Ground and Playing Fields, Cottenham  
NH/12 -022 - Village Green, Cottenham  
NH/12 -023 - Village Green, Dry Drayton  
NH/12 -024 - Fardells Lane Nature Reser ve, Elsworth  
NH/12 -025 - Grass Close, Elsworth  
NH/12 -026 - Village Green, Eltisley  
NH/12 -027 - Village Green, Fen Ditton  
NH/12 -028 - Recreation Ground, Foxton  
NH/12 -029 - The Green, Foxton  
NH/12 -030 - Dovecote Meadow, Foxton  
NH/12 -031 - Victorian garden, F ulbourn  
NH/12 -032 - Log Field, Gamlingay  
NH/12 -033 - Recreation Ground, Guilden Morden  
NH/12 -034 - Recreation ground in Egremont Road, Hardwick  
NH/12 -035 - Recreation Ground, Harston  
NH/12 -036 - Welhouse Meadow, Haslingfield  
NH/12 -037 – Wood, Haslingfield  
NH/12 -038 – Village Green, Haslingfield  
NH/12 -039 - Willow Way Recreation Ground, Hauxton  
NH/12 -040 - Village Green (opposite the church) , Ickleton  
NH/12 -041 - Village Green, Kingston  
NH/12 -042 - Field Road Green, Kingston  
NH/12 -043 - Village Orchard, King ston 
NH/12 -044 - Playground, Kingston  
NH/12 -045 - Recreation Ground, Linton  
NH/12 -046 - Village Green (Camping Close), Linton  
NH/12 -047 - Village Green, Litlington  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  C 
 
260 
 NH/12 -048 - St. Peters Hill, Litlington  
NH/12 -049 - Recreation Ground, Litlington  
NH/12 -050 - Scout Camp Site, Church Lane, Little Abington  
NH/12 -051 - Bowling Green, High Street, Little Abington  
NH/12 -052 - Recreation Ground, Little Wilbraham  
NH/12 -053 – Recreation Ground, Lolworth  
NH/12 -054 - New Recreation Ground, The Moor, Melbourn  
NH/12 -055 - Millennium Copse, The Moor, Melbourn  
NH/12 -056 - Old Recreation Ground, The Moor, Melbourn  
NH/12 -057 - The Cross, High Street, Melbourn  
NH/12 -058 - Stockbridge Meadows, Dolphin Lane, Melbourn  
NH/12 -059 - Recreation Ground, Meldreth  
NH/12 -060 - Chapel Orc hard, Orwell  
NH/12 -061 - Recreation Ground, Town Green Road, Orwell  
NH/12 -062 - Jubilee Green, Papworth Everard  
NH/12 -063 - Meadow at western end of Church Lane, Papworth Everard  
NH/12 -064 - Papworth Hall, Papworth Everard  
NH/12 -065 - Village Playing Field , Papworth Everard  
NH/12 -066 - Mill Lane Recreation Ground, Sawston  
NH/12 -067 - Millennium Copse, Sawston  
NH/12 -068 - Spicers' Sports Field, Sawston  
NH/12 -069 - Lynton Way Recreation Ground, Sawston  
NH/12 -070 - Orchard Park, Sawston  
NH/12 -071 - Recreation Ground, Hay Street, Steeple Morden  
NH/12 -072 - The Cowslip Meadow, Steeple Morden  
NH/12 -073 - Village Green, Thriplow  
NH/12 -074 - Cricket Pitch, Thriplow  
NH/12 -075 - Recreation Ground, Thriplow  
NH/12 -076 - Land adjacent 6 High Street , Toft  
NH/12 -077 - Recreation Ground , Toft  
NH/12 -078 - Small green area immediately to west of NH/12 -076, Toft  
NH/12 -079 - Village Green, Waterbeach  
NH/12 -080 - The Gault, Waterbeach  
NH/12 -081 - Recreation Ground / play area, Whaddon  
NH/12 -082 - The Lawn, Whittlesford  
NH/12 -083 - Playing Field north of Hall Lane, Great Chishill  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
261 
 Appendix D: Glossary  
 
 Ab-initio flights  Initial training flights taken in an aeroplane.  
 Affordable Housing  Social rented, affordable rented and 
intermediate housing, provided to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by 
the market. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and local house 
prices. Affordable housing should include 
provisions to remain at an affordable price 
for future eligible households or for th e 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative 
affordable housing provision.  
 
Social rented housing is owned by local 
authorities and private registered providers 
(as defined in section 80 of the Housing 
and Regeneration Act 2008), for which 
guideline target ren ts are determined 
through the national rent regime. It may 
also be owned by other persons and 
provided under equivalent rental 
arrangements to the above, as agreed with 
the local authority or with Homes England.  
 
Affordable rented housing is let by local 
authorities or private registered providers of 
social housing to households who are 
eligible for social rented housing. 
Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls 
that require a rent of no more than 80% of 
the local market rent (including service 
charges, where applicable).  
 
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and 
rent provided at a cost above social rent, 
but below market levels subject to the 
criteria in the Affordable Housing definition 
above. These can include shared equity 
(shared ownership and equi ty loans), other 
low cost homes for sale and intermediate 
rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
 
Homes that do not meet the above 
definition of affordable housing, such as 
“low cost market” housing, may not be 
considered as affordable housing for 
planni ng purposes. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
262 
  Aged or veteran tree  A tree which, because of its great age, size 
or condition is of exceptional value for 
wildlife, in the landscape, or culturally. 
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
AQMA  Air Quality Management Area  Each local authority in the UK is required to 
monitor air quality in their area. If an 
authority finds any places where the 
national air quality objectives are not likely 
to be achieved, it must declare an Air 
Quality Management Area, and prepare an 
air quality actio n plan.  
 Air source heat pumps  Air source heat pumps absorb heat from 
the outside air. This heat can then be used 
to heat radiators, under floor heating 
systems, or warm air convectors and hot 
water.  
 Allocated Site  Sites identified for development in a 
development plan.  
 Anaerobic digestion  Anaerobic Digestion (AD) is a natural 
process where plant and animal materials 
(biomass) are broken down by micro -
organisms in the absence of air.  
 Ancient woodland  An area that has been wooded 
continuously since a t least 1600 AD.  
 Annual Monitoring Report  A document which is produced by the 
Council annually, which measures various 
indicators to assess the performance of the 
individual planning policies set out in the 
adopted development plan but also to 
provide a general portrait of the social, 
economic and environmental conditions in 
the district.  
AAP Area Action Plan  Provides a statutory planning framework for 
an area of change, e.g. Northstowe.  
 Best and most versatile 
agricultural land  Land in grades 1, 2 and  3a of the 
Agricultural Land Classification. (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
 Biodiversity  Biodiversity is the variety of life in all its 
forms. This includes the plant and animal 
species that make up our wildlife and the 
habitats in which they live.  
BAP Biodiversity Action Plan  A strategy prepared for a local area aimed 
at conserving and enhancing biological 
diversity. Can address a specific habitat or 
species.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
263 
  Biomass boilers  Biomass boiler also called wood -fuelled 
heating systems, burn wood pellets,  chips 
or logs to provide warmth in a single room 
or to power central heating and hot water 
boilers.  
 Brownfield site  See definition of ‘Previously developed 
land’.  
 
 Building Regulations  National standards for health and safety, 
energy conservation and access to and 
about buildings.  
BREE
AM Building Research 
Establishments 
Environmental Assessment 
Method  BREEAM is a set of standards for 
measuring the environmental performance 
of a range of new and existing building 
types. It covers energy and water 
perfo rmance, construction materials, waste, 
ecology, pollution and health.   
 Cambridge Area   The area covered by Cambridge City 
Council and South Cambridgeshire District 
Council.  
 Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Structure Plan 
2003  Provided the framework for  the district 
councils’ preparation of detailed Local 
Development Frameworks or Local Plans, 
up to 2016.  
 Cambridge Cluster  Refers to the 1,400+ technology, 
biotechnology, services providers and 
support companies and organizations 
comprising more than 40 ,000+ people 
employed by these in the Cambridge 
region.  
CRHB  Cambridge Sub -Region 
Housing Market Area  Cambridge Sub -Region Housing Market 
Area is a group of local authorities working 
together to consider and address housing 
issues, to bid for resources and to work 
together to get the best results when using 
any public resources.  
 
The Cambridge Sub -Region Housing 
Market Area is made up of seven district 
councils; five in Cambridgeshire and two in 
Suffolk:  
• Cambridge City  
• East Cambridgeshire  
• Fenland  
• Forest Heath (Suffolk)*  
• Huntingdonshire  
• South Cambridgeshire  
• St Edmundsbury (Suffolk)*  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
264 
  
* Note: Forest Heath and St Edmundsbury 
Councils have merged into West Suffolk 
Council.  
 
CRHB  comprises these authorities together 
with Cambridgeshire County Council, 
Homes England and three registered social 
landlord (RSL) representatives.   
 Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Minerals and 
Waste Plan  Comprises a suite of documents including 
the Cor e Strategy and Site Specific 
Proposals Plan adopted by Cambridgeshire 
County and Peterborough City Councils. 
There is also an adopted Proposals Map, 
which shows allocated sites and areas of 
search for future minerals and waste 
facilities, and safeguarding areas for 
existing and future facilities.  
 Carbon Footprint  A measure of the impact our activities have 
on the environment and, in particular, 
climate change. It relates to the amount of 
greenhouse gases produced in our day ‐to‐
day lives through burning fossil fuels for 
electricity, heating, transportation etc.  
 Children’s Playspace (open 
space)  Designated areas for outdoor play for 
children and young people. This will contain 
a range of facilities and an environment 
that has been designed to provide foc used 
opportunities for outdoor play. This includes 
formal equipped play areas and provision 
for teenagers including wheeled sports 
parks and macadam kick -about areas. It 
also includes areas for informal play, 
including grass kick -about areas within 
housing  developments.  
 Climate Change Adaptation  Adjustments to natural or human systems 
in response to actual or expected climatic 
factors or their effects, including from 
changes in rainfall and rising temperatures, 
which moderate harm or exploit beneficial 
opportunities. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Climate Change Mitigation  Action to reduce the impact of human 
activity on the climate system, primarily 
through reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions.  
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
265 
  Clusters  Groups of companies in related activities, 
often sharing similar skills and 
infrastructure, within a specific area – The 
Cambridge Clusters are related to high tech 
clusters (including high tech firms, 
Cambridge University and the research 
institutes and related specialist services 
e.g. biotech and medical uses at Granta 
Park.  
 Combined Heat and Power  A plant designed to produce heat and 
electricity from a single source.  
 Community Energy Fund  
 
 A community energy fund is a way of 
collecting investment from a range of 
different source s, including developers and 
private investors, which can be used to 
fund infrastructure that will reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions  
 Community Facilities  Facilities which help meet the varied needs 
of residents for health, education, and 
public services, as  well as social, cultural 
and religious activities.  
CIL Community Infrastructure 
Levy  A levy allowing local authorities to raise 
funds from owners or developers of land 
undertaking new building projects in their 
area.  
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Community Tr ansport  Transport provided by voluntary and 
community sector (VCS) organisations, 
using a combination of volunteers and paid 
staff. Community transport can include: 
Dial-a-Ride services using wheelchair 
accessible minibuses; village -based 
community car sch emes where local 
people use their own car to transport others 
for a small fee; moped and mobility scooter 
hire. 
 Conservation Areas  Areas identified by the Council, which have 
'special architectural or historic interest', 
which makes them worth protecting  and 
improving.  
 Core Strategy  The Core Strategy Development Plan 
Document (2006) formed part of the current 
Local Development Framework, and sets 
out the overall approach to development in 
the district. Replaced by the Local Plan.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
266 
 CWS  County Wildlife  Site County Wildlife Sites contain some of the 
best areas of wildlife in Cambridgeshire. 
They provide a valuable network of wildlife 
resources across the county, along with 
other wildlife sites. Many sites also support 
rare or threatened plants and animal s. 
Although CWSs are not protected under 
legislation, planning authorities need to 
consider the potential impact on 
development on CWSs as part of the 
planning process.  
 Design and Access 
Statement  A statement submitted alongside a 
planning application by  the applicant to 
demonstrate that proper consideration has 
been given to the impact of the proposal 
and account taken of all relevant factors in 
the design and landscaping of the scheme. 
Development will be accessible to 
everybody regardless of age, gende r or 
disability.  
 Design Code  A set of illustrated design rules and 
requirements which instruct and may 
advise on the physical development of a 
site or area. Builds on a design vision 
created by a masterplan.  
 Designated heritage asset  A Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, 
Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and 
Garden, Registered Battlefield or 
Conservation Area designated under the 
relevant legislation. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Development plan  This includes adopted Local Plans, 
neighbourhood pla ns and is defined in 
section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 District Heating System  District heating is a system for distributing 
heat generated in a centralised location for 
residential and commercial heating 
requirements.  
 Duty to cooperate  Introduced in the Localism Act 2011 
whereby local authorities must work 
together in the preparation of their local 
plans. A key aspect of cooperation is 
around provision of jobs and homes to 
ensure that all the objectively assessed 
needs of the housing mar ket area are met 
in full.   
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
267 
 dph Dwellings per hectare  The number of houses within a hectare of 
land which indicates the density of the 
development  
 East of England Plan  The name given to the Regional Spatial 
Strategy for the East of England. Regional  
Spatial Strategies are no longer produced. 
The East of England Plan, published in 
May 2008, was revoked by the Government 
in January 2013.  
 Employment Land Review  A document which:  
• Examines existing guidance, policies 
and requirements;  
• Takes stock of existing employment 
provision;  
• Assesses future requirements based 
on an analysis of past trends, future 
forecasts and discussions with existing 
employers and stakeholders;  
• Identifies a new portfolio of potential 
employment sites on land with the most 
poten tial for sustainable development;  
• Identifies existing employment sites 
that could be released for other forms 
of development.  
 Enterprise Zone  Enterprise Zones are specific areas where 
a combination of financial incentives, 
reduced planning restrictions a nd other 
support is used to encourage the creation 
of new businesses and jobs – and 
contribute to the growth of the local and 
national economies. Such a zone has been 
set up for Alconbury Airfield in 
Huntingdonshire.  
 European Site  This includes candidate  Special Areas of 
Conservation, Sites of Community 
Importance, Special Areas of Conservation 
and Special Protection Areas, and is 
defined in regulation 8 of the Conservation 
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. 
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Exception sites for Affordable 
Housing  An exception site is currently a site that 
provides 100% affordable housing provided 
within or adjoining a rural settlement, as an 
exception to normal planning policy. Issue 
49 seeks views on whether an element of 
market housing coul d be included.  
 
Small sites used for affordable housing in South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
268 
 perpetuity where sites would not normally 
be used for housing. Rural exception sites 
seek to address the needs of the local 
community by accommodating households 
who are either current residents or  have an 
existing family or employment connection. 
Small numbers of market homes may be 
allowed at the local authority’s discretion, 
for example where essential to enable the 
delivery of affordable units without grant 
funding. (Source NPPF, 2012)  
 Flood Z ones  Identify risk from fluvial flooding:  
Flood zone 1  – low probability (less than 1 
in 1,000 annual probability of river or sea 
flooding (<0.1%).)  
Flood zone 2  – medium probability  
(between a 1 in 100 and 1 in 1,000 annual 
probability of river flooding  (1% – 0.1%), or 
between a 1 in 200 and 1 in 1,000 annual 
probability of sea flooding (0.5% – 0.1%) in 
any year).  
Flood zone 3a  – high probability (a 1 in 
100 or greater annual probability of river 
flooding (>1%), or a 1 in 200 or greater 
annual probabilit y of flooding from the sea 
(>0.5%) in any year).  
Flood zone 3b  – functional floodplain (land 
where water has to flow or be stored in 
times of flood).  
 Formal open space  Land used for sport and for other activities 
requiring dedicated open space provision.   
Includes sports pitches, tennis courts, 
multi -use games areas, bowling greens, 
basketball courts, ball parks, allotments, 
water sport areas and other similar open 
spaces.  
 General Permitted 
Development Order   Provides permitted development rights 
which allow certain types of development to 
proceed without the need for a planning 
application.  
 Geodiversity  The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils 
and landforms. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Green Belt  A statutory designation made for the 
purposes of: checking the unrestricted 
sprawl of large built -up areas; preventing 
neighbouring towns from merging into each 
other, assisting in safeguarding the 
countryside from encroachment; preserving South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
269 
 the setting and special character of historic 
towns and assisting in urban regeneration 
by encouraging the recycling of derelict and 
other urban land. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Green Infrastructure  Consists of multi -functional networks of 
protected open space woodlands, wild life 
habitat, parks, registered commons and 
villages and town greens, nature reserves, 
waterways and bodies of water, historic 
parks and gardens and historic landscapes.  
 Green Roofs  The roof of a building which is partially or 
completely covered with pla nts, which is 
generally believed to assist in reducing 
surface water runoff from buildings, 
enhance biodiversity, reduce the visual 
impact of a building (in some locations) and 
effect the heat retention of a building.   
 Green Separation  The area of open land required to keep 
apart two separate communities and 
maintain their individual identities.  
 Greenhouse Gases  Greenhouse gas emissions are the 
collective name for a range of gases that 
trap some of the sun’s warmth within the 
earth’s atmosphere, and the most prevalent 
greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide.  
 Greywater Recycling  System for re -using the mildly polluted 
wastewater from shower / bath, washbasin 
or washing machine, for example to flush 
toilets.  
 Ground source heat pumps  Ground source heat pump s use pipes 
which are buried in the garden to extract 
heat from the ground. This heat can then 
be used to heat radiators, under floor or 
warm air heating systems and hot water in 
your home.  
 Group Village  Group Villages established in the 
Settlement hiera rchy for South 
Cambridgeshire. They are generally less 
sustainable locations for new development 
than Rural Centres and Minor Rural 
Centres, having fewer services and 
facilities allowing only some of the basic 
day-to-day requirements of their residents 
to be met without the need to travel outside 
the village. All Group Villages generally 
have at least a primary school. (Policy 
S/10)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
270 
  Gypsy and Traveller  Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever 
their race or origin, including such persons 
who on grounds  only of their own or their 
family’s or dependants’ educational or 
health needs or old age have ceased to 
travel temporarily, but excluding members 
of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling 
together as such.  
(Source: Planni ng policy for traveller sites 
2015)  
HRA  Habitat Regulations 
Assessment  The Habitats Directive (European Council 
Directive 92/43/EEC) on the Conservation 
of Natural Habitats and of Wild Flora and 
Fauna requires that the relevant competent 
authority, when p reparing any plans and 
policy documents must carry out a ‘Habitat 
Regulations Assessment’. South 
Cambridgeshire District Council as the 
relevant authority will have to carry out 
such an assessment whilst preparing the 
South Cambridgeshire Local Plan.   
HIA Health Impact Assessment  An assessment of the impact of the 
proposed development on health and 
identifies actions that can enhance positive 
effects and reduce or eliminate negative 
effects. (Policy SC/2)  
 Hi-Tech or High Technology 
Industry  Activities i ncluding production in fields 
which include biotechnology, chemicals, 
consultancy research and development, 
computer components and hardware, 
computer software, electronic systems and 
products, information technology, 
instrumentation, new materials technol ogy, 
telecommunications, other forms of new 
manufacturing process or fields of research 
and other development which may be 
regarded as high technology uses.  
 Historic Environment  All aspects of the environment resulting 
from the interaction between people  and 
places through time, including all surviving 
physical remains of past human activity, 
whether visible, buried or submerged, and 
landscaped and planted or managed flora. 
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
271 
  Historic Environment Record  Information services that see k to provide 
access to comprehensive and dynamic 
resources relating to the historic 
environment of a defined geographic area 
for public benefit and use. (Source: NPPF, 
2012)  
HRC  Household Recycling Centre  Place provided by the Waste Disposal 
Authority whe re members of the public can 
deliver household wastes for disposal. 
Recycling facilities may also be provided at 
these sites. (Also known as Civic Amenity 
Sites). (Source: Cambridgeshire Minerals 
and Waste Plan.)  
 Housing Trajectory  Illustrates the expected rate and phasing of 
delivery of new homes.  
 Infill Village  Infill villages are identified in the settlement 
hierarchy. Infill Villages are generally 
amongst the smallest in South 
Cambridgeshire. These villages have a 
poor range of services and fa cilities and it 
is often necessary for local residents to 
travel outside the village for most of their 
daily needs. (Policy S/11)  
 Informal Open Space  Used by people of all ages for informal 
unstructured recreation such as walking, 
relaxing, or a focal po int, ranging from 
formal planted areas and meeting places to 
wilder, more natural spaces, including 
green linkages.  
 Infrastructure  Infrastructure is a term used to describe 
new facilities, such as roads, community 
centres, schools, IT provision and cycle  
paths, with a development. It means 
anything that is required, other than 
houses, to make a new development work.  
IDS Infrastructure Delivery Study  The Infrastructure Delivery Study is 
exploring infrastructure needs and costs, 
when and where infrastructure will need to 
be provided, the scale of funding needed to 
achieve this, and potential sources of 
funding within the Cambridge Sub -region. 
The IDS will also identify infrastructure 
critical to the delivery of the Local Plan.  
JST&
SPG  Joint Str ategic Transport and 
Spatial Planning Group  The member governance group set up to 
guide the collaborative preparation of 
development plans in Cambridge and 
South Cambridgeshire and the associated 
Transport Strategy  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
272 
  Key diagram  Illustrates the key polici es in a Local Plan  
 Listed Buildings  A building or structure of special 
architectural or historic interest and 
included in a list, approved by the 
Secretary of State. The owner must get 
Listed Building Consent to carry out 
alterations, which would affect its character.  
LDF Local Development 
Framework  A suite of planning related documents that 
guide the development within the 
administrative area. The Local 
Development Framework currently provides 
planning policies for the area, but some 
elements of it will  be replaced by the new 
Local Plan.  
LGS Local Green Space  The NPPF (2012) has introduced a new 
designation of Local Green Space, to 
identify and protect green areas of 
particular importance to a local community. 
The NPPF states that “the designation 
shoul d only be used: where the green 
space is in reasonably close proximity to 
the community it serves; where the green 
area is demonstrably special to a local 
community and holds a particular local 
significance, for example because of its 
beauty, historic sign ificance, recreational 
value (including as a playing field), 
tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and 
where the green area concerned is local in 
character and is not an extensive tract of 
land. (Policy NH/12)  
 Localism  The Localism Act 2011 creates n ew 
responsibilities and opportunities for local 
communities to be actively involved in 
planning.  
 Local Nature Partnership  A body, designated by the Secretary of 
State for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs, established for the purpose of 
protecting and improving the natural 
environment in an area and the benefits 
derived from it.  
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Local Plan  Sets out policies to guide the future 
development of South Cambridgeshire. It 
also sets out where future development will 
take place, and identifies land for new 
housing, community facilities, shops and 
employment. It is the key document used to South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
273 
 determine planning applications for new 
development in the district.  
LPA Local Planning Authority  The public authority whose duty it is to 
carry out specific planning functions for a 
particular area. e.g. South Cambridgeshire 
District Council  
LTP Local Transport P lan Cambridgeshire County Council, as the 
local transport authority, is responsible for 
producing the Cambridgeshire Local 
Transport Plan (LTP) which seeks to 
address existing transport challenges as 
well the needs generated by new 
development, and plan fo r the delivery of 
new transport infrastructure, such as road 
improvements.  
 Masterplan  A masterplan describes how proposals for 
a site will be implemented. The level of 
detail required in a masterplan will vary 
according to the scale at which the 
masterp lan is produced.  
 Memorandum of Cooperation  The Cambridgeshire & Peterborough 
Memorandum of Cooperation has been 
produced by the Cambridgeshire 
Authorities, together with Peterborough to 
support the development of a coherent and 
comprehensive growth strategy across 
Cambridgeshire & Peterborough.  
The Memorandum aims to contribute to the 
achievement of sustainable development in 
Cambridgeshire & Peterborough, in 
accordance with the NPPF.  
 Merton rule  The Merton Rule was the ground breaking 
planning policy, developed by the London 
Borough of Merton, which required new 
developments to generate at least 10% of 
their energy needs from on -site renewable 
energy equipment in order to help reduce 
annual carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions in 
the built environment.  
(Source: Merton Borough Council website)  
 Minera l Safeguarding Area  An area designated by Minerals Planning 
Authorities which covers known deposits of 
minerals which are desired to be kept 
safeguarded from unnecessary sterilisation 
by non -mineral development.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
274 
 MRC  Minor Rural Centre  Minor Rural Centres are identified as part 
of the settlement hierarchy.  These villages 
are less sustainable than Rural Centres, 
but which nevertheless perform a role in 
terms of providing services and facilities for 
a rural hinterland. (Policy S/9)  
 Mixed use develo pment  Development comprising two or more uses 
as part of the same scheme (e.g. 
residential and community facilities). This 
could apply at a variety of scales from 
individual buildings, to a street, to a new 
neighbourhood or urban extension.  
 National Char acter Area  Natural England has divided the country 
into areas with similar landscape character, 
which are called National Character Areas 
(NCAs);  
NPPF  National Planning Policy 
Framework  This document published in 2012 by the 
Government sets out national p lanning 
policies for England and the Government’s 
requirements for the Planning System. The 
policies in the NPPF must be taken into 
account when preparing local and 
neighbourhood plans.  
 Natural England  Natural England is the Government’s 
advisor on the natural environment.  
Natural England works with farmers and 
land managers; business and industry; 
planners and developers; national, regional 
and local government; interest groups and 
local communities to help them improve 
their local environment.  
 Neighb ourhood Plans / 
Neighbourhood Development 
Plan A Plan prepared by a Parish Council or 
neighbourhood forum for a particular 
neighbourhood area. They must be 
consistent with the strategic policies in the 
current Local Development Framework 
and, when adopted,  the new Local Plan.  
NIAB / 
NIAB2   Land in north west Cambridge, between 
Huntingdon Road and Histon Road, 
allocated for mixed -use development. The 
land is part of the National Institute for 
Agricultural Botany hence NIAB. The land 
within Cambridge City Co uncil’s boundary 
is known as NIAB and an extension which 
lies within South Cambridgeshire as NIAB2. 
Known now as Darwin Green.   
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
275 
  Non-designated heritage 
asset  Heritage assets which do not have 
statutory designations. They can include 
undesignated buildings and structures of 
special local architectural and historical 
interest. Such assets are likely to be 
identified in South Cambs in conservation 
area appraisals, through the development 
process and through further supplementary 
planning documents.  
 North West Cambridge  Land between Madingley Road and 
Huntingdon Road, allocated for 
predominantly University uses. 
Development in this area is subject to 
policies in the North West Cambridge Area 
Action Plan.  
 Northstowe  A planned new town of 10,000 dwel lings 
and a range of employment, shops and 
community uses, located close to 
Longstanton and Oakington. Development 
in this area is subject to policies in the 
Northstowe Area Action Plan.  
 Objectively Assessed Needs  The National Planning Policy Framework 
requires that Local Plans should meet the 
objectively assessed housing, business 
and other development needs of an area in 
a positive and flexible way, unless any 
adverse impacts of doing so would 
significantly and demonstrably outweigh the 
benefits. This m ust involve using an 
evidence base to ensure that the Local 
Plan meets the full, objectively assessed 
needs for market and affordable housing in 
the local housing market area as far as is 
consistent with the policies set out on the 
NPPF.  
 Outdoor Sport (o pen space)  Facilities such as grass pitches for a range 
of sports, bowling green’s tennis courts, 
athletics tracks and multi -use games areas 
plus ancillary facilities such as car park, 
changing and storage. Water can only be 
included if it is in the form of a formal water 
sports lake with associated facilities and 
car park.  
 Photovoltaic Energy  Solar energy from photovoltaic cells.  
 Pitch (Gypsy and Traveller)  ‘Pitch’ means a pitch on a ‘Gypsy and 
Traveller’ site.  
(Source: Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 
2012)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
276 
  Planning condition  A condition imposed on a grant of planning 
permission (in accordance with the Town 
and Country Planning Act 1990) or a 
condition included in a Local Development 
Order or Neighbourhood Development 
Order. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Planning obligation  A legally enforceable obligation entered 
into under section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the 
impacts of a development proposal.  
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Planning Practice Guidance  
(PPG)  
 The web -based planning practice guidance 
is a planning information resource available 
online in a usable and accessible format to 
be read alongside the National Planning 
Policy Framework (2012). It contains 
detailed information for users of the 
planning system previously only published 
in separate documents. DCLG are actively 
managing the planning practice guidance, 
and any necessary updates will be made 
as soon a s regulations and legislation are 
brought into force.  
 Plot (Travelling Showpeople)  ‘Plot’ means a pitch on a ‘Travelling 
Showpeople’ site (often called a ‘yard’). 
This terminology differentiates between 
residential pitches for ‘Gypsies and 
Travellers’ an d mixed -use plots for 
‘Travelling Showpeople’, which may/will 
need to incorporate space or to be split to 
allow for the storage of equipment. 
(Source: Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, 
2012)  
 Policies Map  Map, which forms part of the Local Plan 
showing  all designations and site 
allocations. Previously known as a 
Proposals Map.  
 Previously developed land  Land which is or was occupied by a 
permanent structure, including the curtilage 
of the developed land (although it should 
not be assumed that the whole of the 
curtilage should be developed) and any 
associated fixed surface infrastructure. This 
excludes: la nd that is or has been occupied 
by agricultural or forestry buildings; land 
that has been developed for minerals 
extraction or waste disposal by landfill 
purposes where provision for restoration South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
277 
 has been made through development 
control procedures; land in  built-up areas 
such as private residential gardens, parks, 
recreation grounds and allotments; and 
land that was previously -developed but 
where the remains of the permanent 
structure or fixed surface structure have 
blended into the landscape in the process  
of time.  
(Source :NPPF, 2012)  
Alternative term for such land is brownfield 
land.  
 Priority Species and Habitats   Priority Species and Habitats are those that 
are identified within a Biodiversity Action 
Plan 
(BAP) and/or the Natural Environment and 
Rural Communities Act, 2006, Section 41.  
 Public Realm  
 
 Public Realm relates to all those parts of 
the built environment where the public has 
free access. It encompasses: all streets, 
squares, and other rights of way, whether 
predominantly in residential, commercial or 
community/civic uses; the open spaces and 
parks; and the ‘public / private’ spaces 
where public access is unrestricted (at least 
during daylight hours). It includes the 
interfaces with key internal and private 
spaces to which the public normally has 
free access.  
(Source: ODPM in Living Places: Ca ring for 
Quality (January 2004))  
 Public Safety Zones  Areas of land at the ends of the runways at 
airports, within which development is 
restricted in order to minimise the number 
of people on the ground at risk in the event 
of an aircraft crash on take -off or landing.  
 Proposals Map  Map, which forms part of the Local Plan 
showing all designations and site 
allocations.  Now superseded by Policies 
Map.  
PVAA  Protected Village Amenity 
Area  Open land protected for its contribution to 
the character of the vil lage. (Policy NH/11)  
 Rainwater Harvesting  Using rainwater for flushing toilets etc.  
 Ramsar sites  Wetlands of international importance, 
designated under the 1971 Ramsar 
Convention.  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
278 
  Regional planning   Regional Planning Bodies used to have a 
duty to produce a Regional Special 
Strategy for how a region should look in 15 
-20 years’ time.  Regional Planning Bodies 
were been disbanded on 31 March 2010. 
The Regional strategy for the East of 
England was revoke d in January 2013.  
 Renewable and low carbon 
energy  Includes energy for heating and cooling as 
well as generating electricity. Renewable 
energy covers those energy flows that 
occur naturally and repeatedly in the 
environment – from the wind, the fall of 
water, the movement of the oceans, from 
the sun and also from biomass and deep 
geothermal heat. Low carbon technologies 
are those that can help reduce emissions 
(compared to conventional use of fossil 
fuels). (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
R&D  Research and Development  Sector within industry specialising in 
researching new ideas and developing 
these products towards being made.  
 Retail Floorspace (Gross)  Total floor area within buildings.  
 Rural Centre  Rural Centres are the larger more 
sustai nable villages.  (Policy S/8)  
 Rural Based Enterprise  An enterprise where a countryside location 
is necessary and acceptable, which 
contributes to the rural economy, and/or 
promotes recreation in and the enjoyment 
of the countryside.  Examples may include  
types of farm diversification, recreation and 
tourism.  
SAM  Scheduled Monument / 
Scheduled Ancient 
Monument  Archaeological sites, buried deposits or 
structures of national importance by virtue 
of their historic, architectural, traditional or 
archaeological interest. The Secretary of 
State for Culture, Media and Sport 
schedules them under the National 
Heritage Act 1983.  
 Area of Water Stress  Designated by the Environment Agency 
where water demand is high compared to 
available rainfall.  
 Setting of a heritage asset  The surroundings in which a heritage asset 
is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and 
may change as the asset and its 
surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting 
may make a positive or negative 
contribution to the significance of an  asset, 
may affect the ability to appreciate that South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
279 
 significance or may be neutral. (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
S106  Section 106  Planning agreements that secure 
contributions (in cash or in kind) to the 
infrastructure and services necessary to 
facilitate proposed developments. Planning 
obligations are normally secured under 
Section 106 of the Town & Country 
Planning Act 1990.  
 Setting of a heritage asset:  The surroundings in which a heritage asset 
is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and 
may change as the asset  and its 
surroundings evolve. Elements of a setting 
may make a positive or negative 
contribution to the significance of an asset, 
may affect the ability to appreciate that 
significance or may be neutral. (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
 Shared ownership  A form of I ntermediate Tenure Low Cost 
Home Ownership housing. Homes in which 
the occupier owns a share of the equity and 
pays rent on the remaining share.  
 Significance (for heritage 
policy):  The value of a heritage asset to this and 
future generations because of i ts heritage 
interest. That interest may be 
archaeological, architectural, artistic or 
historic. Significance derives not only from 
a heritage asset’s physical presence, but 
also from its setting. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Site of Special Scientific 
Interest:  Sites designated by Natural England under 
the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. 
(Source: NPPF)  
 Smart Measures  Smarter choices measures are ways of 
promoting more sustainable transport 
choices such as car clubs and car sharing  
 Social rented housing  Rented housing owned by local authorities 
and private registered providers, for which 
guideline target rents are determined 
through the national rent regime. It may 
also be owned by other persons and 
provided under equivalent rental 
arrangements to the abo ve, as agreed with 
the local authority or with Homes England. 
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
280 
  Solar photovoltaics  Solar panel electricity systems, also known 
as solar photovoltaics (PV), capture the 
sun's energy using photovoltaic cells. 
These cells don't need di rect sunlight to 
work – they can still generate some 
electricity on a cloudy day. The cells 
convert the sunlight into electricity, which 
can be used to run household appliances 
and lighting. (Source: Energy saving trust)  
 Solar thermal panels  Solar water heating systems use free heat 
from the sun to warm domestic hot water. 
Energy from sunlight is absorbed by the 
solar panel and converts it to heat energy. 
In most systems, a small pump is required 
to circulate the heat transfer fluid to where 
it is immedia tely needed, or to a store from 
which it can be used later. A conventional 
boiler or immersion heater can be used to 
make the water hotter, or to provide hot 
water when solar energy is unavailable. 
(Source: Energy saving trust)  
 Special Areas of 
Conservation:  Areas given special protection under the 
European Union’s Habitats Directive, which 
is transposed into UK law by the Habitats 
and Conservation of Species Regulations 
2010.  
 Special Protection Areas:  Areas which have been identified as being 
of international importance for the breeding, 
feeding, wintering or the migration of rare 
and vulnerable species of birds found 
within European Union countries. They are 
European designated sites, classified under 
the Birds Directive.  
 Stepping stones  Pockets of habitat that, while not 
necessarily connected, facilitate the 
movement of species across otherwise 
inhospitable landscapes. (Source: NPPF, 
2012)  
 Strategic Environmental 
Assessment  A procedure (set out in the Environmental 
Assessment of Plans and Programmes 
Regulations 2004) which requires the 
formal environmental assessment of certain 
plans and programmes which are likely to 
have significant effects on the environment. 
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
281 
 SHLA
A Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment  This document identifies sites which may 
have potential for new housing, estimates 
approximately how many homes could be 
built on these sites and suggests a time 
frame for when these sites could become 
available. It is a technical document which 
forms part  of the evidence base supporting 
the review of the Local Plan and has been 
prepared in accordance with national and 
best practice guidance.  
SHMA  Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment  Councils should work with neighbouring 
authorities where housing market ar eas 
cross administrative boundaries and the 
NPPF requires the preparation of a 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA) to assess full housing needs.  
SPD Supplementary Planning 
Document  Documents which add further detail to the 
policies in the Local Pla n. They can be 
used to provide further guidance for 
development on specific sites, or on 
particular issues, such as design. 
Supplementary planning documents are 
capable of being a material consideration in 
planning decisions but are not part of the 
develop ment plan. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
SA Sustainability Appraisal  Prepared alongside the draft plan to 
appraise the social, environmental and 
economic effects of a plan and alternative 
approaches to help ensure that decisions 
made will contribute to achieving 
sustainable development.   
 Sustainable Development  Resolutio n 42/187 of the United Nations 
General Assembly defined sustainable 
development as meeting the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. 
The UK Sustainable Development Strategy 
Securing the Future set out five ‘guiding 
principles’ of sustainable development: 
living within the planet’s environmental 
limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just 
society; achieving a sustainable economy; 
promoting good governance; and using 
sound science responsibly. (So urce: NPPF, 
2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
282 
 SPEP  Sustainable Parish Energy 
Partnership  Consists of 27 Parish Councils working with 
volunteers to help residents cut fuel bills 
and reduce carbon emissions. SPEP has 
been supporting parish councils to make 
their parishes more sustainable since 2009. 
Membership of the partnership is open to 
parish councils and community groups in 
South Cambridgeshire who wish to play a 
part in helping their communities use 
energy efficiently and generate energy 
locally.  
 Sustainable transport m odes  Any efficient, safe and accessible means of 
transport with overall low impact on the 
environment, including walking and cycling, 
low and ultra low emission vehicles, car 
sharing and public transport.  (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
SuDS  Sustainable Urban Drainage 
Systems  Sustainable drainage systems control 
surface water run -off by mimicking natural 
drainage processes through the use of 
surface water storage areas, flow limiting 
devises and the use of infiltration areas or 
soakaways.  
 Transport assessment  A comprehensive and systematic process 
that sets out transport issues relating to a 
proposed development. It identifies what 
measures will be required to improve 
accessibility and safety for all modes of 
travel, particularly for alternatives to the car 
such as walking, cycling and public 
transport and what measures will need to 
be taken to deal with the anticipated 
transport impacts of the development.  
(Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Transport statement  A simplified version of a transport 
assessment where it is ag reed the 
transport issues arising out of development 
proposals are limited and a full transport 
assessment is not required. (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
 Travel Plan  A long -term management strategy for an 
organisation or site that seeks to deliver 
sustainable tra nsport objectives through 
action and is articulated in a document that 
is regularly reviewed. (Source: NPPF, 
2012)  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
283 
  Transport Strategy for 
Cambridge and South 
Cambridgeshire  Transport plan being prepared by 
Cambridgeshire County Council alongside 
the preparation of the local plans for South 
Cambridgeshire District and Cambridge 
City Councils.  
 Travelling Showpeople  Members of a group organised for the 
purposes of holding fai rs, circuses or 
shows (whether or not travelling together 
as such). This includes such persons who 
on the grounds of their own or their family’s 
or dependants’ more localised pattern of 
trading, educational or health needs or old 
age have ceased to travel temporarily, but 
excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined 
above. (Source: Planning Policy for 
Traveller s  DCLG August 2015)  
 Use Classes  The Town and Country Planning (Use 
Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) puts 
uses of land and buildings into various 
categories known as 'Use Classes'.  
B1(a)  Use Class B1(a)  An office  
B1(b)  Use Class B1(b)  High technology / Research and 
Development  
B1(c)  Use Class B1(c)  Light Industry  
B2 Use Class B2  General Industry  
B8 Use Class B8  Wholesale warehouse, distribution centres 
and repositories  
 Village Framework  
(sometimes referred to as 
Development Frameworks)  Line on the Policies Map that defines the 
built-up areas of settlements for planning 
purposes  
 Water Framework Directive  The European Water Framework Directive 
(WFD) came into force in December 2000 
and became part of UK law in December 
2003. It provides an opportunity to plan and 
deliver a better water environment, 
focussing on ecology.  
 
It provides an opportunity to plan a nd 
deliver a better water environment through 
river basin management planning.  
 
The WFD will help protect and enhance the 
quality of surface freshwater (including 
lakes, streams and rivers), groundwaters, 
groundwater dependant ecosystems, 
estuaries and coa stal waters out to one 
mile from low -water.  
(Source: Environment Agency website)  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix  D 
 
284 
  Wheelchair Housing Design 
standards  Wheelchair housing is designed to 
specifically meet the diverse and changing 
needs of wheelchair users and the 
multiplicity of impairments that some 
wheelchair users experience.  
 Wildlife Corridor  Areas of habitat connecting wildlife 
populations. (Source: NPPF, 2012)  
 Windfall  Sites which have not been specifically 
identified as available in the Local Plan 
process. They norma lly comprise 
previously developed sites that have 
unexpectedly become available. (Source: 
NPPF, 2012)  
 Wind turbine  Wind turbines harness the power of the 
wind and use it to generate electricity.  
(Source: Energy saving trust)  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
285 
 Appendix E : Strategic policies in South Cambridgeshire  
 
According to the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF , 2012 ) a local 
planning authority should set out clearly the strategic policies for their area 
(para 184). There is guidance provided at natio nal level for identifying 
strategic polices both within the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF  
2012 ) – paragraph 156 and the National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) 
(paragraph 074 -077 Ref ID: 41 -074-20140306).  
 
The Council has used this to identi fy the strategic policies in the Local Plan.  
 
The Criteria used for identifying Strategic Policies Extract from NPPF  
(2012)  
 
Local planning authorities should set out the strategic priorities for the area in 
the Local Plan. This should include strategic po licies to deliver:  
 
1. the homes and jobs needed in the area;  
2. the provision of retail, leisure and other commercial development;  
3. the provision of infrastructure for transport, telecommunications, waste 
management, water supply, wastewater, flood risk  and coastal change 
management, and the provision of minerals and energy (including 
heat);  
4. the provision of health, security, community and cultural infrastructure 
and other local facilities; and  
5. climate change mitigation and adaptation, conservation  and 
enhancement of the natural and historic environment, including 
landscape.  
 
Extract from NPPG  
 
When reaching a view on whether a policy is a strategic policy the following 
are useful considerations:  
A. whether the policy sets out an overarching directi on or objective  
B. whether the policy seeks to shape the broad characteristics of 
development  
C. the scale at which the policy is intended to operate  
D. whether the policy sets a framework for decisions on how competing 
priorities should be balanced  
E. whe ther the policy sets a standard or other requirement that is 
essential to achieving the wider vision and aspirations in the Local Plan  
F. in the case of site allocations, whether bringing the site forward is 
central to achieving the vision and aspirations of the Local Plan  
G. whether the Local Plan identifies the policy as being strategic  
 
These criteria have been used to identify why a policy is considered to be 
strategic – for NPPF criteria from 1 - 5 and for NPPG from A -G. The following 
table identifies t he strategic policies in the Local Plan.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
286 
 Table identifying Strategic Policies in the Local Plan  
All policies in the Local Plan are listed with Strategic Policies highlighted in 
grey.  
 
Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
LP/1 Superseded Policies 
referred to in Adopted Area 
Action Plans  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  The AAPs are Strategic, and this 
policy clarifies how they should be 
applied.  
S/1 Vision   A Overarching vision of plan  
S/2 Objectives of the Local 
Plan 1,2,3,4,5  A Overarching objectives of plan  
S/3 Presumption in Favour of 
Sustainable Development   ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
S/4: Cambridge Green Belt   AC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  
Essential to delivery of devel opment 
strategy of plan  
S/5 Provision of New Jobs and 
Homes  1 AC Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs 
S/6 The Development Strategy 
to 2031  1 ABCEF  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
S/7 Development Frameworks  1 BCE Policy setting out an ove rarching 
objective  
S/8 Rural Centres   BCE Strategic to deliver development 
strategy of Local Plan  
S/9 Minor Rural Centres   BCE Strategic to deliver development 
strategy of Local Plan  
S/10 Group Villages   BCE Strategic to deliver development 
strategy of  Local Plan  
S/11 Infill Villages   BCE Strategic to deliver development 
strategy of Local Plan  
S/12 Phasing, Delivery and 
Monitoring  1 A Policy setting out an overarching 
objective of plan  
S/13 Review of the Local Plan    Procedural  
SS/1  Orchard Park  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
SS/2  North West Cambridge - 
Land between Huntingdon 
Road and Histon Road  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
SS/3  Cambridge East  1 DFG  Strategic to de livery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation.   Needs to be 
read with Cambridge East Area 
Action Plan.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
287 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
SS/4  Cambridge Northern 
Fringe East and land 
surrounding the proposed 
Cambridge Science Park 
Station  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs.  Site allocation  
SS/5:  Northstowe Extension  1 DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
SS/6 Waterbeach New Town  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
SS/7 New Village at Bourn 
Airfield  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
SS/8 : Cambourne West  1,2,3,4,5  DFG  Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
CC/1  Mitigation and Adaptation 
to Climate Change  5 ABEG  Strategic to deliver climate change 
mitigation and  adaption  
CC/2  Renewable and Low 
Carbon Energy Generation  5 BE Strategic to deliver climate change 
mitigation and adaption  
CC/3  Renewable and Low 
Carbon Energy in New 
Developments  5 BE Strategic to deliver climate change 
mitigation and adaption  
CC/4  Water Efficiency  3,5 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  Policy seeking to shape 
broad characteristics of 
development  
CC/5  Sustainable Show 
Homes  5 E Strategic to deliver climate change 
mitigation and adaption  
CC/6  Construction Methods   AC Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
CC/7  Water Quality  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
CC/8  Sustainable Drainage 
Systems  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
CC/9  Managing Flood Risk  3,5 ABCDE  Polic y setting out an overarching 
objective  
HQ/1  Design Principles   ABCE  Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
HQ/2  Public Art and New 
Development    Policy that local community could 
review to be specific for their area.  
NH/1 : Conserv ation Area and 
Green Separation at 
Longstanton  5 B Strategic to the setting of new town 
of Northstowe  
NH/2  Protecting and 
enhancing Landscape 
Character  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
288 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
NH/3  Protecting Agricultural 
Land  5 ADE Policy sett ing out an overarching 
objective  
NH/4  Biodiversity  5 ADE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/5  Sites of Biodiversity or 
Geological Importance  5 ADE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/6  Green Infrastructure  5 ABCE  Policy setting ou t an overarching 
objective  
NH/7  Ancient Woodlands and 
Veteran Trees  5 ADE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/8  Mitigating the Impact of 
Development in and adjoining 
the Green Belt  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  
NH/9  Redevelopment of 
Previously Developed Sites 
and Infilling in the Green Belt  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/10  Facilities for Recreation 
in the Green Belt  5 ABDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/11  Protected Village 
Ameni ty Areas    Local communities may have parish 
specific policy for protecting green 
spaces within their area.  
NH/12  Local Green Space    Local communities may have parish 
specific policy for protecting green 
spaces within their area.  
NH/13  Important Country side 
Frontage    Local communities may have parish 
specific policy to protect views for 
their area.  
NH/14  Heritage Assets  5 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
NH/15  Heritage Assets and 
Adapting to Climate Change  5 AB Policy setting out an over arching 
objective  
H/1 Allocations for Residential 
Development at Villages  1 CF Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
H/2 Bayer CropScience Site, 
Hauxton  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
H/3 Fulbourn and Ida  Darwin 
Hospitals  1,5 ABF Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
H/4 Papworth Everard West 
Central    Local community may have parish 
specific aspirations for this area  
H/5 Fen Drayton Former Land 
Settlement Association Estate    Local c ommunity may have parish 
specific aspirations for this area.  
H/6  South of A1307, Linton    Local community may have parish 
specific aspirations for this area.  
H/7  Residential Moorings  1  Site allocation  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
289 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
H/8 Housing Density  1 ABC Policy seeking to shap e broad 
characteristics of development  
H/9 Housing Mix  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/10 Affordable Housing  1 ACDE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/11 Rural Exception Site 
Affordable Housing  1 ACDE  Policy setting out an  overarching 
objective  
H/12 Residential Space 
Standards  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/13 Extensions to Dwellings 
in the Countryside  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/14 Replacement Dwellings 
in the Countryside  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/15 Countryside Dwellings of 
Exceptional Quality  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/16 Development of 
Residential Gardens  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/17 Re-use of Buildings in the 
Countryside for Residential 
Use 1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/18: Working at Home  1 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/19 Dwellings to Support a 
Rural -based Enterprise  1 ABC Policy setting out an over arching 
objective  
H/20 Provision for Gypsies and 
Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople  1 ACE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/21 Gypsy and Traveller 
Provision at New Communities  1 ABE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/22 Proposal s for Gypsies, 
Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople Sites on 
Unallocated Land Outside 
Development Frameworks  1 AE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
H/23 Design of Gypsy and 
Traveller Sites, and Travelling 
Showpeople Sites  1 ABC Policy setting ou t an overarching 
objective  
E/1 New Employment 
Provision near Cambridge – 
Cambridge Science Park  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
E/2 Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus Extension  3 F Strategic to delivery of jobs. Site 
allocation  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
290 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
E/3 Fulbourn Road East 
(Fulbourn)  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
E/4 Allocations for Class B1 
Employment Uses  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
E/5 Allocations for Class B1, 
B2 and B8 Employment Uses  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
E/6 Papworth Hospital  1 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
E/7 Imperial War Museum at 
Duxford  2,4,5  B Museum as special case as 
nationally important.   
E/8  Mixed -use d evelopment in 
Histon & Impington Station 
area   Local community may have parish 
specific aspirations for this area.  
E/9 Promotion of Clusters  1 ABD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/10 Shared Social Spaces in 
Employment Areas  1 AB Policy set ting out an overarching 
objective  
E/11 Large Scale Warehousing 
and Distribution Centres  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/12 New Employment 
Development in Villages  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/13 New Employment 
Development on the Edges of 
Villages  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/14 Loss of Employment 
Land to Non Employment Uses  1 AD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/15 Established Employment 
Areas  1 AB Policy setting out an overarchi ng 
objective  
E/16 Expansion of Existing 
Businesses in the Countryside  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/17 Conversion or 
Replacement of Rural 
Buildings for Employment  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/18 Farm Diversific ation  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/19: Tourist Facilities and 
Visitor Attractions  1,2 AD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/20 Tourist Accommodation  1,2 AD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/21 Retail Hierarch y 1,2 A Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
E/22 Applications for New 
Retail Development  1 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
 Appendix E  
 
291 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
E/23 Retailing in the 
Countryside  2 ACE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
SC/1  Allocation for Ope n 
Space    Only proposed sites put forward by 
parish councils allocated in local 
plan. Did not use results of 
Recreation Study to allocate sites in 
villages where under provision of 
open space. Local community may 
have parish specific aspirations.  
SC/2  Health Impact 
Assessment  4 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
SC/3  Protection of Village 
Services and Facilities  2,4 ABD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
SC/4  Meeting Community 
Needs  2,4 ABD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characterist ics of development  
SC/5  Community Healthcare 
Facility Provision  2,4 ABD Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
SC/6  Indoor Community 
Facilities   2,4 ABE Strategic as minimum standard to 
ensure provision in new 
developments  
SC/7  Outdoor Play Space,  
Informal Open Space and New 
Developments  2,4 BCE Strategic as minimum standard to 
ensure provision of open space in 
new developments  
SC/8 Protection of Existing 
Recreation Areas, Allotments 
and Community Orchards  2,4 AB Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
SC/9 Lighting Proposals  5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
SC/1 0 Noise Pollution   5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
SC/1 1 Contaminated Land  5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
SC/12  Air Quality   5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
SC/13  Hazardous Installations  5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
SC/1 4 Odour and other fugitive 
emissions to air 5 BD Policy seeking to shape broad 
characteristics of development  
TI/1 Chesterton Rail Station 
and Interchange  3 F Strategic to delivery of homes and 
jobs. Site allocation  
TI/2 Planning for Sustainable 
Travel  3 ABC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
TI/3 Parking Provision  3 ABE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September 2018  
 A
ppendix E  
 
292 
 Policy in Local Plan  NPPF 
(2012) 
Guidance 
(Para 156)  NPPG  
Defining 
strategic 
policies  Comments  
TI/4 Rail Freight and 
Interchanges  3 AC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
TI/5 Aviation -Related 
Development Proposals  3 AC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective. Policy seeking to shape 
broad characteristics of 
development  
TI/6 Cambridge Airport Public 
Safety Zone  3 AC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  Essential to have public 
safety zone around airport  
TI/7 Lord’s Bridge Radio 
Telescope  3 AC Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  Essential to protect 
operation of internationally 
important telescope.  
TI/8 Infrastructure and New 
Developments   2,3,4  ABCE  Policy setting out an overarching 
objective.  Vital for delivery of 
development stra tegy of plan.  
TI/9 Education facilities  4 ACE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
TI/10  Broadband  3 ACE Policy setting out an overarching 
objective  
 
Area Action Plans: 
 
The adopted Area Action Plans (AAP) that are part of the Local Development 
Framework for the district are considered to be strategic to the delivery of 
homes and jobs within the district and therefore all policies within them are 
considered strategic. The adopted AAPs are Northstowe AAP; Cambridge 
East AAP; Cambridge Southern Fringe AAP; and NW Cambridge AAP. 
Policies in any new Area Action Plans prepared and adopted will also be 
considered strategic.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
293 
 Appendix F: Monitoring Indicators  
 
Chapter 2: Spatial Strategy  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M1 Greater Cambridge 
Housing Trajectory 
showing:  
• net additional dwellings 
completed in previous 
years and the current 
year;  
• predicted completions 
in future years;  
• progress against the 
housing target for the 
plan period; and  
• rolling five year supply 
plus relevant buffer 
(jointly with Cambridge 
City Council).  S/5 To deliver a net increase of 19,500 
homes in the district between 2011 
and 2031. Housing trajectory to 
demonstrate that this can be 
achieved.  
 
To demonstrate a five year supply 
of housing land (plus relevant 
buffer) jointly with Cambridge City 
Council. Housing trajectory and 
accompanying five year supply 
calculations to show whether this 
can be demonstrated.  Trigger:  
• Inability to demonstrate 
through the housing trajectory 
the delivery of 19,500 homes 
in the district between 2011 
and 2031.  
• Inability to demonstrate a five 
year supply of housing land 
(plus relevant buffer) jointly 
with Cambridge City Council.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that  led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.   
• Action to bring forward 
housing sites consistent with 
the Local Plan, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and devel opers.  
• Action to secure the timely 
provision of infrastructure.  • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Greater Cambridge housing 
trajectory compiled using 
information on housing 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire Co unty 
Council, and housing 
trajectory questionnaires 
completed by landowners, 
developers or agents.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
294 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan, including housing 
target and housing allocations.  
• Consider undertaking co -
operation with other local 
authorities, including through 
duty to co -operate.  
M2 Total dwellings completed 
annually and cumulatively 
in Greater Cambridge by 
development sequence, 
including by settlement 
category within the rural 
area S/6, 
S/7, 
S/8, 
S/9, 
S/10, 
S/11 Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on the implementation 
of the development strategy 
against the development 
sequence, to inform the Local Plan 
review.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator , to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review  
 
Action:  
• [No Specific Action]  • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Data on dwellings completed 
in the countryside  (outside of 
development frameworks) 
should identify rural exception 
sites, ‘five year supply’ sites 
and Neighbourhood Plan 
allocations separately from 
other dwellings completed in 
the countryside.  
• Annually.  
M3 Affordable housing 
completions  S/5 Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on delivery of 
affordable housing.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
295 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Action:  
• [No Specific Action]  
M4 Amount and type of 
completed employment 
floorspace on previously 
developed land   Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on the implementation 
of the development strategy  and 
the use of previously developed 
land.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]   
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Employment compl etions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M5 Percentage of new and 
converted dwellings 
completed on previously 
developed land   Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on the implementation 
of the development strategy and 
the use of previously developed 
land.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger ] 
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M6 Number of new jobs 
created  
 
Amount and type of 
completed and committed 
employment floorspace 
and land  S/5 Delivery of additional 22,000 jobs 
in the district between 2011  and 
2031.  
 
Maintain employment land supply 
to enable delivery of forecast jobs 
in ‘B’ use classes.  Trigger:  
• A net decrease in the number 
of jobs in the district over a 
rolling five year period.  
• Employment land completions 
and commitments dropping 
below 43 ha / 143,000m2.  
 
Action:  • NOMIS (ONS Jobs Density).  
• Business completions and 
commitments (Use Classes 
B1, B2 and B8) produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
296 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action to bring forward 
employment sites consistent 
with the local plan, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Action to secure the timely 
provision of infrastructure.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan, including jobs 
target and employment 
allocations.  
• Consider undertaking co -
operation with other local 
authorities, including through 
duty to co -operate.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
297 
 Chapter 3: Strategic Sites  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M7 Progress and development 
on strategic site allocations  SS/1 – 
SS/8, 
TI/1 To deliver new mixed use 
development or redevelopment at 
Orchard Park, land between 
Huntingdon Road and Histon Road 
(NIAB / Darwin Green), Cambridge 
East, Cambridge Northern Fringe 
East, Northstowe, Waterbeach 
New Town, Bourn Airfield New 
Village, and Cambourne West.  
 
 
 Trigger:  
• Lack of progress in 
comparison with annually 
published housing trajectory.  
 
• Cambridge Northern Fringe 
East AAP: progress against 
agreed Local Development 
Scheme.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Action to secure the timely 
provision of infrastructure.  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan and/or Area Action 
Plan.  
• Consider undertaking co -• Data compiled using (i) 
planning applications and 
committee or delegation 
reports, (ii) housing, business, 
retail and other use 
completions and commitment s 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council, and (iii) the housing 
trajectory including the 
questionnaires completed by 
landowners, developers or 
agents.  
• Progress on delivery of Area 
Action Plans or 
Supplementary Planning 
Docu ments evidenced through 
relevant committee reports.  
• Annually.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
298 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
operation with other local 
authorities, including through 
duty to co -operate.  
 
 
Chapter 4: Climate Change  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M8 Renewable energy 
capacity installed and with  
planning permission by 
type CC/2, 
CC/3  To increase the generation of 
renewable energy within the 
district.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Renewable energy 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
 
M9 Proportion of development 
proposals permitted , for all 
new dwellings and new 
non-residential buildings of 
1,000m2 or more , reducing 
carbon emissions by a 
minimum  of 10% using on 
site renewable and low 
carbon energy 
technologies  CC/3  That all development proposals for 
all new dwellings and new non -
residential buildings of 1,000m2 or 
more will reduce carbon emissions 
by a minimum of 10% using on site 
renewable and low carbon energy 
technologies.  Trigger:  
• For monitoring purposes a 
notional level of 20% or more 
of planning permissions 
granted in a year for  
developments meeting the 
thresholds set out in Policy 
CC/3 without a condition 
applied relating to the policy or 
without the requirement being 
met through the design of the • Data on developments 
permitted meeting the 
thresholds set out in Policy 
CC/3 and whether the 
requirements of the policy 
have been met .  Produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
299 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
proposed development.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger b eing met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.   
M10 Number of planning 
permissions granted where 
the Environment Agency 
initially objected on water 
quality grounds  CC/7  No planning permissions granted 
where the Environment Agency 
initially objected on water quality 
grounds without appropriate 
conditions.  Trigger:  
• One or more developments 
granted planning permission in 
a year against the advice of 
the Environment Agency, 
without appro priate conditions.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Data compiled using (i) 
information published by the 
Environment Agency, (ii) 
information submitted with 
planning applications and 
delegation or committee 
reports, and (iii) conditions 
imposed on planning 
permissions.  
• Annually.  
M11 Number of planning 
permissions granted where 
the Environment Agency 
initially objected on flooding CC/9  No planning permissions granted 
where the Environment Agency 
initially objected on flooding 
grounds without appropriate Trigger:  
• One or more developments 
granted planning permission in 
a year against the advice of • Data compiled using (i) 
information published by the 
Environment Agency, (ii) 
information submitted w ith South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
300 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
grounds  conditions and / or subm ission of a 
satisfactory flood risk assessment.  the Environment Agency, 
without appropriate conditions 
and / or a satisfactory flood 
risk assessment.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  planning applications and 
delegation or committee 
reports, and (iii) conditions 
imposed on planning 
permissions.  
• Annually.  
M12 Proportion of new homes 
permitted achieving water 
consumption levels 
equivalent to 110 litres per 
person per day or less  CC/4  That all new dwellings permitted 
will be designed to achieve water 
consumption levels of 110 litres 
per person per day or less.  Trigger:  
• For monitoring purposes a 
notional level of 20% or more 
of planning permissions 
granted for a new home(s) 
permitte d in a year without a 
condition applied relating to 
the policy.  
   
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the • Data compiled using (i) 
housing data produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council, and (ii) whether a 
condition has been applied to 
the planning permission 
relating to Policy CC/4.  
• Annuall y. South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
301 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Local Plan.  
M13 Proportion of non -
residential developments 
permitted demonstrating a 
minimum water efficiency 
standard equivalent to the 
BREEAM non -residential 
standard for 2 credits for 
water use levels  CC/4  That all suitable non-residential 
developments permitted will be 
designed to achieve a minimum 
water efficiency standard 
equivalent to the BREEAM non -
residential standard for 2 credits 
for water use levels.  Trigger:  
• For monitoring purposes a 
notional level of 20% or more 
of planning permissions 
granted  for suitable non -
residential developments 
permitted in a year without a 
condition applied relating to 
the policy or without the 
requirement being met through 
the design of the proposed 
development.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigge r being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  • Data compiled using (i) non -
residential data produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire Coun ty 
Council, and (ii) whether a 
condition has been applied 
relating to Policy CC/4 and / or 
information submitted with the 
planning application.  
• Annually.  
 
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
302 
 Chapter 6: Protecting and Enhancing the Natural and Historic Environment  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M14 Amount of new 
development completed 
within, or likely to adversely 
affect, internationally or 
nationally important nature 
conservation areas  NH/4, 
NH/5  That there is no new development 
completed within or that will 
adversely affect internationally or 
nationally important nature 
conservation area(s).  Trigger:  
• One or more new 
developments completed in a 
year within or adversely 
affecting an internationally or 
nationally important nature 
conservation area(s).  
 
Action:  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Data compiled by 
Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough Environmental 
Records Centre using (i)  
housing, business, retail and 
other use completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council and (ii) species 
records.  
• Annually.  
M15 Amount of inappropriate 
development permitted in 
the Green Belt  S/4, 
NH/8, 
NH/9, 
NH/10  To restrict inappropriate 
development in the green belt, 
unless, very special circumstances 
have been accepted that outweigh 
any harm caused.  
 
 Trigger:  
• One or more inappropriate 
developments permitted within 
the Green Belt in a year 
without very special 
circumstances having been 
justified.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which • Data compiled using (i) 
information submitted with 
planning applications and 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing, 
business, retail and other use 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Counc il. 
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
303 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
M16 Amount of development 
completed within or 
adjacent to a Protected 
Village Amenity Area 
(PVAA) that would have an 
adverse impact on its 
character, am enity, 
tranquillity or function  NH/11  That land within or adjacent to a 
Protected Village  Amenity Area 
(PVAA) is protected from 
development that would have an 
adverse impact on the character, 
amenity, tranquillity or function.  Trigger:  
• One or more developments 
completed in a year within or 
adjacent to a Protected Village 
Amenity Area (PVAA) th at 
would have an adverse impact 
on the character, amenity, 
tranquillity or function . 
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Data compiled using (i) 
information submitted with 
planning applications and 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing, 
business, retail and other use 
completions produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M17 Amount of development 
completed within a Local 
Green Space that would 
adversely impact on its 
character and particular 
local significance  NH/12  That land designated as a Local 
Green Space is protected from 
development that would adversely 
impact on its cha racter and 
particular local significance, and 
that where inappropriate 
development is completed very 
special circumstances have been 
demonstrated and discussions 
have been undertaken with the Trigger:  
• One or more inappropriate 
developmen ts completed in a 
year within a Local Green 
Space that would adversely 
affect its designation, without 
very special circumstances 
having been demonstrated 
and discussions having been 
undertaken with the local • Data compiled using (i) 
information submitted with 
planning applications and 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing , 
business, retail and other use 
completions produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
304 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
local community.  
 
 community.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances t hat led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Annually.  
M18 Amount of land adjacent to 
an Important Countryside 
Frontage that has been lost 
to development  NH/13  That land adjacent to an Important 
Countryside Frontage is protected 
from development that would 
compromise its purposes.  Trigger:  
• One or more developments 
completed in a year adjacent 
to an Important Countryside 
Frontage that would 
compromise its purposes.  
 
Action:   
Review the  circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Data compiled using (i) 
information submitted with 
planning applications and 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing, 
business, retail and other use 
completions produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M19 Change in areas of 
biodiversity importance 
(international, national and 
local designations)  NH/4, 
NH/5  That there is no loss in the areas 
of biodiversity importance as a 
result of new development where 
no mitigation has been provided.  Trigger:  
• Loss of areas of biodiversity 
importance as a result of new 
development with no 
mitigation provided.  
 • Compiled using (i) GIS layers 
of each of the areas of 
biodiversity importance in 
South Cambridgeshire a nd (ii) 
information from relevant 
officers and / or organisations South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
305 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes  on the reason for the loss.  
• Annually.  
 
 
Chapter 7: Delivering High Quality Homes  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M20 Average net density of all 
completed new housing 
developments on sites of 9 
or more dwellings at urban 
extensions, new 
settlements, Rural Centres, 
Minor Rural Centres, and 
Group Villages  H/8 To deliver an average net density 
of 30 dwellings  per hectare (dph) 
on developments completed in 
Rural Centres, Minor Rural 
Centres and Group Villages.  
 
To deliver an average net density 
of 40 dph on developments 
completed in urban extensions to 
Cambridge and in new 
settlements.  Trigger:  
• For monitoring purposes a 
notional level of delivery of an 
average net density of 25 dph 
or less on developments 
completed in Rural Centres, 
Minor Rural Centres and 
Group Villages.  
• For monitoring purposes a 
notional level of delivery of an 
average net dens ity of 35 dph 
or less on developments 
completed in urban extensions 
to Cambridge and in new 
settlements.  
 • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
306 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Managem ent processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  
M21 Housing completions by 
number of bedrooms  H/9 Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on delivery of a mix of 
housing to meet the needs of 
different groups in the community 
across all housing developments.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
 
M22 Market housing permitted 
on developments of over 
10 dwellings by number of 
bedrooms  H/9 All development proposals of over 
10 dwellings permitted will consist 
of at least 30% 1 or 2 bedroom 
homes; at least 30% 3 bedroom 
homes; and at least 30% 4 or 
more bedroom homes.  Trigger:  
• For monitoring purposes on 
developments of over 10 
dwellings, 25% or less 
dwellings permitted with 1 or 2 
bedrooms, 25% or less 
dwellings permitted with 3 
bedrooms, and / or 25% or 
less dwellings permitted with 4 
or more bedrooms.  
 • Data compiled using housing 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
307 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  
M23 Affordable housing 
completions on rural 
exception sites  H/11  Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on the delivery of 
affordable housing on rural 
exception sites . Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the  
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M24 Progress towards City Deal 
commitment to deliver an 
additional 1,000 new 
homes on rural exception 
sites  To contribute to the delivery of an 
additional 1,000 new homes on 
rural exception sites between 2011 
and 2031, as set out in the City 
Deal agreement (see paragraph 
2.75).  Trigger:  
• No annualised target.  
• At 31 March 2026, actual and 
projected affordable housing 
completions on qualifying sites 
would not meet the 1,000 
homes target.  
• If earlier than 2026, evidence 
indicates that the 1,000 homes 
target may not be achieved.   
 • Data compiled using  (i) 
housing completions and 
commitments produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council and (ii) information 
submitted with planning 
applications and committee or 
delegation reports.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
308 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action to bring forward 
affordable dwellings on 
qualifying sites for 
development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
M25 Gypsy & Traveller pitches 
and Travelling Showpeople 
plots completed  H/20, 
H/21,  
H/22  To deliver permanent Gypsy & 
Traveller pitches, as set out in 
Policy H/20, which identifies that 
no pitches are required under the 
evidence base supporting the 
Local Plan (Gypsy & Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment 
2016).   
 
To deliver at least 11 Travelling 
Showpeople plots between 2011 
and 2031, as set out in Policy 
H/20.  Trigger:  
• Inability to demonstrate 
delivery of permanent Gypsy & 
Traveller pitches between 
2011 and 2031, as set out in 
Policy H/20, if ongoing 
monitoring under M26 
identifies an unmet need.  
• Inability to demonstrate 
delivery of permanent 
Travelling Showpeople plots 
between 2011 and 2031, as 
set out in Policy H/20.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger bei ng met, and then 
take action as appropriate which • Housing completions 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
309 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
may include:  
• Action to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review Needs Assessment.  
• Review of the Local Plan.  
• Consider undertaking co -
operation with other local 
authorities, including through 
duty to co -operate.  
M26 Meeting the needs of those 
that meet the planning 
definition of Gypsies and 
Travellers and those that 
do not meet the definition 
but can demonstrate a 
cultural need for caravan 
accommodation  H/20, 
H/21,  
H/22  Sufficient sites coming forward to 
meet identified needs of those that 
meet the planning definition of 
Gypsies and Travellers and those 
that do not meet the definition but 
can demonstrate a cultural need 
for caravan accommodation.  Trigger:  
• Insufficient sites coming 
forward to meet identified 
needs of those that meet the 
planning defin ition of Gypsies 
and Travellers and those that 
do not meet the definition but 
can demonstrate a cultural 
need for caravan 
accommodation, assessed 
against the Gypsy & Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment 
(GTAA) and ongoing 
monitoring by the local 
housing auth ority.  
 • Gypsy & Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment 
(GTAA)  
• National caravan count which 
is carried out in January and 
July each year.  
• Planning information: planning 
applications, planning appeals, 
enforcement  
• Local Housing Authority 
information  
• Annually and on -going  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
310 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Actions:  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Action to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership wi th 
landowners and developers.  
• Review Needs Assessment  
• Review of the Local Plan.  
• Consider undertaking co -
operation with other local 
authorities, including through 
duty to co -operate.  
M27 Number of caravans on 
unauthorised Gypsy & 
Traveller sites  H/20, 
H/21,  
H/22  Contextual indicator, to provide 
information for the on -going review 
of Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation needs.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information for the on -
going review of Gypsy and 
Traveller accommoda tion 
needs.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • National caravan count which 
is carried out in January and 
July each year.  
• Annually.  
M28 Progress and development 
on residential allocations at H/1 – 
H/5, To deliver new residential 
development at three sites in Trigger:  
• Delay in delivery according to • Data compiled using (i) 
planning applications and South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
311 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
villages (Policy H/1), and at 
Bayer CropScience Site 
(Hauxton), Papworth 
Everard West Central, Fen 
Drayton Former LSA 
Estate, Fulbourn and Ida 
Darwin Hospitals, and 
Histon & Impington Station 
area E/8 Sawston (Dales Manor Business 
Park, land north of B abraham 
Road, land south of Babraham 
Road), Histon & Impington (land 
north of Impington Road), 
Melbourn (land off New Road and 
rear of Victoria Way), Gamlingay 
(Green End Industrial Estate), 
Willingham (land east of Rockmill 
End), and Comberton (land at 
Bennell Farm) allocated through 
Policy H/1.  
 
To deliver residential -led mixed 
use development at the former 
Bayer CropScience site as 
allocated through Policy H/2.  
 
To deliver the redevelopment of 
the Fulbourn and Ida Darwin 
Hospitals site as allocated throu gh 
Policy H/3.  
 
That all proposals for the 
redevelopment of land within 
Papworth West Central area are 
consistent with Policy H/4.  
 
That all proposals within the Fen the annually published 
housing trajectory.   
• Development that does not 
accord with policy 
requirements.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in pa rtnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Action to secure the timely 
provision of infrastructure.  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan, including housing 
allocations.  committee or delegation 
reports, (ii), housing 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council and (iii) the housing 
trajectory including the 
questionnair es completed by 
landowners, developers or 
agents.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
312 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Drayton former LSA estate area 
for the reuse or redevelopment of 
existing buildings no longer 
needed for agricultural purposes 
are consistent with Policy H/5.  
 
To deliver the redevelopment of 
the Histon & Impington Station 
area as allocated through Policy 
E/8. 
M29 Development of Residential 
Moorings at Chesterton 
Fen Road, Milton  H/7 To deliver residential boat 
moorings at Chesterton Fen Road, 
Milton as allocated through Policy 
H/7. Trigger:  
• No delivery of or progress 
towards the completion of 
residential boat moorings at 
Chesterton Fen Road, Milton 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action  to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Consider undertaking co -
operation with other local 
authorities, including through • Data compiled using (i) 
planning applications an d 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
313 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
duty to co -operate.  
M30 Number of homes 
completed to the 
accessible and adaptable 
dwellings M4(2) standard  H/9 That 5% of homes completed on 
developments of 20 or more 
dwellings are built to the 
accessible and adaptable 
dwellings M4(2)  standard.  Trigger:  
• Less than 5% of homes 
completed on eligible 
developments built to the 
accessible and adaptable 
dwellings M4(2) s tandard .  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  • Data compiled using (i) 
planning applic ations and 
committee or delegation 
reports, and (ii) housing 
completions produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M31 Affordable dwellings 
permitted as a percentage 
of all dwellings permitted 
on sites where the policy 
requiring affordable 
dwellings applies  H/10  That all developments of 11 
dwellings or more, or on 
development sites of less than 11 
dwellings if the total floorspace 
exceeds 1,000 m2, permitted will 
provide 40% of the dwellings on 
site as affordable d wellings, unless 
the exceptions listed in Policy H/10 
can be demonstrated.    Trigger:  
• District wide contextual 
indicator to inform Local Plan 
review regarding overall 
percentage achieved.  
• Less than 40% of dwellings on 
all developments of 11 or 
more dwelli ngs, or on 
development sites of less than 
11 dwellings if the total 
floorspace exceeds 1,  000m2, • List of housing developments 
permitted produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cam bridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
314 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
permitted that are anticipated 
to be affordable dwellings 
(unless the exceptions listed in 
Policy H/10 can be 
demonstrated).  
 
Action:  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  
 
 
Chapter 8: Building a Strong and Competitive Economy  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M32 Amount of employment 
land lost to non-
employment uses :  
 
i) total 
ii) within development 
frameworks  
iii) to residential E/14 To limit the amount of employment 
land lost to non -employment uses.  Trigger:  
• Loss of 5 or more hectares of 
employment land to non -
employment uses in a year.  
 
Action : 
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then • Business completions (Use 
Classes B1, B2 and B8) 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
315 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
development  take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  
M33 Amount of completed and 
committed floorspace for 
retail  E/21 – 
E/23 Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on de livery of retail 
developments.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Retail completions and 
commitments produced by 
Research  & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  
M34 Progress and development 
on allocations at 
Cambridge Science Park, 
land south of Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, 
Fulbourn Road East, for 
employment uses (Policies 
E/4 and E/5), Papworth 
Hospital,  Histon & 
Impington Station area, 
Dales Manor Business 
Park (Sawston), Green End 
Industrial Estate 
(Gamlingay), Bayer E/1 – 
E/6, 
E/8, 
H/1:a, 
H/1:f, 
H/2, 
H/4 That all proposals  for employment 
development or redevelopment on 
the Cambridge Science Park are 
consistent with Policy E/1.  
 
To deliver new employment 
development at land south of 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, 
Fulbourn Road East, Longstanton 
(North of Hattons Road), 
Pampisf ord (West of Eastern 
Counties Leather), Over (Norman 
Way) and Papworth Everard 
(Ermine Street South) allocated Trigger:  
• Policy E/1: Cambridge Science 
Park 
o No specific trigger. Monitor 
development on 
Cambridge Science Park 
and compliance with the 
policy.  
 
• Policy E/2: Land south of 
Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus  
o No delivery of, or progress 
towar ds, the completion of • Business, retail and other use 
completions and commitments 
produced by Research & 
Monitoring Team at 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
316 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
CropScience Site 
(Hauxton), and Papworth 
Everard West Central  through Policies E/2 -E/5. 
 
To deliver the reuse or 
redevelopment of the Papworth 
Hospital site as allocated through 
Policy E/6.  
 
To deliver the r edevelopment of 
the Histon & Impington Station 
area as allocated through Policy 
E/8. 
 
To deliver the redevelopment of 
Dales Manor Business Park, 
Sawston as allocated through 
Policy H/1:a.  
 
To deliver the redevelopment of 
Green End Industrial Estate, 
Gamlingay as allocated through 
Policy H/1:f.  
 
To deliver residential -led mixed 
use development at the former 
Bayer CropScience site as 
allocated through Policy H/2.  
 
That all proposals for the 
redevelopment of land within employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policy E/3: Fulbourn Road 
East 
o No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of 
employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policies E/4 and E/5: 
Allocations for Employment 
Uses  
o No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of 
employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policy E/8: Mixed -Use 
Development in Histon & 
Impington Station Area  
o No specific trigger. Monitor 
delivery of mixed uses in 
the policy area.  
 
• Policy H/1a: Dales Manor 
Business Park, Sawston  
o No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
317 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
Papworth West Central area are 
consistent with Policy H/4.  employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policy H/1f: Green End 
Industrial Estate, Gamlingay  
o No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of 
employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policy H/2: Bayer CropScience 
Site, Hauxton  
o No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of 
employment development 
by 31 March 2026.  
 
• Policy H/4: Papworth Everard 
West Central  
o No specific trigger. Monitor 
delivery of mixed uses in  
the policy area.  
 
Action:   
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Action to bring forward sites South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
318 
 Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Action to secure the timely 
provision of infrastructure.  
 
 
Chapter 9: Promoting Successful Communities  
 
Indicator  
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M35 Progress of open space 
allocations  SC/1  To deliver the extensions to 
existing recreation grounds and 
new sites for open space allocated 
through Policy SC/1.  Trigger:  
• No delivery of, or progress 
towards, the completion of the 
open space allocations by 31 
March 2026.  
 
Action:  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, including 
with relevant Parish Councils, and 
then take action as  appropriate 
which may include:  
• Action to bring forward sites 
for development, wherever 
possible in partnership with 
landowners and developers.  
• Review relevant parts of the 
Local Plan.  • Data compiled from the 
Council’s planning database 
and qualitative data  provided 
by Parish Councils.  
• Annually.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
319 
 Indicator  
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M36 Loss of recreation areas, 
allotments and community 
orchards resulting from 
new developments  SC/8  To restrict the loss of recreation 
areas, allotments and community 
orchards to other uses.  Trigger:  
• One or more developments 
completed resulting in the loss 
of recreation areas, allotments 
and community orchards to 
other uses, where the 
requirements of Policy SC/8 
have not been met.  
 
Action:  
Review the circumstances that led 
to the trigger being met, and then 
take action as appropriate which 
may include:  
• Review Development 
Management processes.  • Data compiled using (i) 
housing, business, retail and 
other use completions and 
commitments produced by 
Research & Monitoring Team 
at Cambridgeshire County 
Council and (ii) C ouncil’s 
Recreation Study which 
identifies recreation areas, 
allotments and community 
orchards.  
• Annually.  
M37 Provision of open space, 
outdoor recreation  and 
children’s play space 
resulting from new 
developments  SC/7  Contextual indicator, to provide 
information on the provision of 
allotments, community orchards, 
sports pitches, other outdoor 
sports facilities, and children’s play 
space in new residential 
developments.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Data compiled using  (i) 
housing completions produced 
by Research & Monitoring 
Team at Cambridgeshire 
County Council, (ii) information 
submitted with planning 
applications,  and (iii) 
monitoring of s106 
agreements.  
• Only includes developments 
that are wholly completed or 
where a phase of a major 
development has been wholly South Cambridgeshire Local Plan          Adopted September  2018 
Appendix F  
 
320 
 Indicator  
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
completed.  
• Annually.  
 
 
Chapter 10: Promoting and Delivering Sustainable Transport and Infrastructure  
 
Indicator 
Number  Indicator Description  Policy  Target  Triggers and Actions  Data Source and Frequency of 
Monitoring  
M38 Investment secured for 
infrastructure and 
community facilities 
through developer 
contributions  TI/8 Contextual indicator, to provide 
information regarding securing of 
necessary facilities and / or 
contributions to support all new 
development.  Trigger:  
• [No specific trigger]  
• Contextual indicator, to 
provide information on the 
implementation of policies to 
inform Local Plan review.  
 
Action:  
• [No specific action]  • Monitoring of contributions 
secured through s106 
agreements and CIL compiled 
by South Cambridgeshire  
District Council and 
Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
• Requirements for the 
implementation and monitoring 
of CIL are detailed in the CIL 
Regulations. Once South 
Cambridgeshire District 
Council has adopted a CIL 
Charging Schedule, 
information on the collectio n 
and spending of monies will be 
included in the Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
• Annually.  
 
 South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix G  
 
321 
 Appendix G: Local Plan  – Superseded Documents a nd Policies  
 
Development Plan Documents  
Current 
Document  Adopted  Superseded by the Local 
Plan?  Notes  
South 
Cambridgeshire 
Local Plan 
policy CNF6  2004  YES This applies to an area of 
Chesterton Fen Road, 
Cambridge and deals with  
applications for Gypsy sites.  
The Core 
Strategy DPD  2007  YES  
Development 
Control Policies 
DPD  2007  YES  
Site Specific 
Policies DPD  2010  YES  
The Northstowe  
Area Action 
Plan 2007  NO 
(excluding policy  NS/3 (1g), 
which is superseded  by 
Policy SS/5 Northstowe 
Extension   
Cambridge 
Southern 
Fringe Area 
Action Plan  2008  NO  
Cambridge 
East Area 
Action Plan  2008  NO 
(excluding policies CE/3 and  
CE/35, which are 
superseded  by Policy SS/3 
Cambridge East )  
North West 
Cambridge 
Area Action 
Plan  2009  NO  
Cambridgeshire 
and 
Peterborough 
Minerals and 
Waste Local 
Development 
Framework  2011  NO  
  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix G  
 
322 
 Supplementary Planning Documents  
SPD Adopted  Adds detail and guidance 
regarding the following 
plan policies  Status after Local Plan 
adoption  
Cottenham 
Village Design 
Statement  2007  Very long list of policies 
included  from the Core 
Strategy and DC Policies 
DPDs.  SPD will need  review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the  Local Plan  
Development 
Affecting 
Conservation 
Areas  2009  DC Policies DPD policy 
CH/5  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary t o 
relate to the Local Plan  
Open Space in 
New 
Developments  2009  DC Policies DPD policies 
SF/10 and SF/11  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
Public Art  2009  DC Policies DPD policy 
SF/6  
 
Also supports AAP policies 
in the:  
Northstowe Area Action 
Plan (adopted July 2007)  
• Cambridge East AAP – 
prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(adopted February 2008)  
• Cambridge Southern 
Fringe AAP (adopted 
February 2008)  
• North -West Cambridge 
AAP – prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(Submission – May 2008)  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan, but 
will remain in place until 
then to guide proposals 
coming forward in the AAP 
areas.  
Trees and 
Development 
Sites  2009  DC policies DP/1 ,  DP/2 in 
particular parts b, j, k, and l , 
DP/3 in particular parts m 
and o , NE/6, CH/5  
 
Also supports AAP policies 
in the:  
Northstowe Area Action 
Plan (adopted July 2007)  
• Cambridge East AAP – 
prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(adopted February 2008)  
• Cambridge Southern 
Fringe AAP (adopted 
February 2008)  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan, but 
will remain in place until 
then to guide proposals 
coming forward in the AAP 
areas.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix G  
 
323 
 Supplementary Planning Documents  
SPD Adopted  Adds detail and guidance 
regarding the following 
plan policies  Status after Local Plan 
adoption  
Biodiversity  2009  DC Policies: DP/1 in 
particular part o , DP/2 in 
particular parts b, k and l , 
DP/3 – in particular part o , 
GB/2, GB/3 , GB/5 , NE/4, 
NE/5 NE/6 , NE/7 , CH/1 
 
Also supports AAP policies 
in the:  
Northstowe Area Action 
Plan (adopted July 2007)  
• Cambridge East AAP – 
prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(adopted February 2008)  
• Cambridge Southern 
Fringe AAP (adopted 
February 2008)  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan, but 
will remain in place until 
then to guide proposals 
coming forward in the AAP 
areas.  
Listed Buildings  2009  DC Policies DPD policies 
CH/3 and CH/4  SPD wi ll need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
District Design 
Guide  2010  DC Policies DPD policies 
DP/1 and DP/2  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
Affordable 
Housing  2010  DC Policies DPD policies 
HG3, HG4, HG5.  
 
Also supports AAP policies 
in the:  
Northstowe Area Action 
Plan (adopted July 2007)  
• Cambridge East AAP – 
prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(adopted February 2008)  
• Cambridge Southern 
Fringe AAP (adopted 
February 2008)  
• North -West Cambridge 
AAP – prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(Submission – May 2008)  SPD will need updating to 
relate to the Local Plan, but 
will remain in place until 
then to guide proposals 
coming forward in the AAP 
areas.  South Cambridgeshire Local Plan      Adopted September  2018 
Appendix G  
 
324 
 Supplementary Planning Documents  
SPD Adopted  Adds detail and guidance 
regarding the following 
plan policies  Status after Local Plan 
adoption  
Landscape in 
New 
Developments  2010  DC Policies DPD policies 
DP/1 in particular part o , 
DP/2 – in particular parts b , k 
and l , DP/3 – in particular 
part o , GB/2, GB/3 , GB/5, 
NE/4, NE/5 , NE/6 , NE/7 , 
CH/1 . 
 
Also supports AAP policies 
in the:  
Northstowe  Area Action 
Plan (adopted July 2007)  
• Cambridge East AAP – 
prepared jointly with 
Cambridge City Council  
(adopted February 2008)  
• Cambridge Southern 
Fringe AAP (adopted 
February 2008)  
 SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local  Plan, but 
will remain in place until 
then to guide proposals 
coming forward in the AAP 
areas.  
Health Impact 
Assessment  2011  DC Policies DP/1, DP/2, 
DP/3, NE/1, NE/2, NE/3, 
NE/16.  
 
Site Specific Policy SP/1  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
Orchard Park 
Design 
Guidance  2011  Site Specific Policies SP/1  SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
Fen Drayton 
Former Land 
Settlement 
Association 
Estate  2011  Site Specific Policies SP/1 1 SPD will need review and  
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
Cambridgeshire 
Flood and 
Water SPD  2016  DC Policies DP/1, DP/4, 
NE/6, NE/8, NE/9, NE/10, 
NE/11, NE/12  SPD will need review and 
updating if necessary to 
relate to the Local Plan  
 
 
 