www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire  Local Plan
Core Strategy
2006 - 2027
South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 2
Contents  
    Page
1.  Introduction  6
  Planning for the future  6
  National context  7
  Partnership workin
g 7
  Developing the Core Str
ategy  8
  Strategy for developm
ent – summary statement  10
 
2.  Setting the scene (Spat
ial Portrait)  12
3.  Key issues  15
4.  Visions, strategic ob
jectives and strategy for development  20
Part 1 - General Core Strategy Policies  
 5.
  High quality design & res
ponding to climate change  31
  High quality design  32
  Green infrastructur
e 37
  Renewable and low carb
on energy generation  41
  Renewable or low carbon d
istrict heat networks  43
6.  Managing future develo
pment  46
  Presumption in favour of su
stainable development  47
  Location of developme
nt 48 
  Infrastructure & de
veloper contributions  52
7.  Tackling congestion & i
mproving accessibility  54
  Strategic transport in
frastructure  54
  Improving accessibilit
y  61
8.  Managing the environm
ent & heritage  64
  Managing the environm
ent & heritage  65 
  Minerals  69
9.  Maintaining economi
c prosperity  72
  Distribution of economic d
evelopment land  74 
  Safeguarded areas f
or economic development  75
  Non-safeguarded econ
omic development sites  79
  Town centres & retail  80
10.  Providing housing & com
munity infrastructure  85
  Distribution of housin
g  86
  Housing density  89
  Housing diversity  90 
  Affordable housing  92Front cover: top: Prowse Close, Thornbury, middle: National Composites Centre, bottom: Severn Bridge, Aust.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 3
    Page
  Rural housing exceptio
n sites  96
  Extra Care Housing  99
  Gypsy & Traveller accomm
odation  100
  Travelling showpeople
  103
  Community infrastruc
ture & cultural activity  104
  Green infrastructure
, sport and recreation standards  106
 
Part 2 - Spatial strategy  
11.  Introduction to part 2  111
12.   Communities of the Nort
h Fringe of Bristol Urban Area  113
   Cribbs/Patchway New N
eighbourhood
   East of Harry Stoke New Nei
ghbourhood
   The University of the West o
f England  
13.   Communities of the East F
ringe of Bristol Urban Area  129
14.   Yate and Chipping Sodbu
ry 136
   North Yate New Neighbou
rhood
15.   Thornbury  147
  
16.   Rural areas  153
 
17.   Severnside  158
 18.
  Major infrastructur
e projects  165
  Nuclear power station
s in the Oldbury on Severn area  171
  Severn Tidal Power  176
19.  Implementation and monit
oring  177 
 
Appendices  
1 Local plans and strateg
ies 188 
2 Replaced Local Plan pol
icies 189
3 Green Infrastructur
e Assets  190
4 Extract from the Strate
gic Housing Market Assessment  191
5 Green infrastructur
e, sport and recreation standards  192
6 Coal resources  193
7 Coal mining legacy  194
8 Nuclear safeguarding (
consultation) zones  195
Glossary of Terms  196
Key Diagram  204South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 4
List of Policies
CS1 High quality design       32 
CS2 Green infrastructure       37
CS3 Renewable and low carbon
 energy generation       41
CS4 Renewable or low carbon di
strict heat networks       43
CS4a  Presumption in favour of sus
tainable development       47
CS5 Location of developmen
t (inc.G reen B elt) 48
CS6 Infrastructure and de
veloper contributions       52
CS7 Strategic transport in
frastructure       54
CS8 Improving accessibili
ty      61
CS9 Managing the environme
nt and heritage       65
CS10  Minerals       69
CS11  Distribution of economic de
velopment land       74
CS12  Safeguarded areas for ec
onomic development       75
CS13  Non-safeguarded econ
omic development sites       79
CS14  Town centres and retail       80
CS15  Distribution of housing       86
CS16  Housing density       89
CS17  Housing diversity       90
CS18  Affordable housing       92
CS19  Rural housing exception si
tes      96
CS20  Extra care housing       99
CS21  Gypsy and Traveller accom
modation       100
CS22  Travelling showpeople       103
CS23  Community infrastruct
ure and cultural activity       104
CS24  Green Infrastructure
, sport and recreation standards       106
CS25  Communities of the North F
ringe of Bristol Urban Area       116
CS26  Cribbs / Patchway new neig
hbourhood       120
CS27  East of Harry Stoke new neig
hbourhood       124
CS28  The University of the West of E
ngland       127
CS29  Communities of the East Fr
inge of Bristol Urban Area       133
CS30  Yate and Chipping Sodbury       139
CS31  North Yate new neighbour
hood       143
CS32  Thornbury       149
CS33  Housing opportunity       150
CS34  Rural Areas       154
CS35  Severnside       159
CS36  Proposals for major infr
astructure projects       165
CS37  Nuclear related develop
ment       172www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 5
Abbreviations  
AONB     Area of Outstanding Nat ural Beauty
AMR     Authority Monitoring
 Report
BfL    Buildings for Life
B
REEAM    Building Research
 Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
CHP     Combined Heat and Powe
r
CIL    Community Infrast
ructure Levy
CS     Core Strategy
D&A     Design and Access State
ment
DCLG/CLG   Department of Commun
ities and Local Government
DfT    Department for Tr
ansport
DPD     Development Plan 
Document
DTLR     Department of Transp
ort, Local Government and the Regions
EC     European Community
G
I     Green Infrastructu
re
GTAA     Gypsy and Traveller Acc
ommodation Assessment
HCA     Homes and Communities
 Agency
HGV     Heavy Goods Vehic
le
JLTP     Joint Local Transpor
t Plan
M&WLP    Minerals and Waste Loc
al Plan
MOD     Ministry of Defen
ce
NHS     National Health Servic
e
NPS    National Policy S
tatement
PCT    Primary Care Trus
t
PPS    Planning Policy 
Statement
RFA2     Regional Funding Allo
cation/Advice
RSPB     Royal Society for the Pr
otection of Birds
RSS    Regional Spatial Str
ategy
RT     Rapid Transit
S106     Section 106 Agree
ment
SA     Sustainability App
raisal
SGC     South Gloucester
shire Council
SGLP     South Gloucestersh
ire Local Plan
SHLAA    Strategic Housing Lan
d Availability Assessment
SHMA     Strategic Housing Mar
ket Assessment
SPD    Supplementary Pla
nning Document
SuDS     Sustainable Drain
age Systems
UKBAP    UK Biodiversity Action P
lan
UWE     University of the West of E
ngland
WEP     West of England Partne
rship
WoE     West of EnglandSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 6
1. Introduction
Planning for the future
1.1    Planning shapes the places where people live and work and the country we live in. In 
South Gloucestersh
ire we believe good planning should make a positive difference 
to our lives and help to deliver homes, jobs, and better opportunities for all, whilst balancing this against protecting and enhancing the District’s high quality natural and historic environment, and conserving the countryside and open spaces. The Council has identified sustainable development as a core principle underpinning all the things we do, where sustainable development is defined as development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
1.2
    In South Gloucestersh
ire planning, therefore, has a key role to play in the creation of 
‘sustainable communities’ i.e. communities that will stand the test of time, where people want to live, and which will enable people to meet their aspirations and potential. Having up to date and effective statutory planning policies to direct the use and management of land and to make and decide planning applications is essential to create sustainable communities. The Council’s approach is to set out how growth will be managed over the period up to 2027 through a locally driven growth strategy. The document also includes a suite of planning policies which can be used for the management of development and in determining planning applications. Proposals which are acceptable in terms of the policies in the Core Strategy and other documents in the Local Plan, and which are in general consistency with national policy, therefore, represent sustainable development for South Gloucestershire.
The South Gloucestershire Local Plan 
1.3    The Local Plan for South Gloucestershire will comprise three documents. The Core Strategy is the key docum 
ent forming the strategic component of the Council’s new Local 
Plan. It sets out a vision for the area based on evidence, community objectives and the detailed spatial strategy for future development in South Gloucestershire to 2027. Also included are policies and programmes for the general location of new development, its type and scale, and the resources to deliver it, as well as the protection of what is valued about the area. 
1.4
    The Core Strategy repla
ces certain South Gloucestershire Local Plan and Minerals & 
Waste Local Plan policies. These are listed in Appendix 2. 
1.5    The adopted Joint Waste C
ore Strategy sits alongside the Core Strategy, see para 1.14. 
The third document in the Local Plan is the Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document (DPD), which is also known as the Policies, Sites and Places Plan. 
1.6
    Policies, Sites and Pl
aces Development Plan Document (DPD) – This will contain 
non-strategic site allocations, for example town centre boundaries, any changes to village www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 7
settlement boundaries and the detailed development management policies. Work on this 
document commenced during 2013. 
1.7    The Local Plan is support
ed by Supplementary Planning Documents. The programme for 
the preparation of these is set out in the Local Development Scheme (now known as the Local Plan Delivery Programme), which is updated and rolled forward annually. This can be viewed on our website www.southglos.gov.uk.  
Neighbourhood planning
1.8    Local communities now have the option to undertake Neighbourhood Planning to cover non-strateg 
ic planning policy issues for their areas. Parish and Town Councils 
(and neighbourhood forums in un-parished areas) have three mechanisms by which to undertake this; Neighbourhood Plans, Neighbourhood Development Orders and Community Right to Build Orders.
National context 
1.9    The Core Strategy has been prepared and maintained having regard to national planning policy. The document does n 
ot repeat national policies, but aims to express their 
objectives.
Partnership working
1.10  As a spatial plan the Core Strategy does not just consider land use, but ‘joins-up’ with the plans and strategies of o 
ther organisations and agencies, as well as with our own, so that 
we are all working in the same direction. The preparation of the Core Strategy would have not been possible without the engagement and involvement of a wide range of people and organisations all of whom are committed to making South Gloucestershire a great place to live and work. The Council is grateful to all our partners for their involvement in contributing to the Core Strategy. In particular, parish and town councils, voluntary and community groups, local businesses and public sector agencies that work actively in our communities. The Council works with a wide range of partners, both statutory and non-statutory. The partnerships that are formed will vary both geographically and thematically throughout the period of the Core Strategy. 
1.11
  The Core Strategy has be
en prepared to be closely integrated with the South 
Gloucestershire Sustainable Community Strategy and the work we are doing with the other West of England Authorities: Bristol City, Bath and North East Somerset and North Somerset Councils, the Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) and the Local Nature Partnership (LNP).
South Gloucestershire Sustainable Community Strategy
1.12
  The Core Strategy is the k
ey strategy for delivering the spatial elements of the South 
Gloucestershire 2026 Sustainable Community Strategy. This strategy was first adopted in South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 8
January 2008 and refreshed in 2011 and sets out the shared vision and key priorities for 
the future of the area as identified and shaped by its people and partners.
1.13  The alignment of the Susta
inable Community Strategy and the documents of the Local 
Plan will enable an integrated approach towards future development within South Gloucestershire and provide a framework for the delivery of sustainable development, working with our partners in Health, the Police and emergency services at a local level, the LEP , the LNP and the voluntary/community sector. This cooperation is key to the cohesive delivery of the aspirations of South Gloucestershire’s communities. 
Working with our neighbouring Unitary Authorities 
1.14
  Joint Waste Core Stra
tegy - Along with Bristol, Bath & North East Somerset and North 
Somerset Councils, we have produced a Joint Waste Core Strategy, which is part of 
our Local Plan. This document sets out the vision and strategy for managing waste and the spatial strategy for delivering strategic recovery facilities. The Joint Waste Core Strategy does not just provide the strategy for waste facilities, but it also addresses waste minimisation and the opportunities for generating heat from waste. There therefore needs to be close integration between this document and the Core Strategy. The Joint Waste Core Strategy was adopted in March 2011.
1.15
  Our Future Transport - Th
e Joint Local Transport Plan 3 (2011 – 2026) (JLTP3) was 
adopted by the West of England (WoE) authorities in December 2010 and January 2011. Its vision is for a transport system that strengthens the local economy, improves access, ensures alternatives to the car are a realistic first choice as well as being affordable, safe, secure, reliable, simple to use and available to all. To deliver the JLTP3, we are working with the other WoE authorities, the WoE Local Enterprise Partnership, the Highways Agency, Network Rail and public transport operators.
1.16
  The local level plans and st
rategies which we think are the most relevant to the South 
Gloucestershire Core Strategy are listed in Appendix 1.
Developing the Core Strategy 
1.17  In developing the Core Strategy, the Council has worked closely with local community representatives, a r 
ange of key stakeholders both within the Council and supporting 
partners and agencies, developers and major landowners. This has been supported by public consultation and engagement at various stages. Feedback from these activities has informed the spatial strategy and the wording of policies. 
1.18
  This approach has been co
nsistent with the plan making regulations and national 
policy prevailing at the various stages of Core Strategy preparation which required local authorities to engage key stakeholders in timely and effective discussions. 
1.19
  Reports detailing all th
e engagement that has been undertaken in the preparation of this 
Core Strategy are available and can be viewed/downloaded from www.southglos.gov.uk/corestrategy .www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 9
1.20  The Core Strategy must contribute to the delivery of sustainable development. The 
Sustainability Appr
aisal (SA) process is carried out during the preparation of a plan 
to assess the economic, social and environmental impact of emerging policies. The Sustainability Appraisal Report that accompanies this document provides assessments of the policies and proposals contained in this document, as well as appraisals of alternatives to ensure that the most sustainable options have been chosen. The Sustainability Appraisal Report can be viewed/downloaded from www.southglos.gov.uk/corestrategy .
1.21
 The Core Strategy is comp
rised of three main elements: 
1.22  The first part sets out set
s out the role and purpose of the Core Strategy. This includes the 
spatial portrait of the district as at 2010, key issues and development vision, along with spatial objectives and a development strategy. 
1.23
  The second part of the docum
ent builds on information above and sets out the 
overarching policies to provide strategic alignment with the Sustainable Community Strategy, join up with other plans and programmes, and fulfil South Gloucestershire Council’s high level objectives for tackling climate change and delivering sustainable communities. There are six chapters with 25 cross-cutting policies, based on the following themes:
		❙
 Responding to Climate Ch
ange and High Quality Design; 
  ❙ Managing Future Developm
ent; 
  ❙ Tackling Congestion a
nd Improving Accessibility; 
  ❙ Managing the Environm
ent and Heritage; 
  ❙ Maintaining Economic Pr
osperity; and  
  ❙ Providing Housing an
d Community Infrastructure.
1.24  The final part of the documen
t deals with issues facing each part of the district and 
sets out spatial policies to achieve priorities such as mixed and balanced communities, economic development, job creation and transport investment. Core Strategies are required to be spatial in nature and to set out a strategy to deliver their overall vision and key objectives. This area based approach contains 11 ‘place making’ polices that will effectively guide future investment and other plans, policies and programmes to achieve strong and prosperous sustainable communities in each of the six spatial areas of the district. The six spatial areas are:
		❙
 Communities of the North Frin
ge of Bristol urban area; 
		❙  Communities of the East Fringe o
f Bristol urban area; 
		❙  Yate/Chipping Sodbur
y;  
		❙  Thornbury;  
		❙  Rural Areas; and 
		❙  Severnside.
1.25  This part of the document al
so contains a chapter on major infrastructure projects, 
including two policies on the approach to the consideration of major infrastructure applications and the proposal for a nuclear power station at Oldbury on Severn.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 10
Strategy for development – Summary statement 
1.26  South Gloucestershire has experienced considerable change throughout the past half 
century. In the period up to 20
27 the district faces the challenge of continuing to ensure 
that growth that has taken place and that which is further planned does so in a way that supports the Council’s commitment to sustainable communities. Responding to and managing the impact and pressure of new development is therefore a key challenge. This is even more so when the longer term effects of climate change, rising child and adult obesity, the needs of an aging population and supporting economic growth and job creation are recognised. To respond successfully, South Gloucestershire Council has prepared and published its Core Strategy. This sets out the development vision, spatial strategy and the policies needed to achieve sustainable development. The Council recognises the important role that ‘bottom up’ community led planning has played and will continue to play in this process.
1.27
  Overall the Core Strat
egy makes provision for 28,355 new homes in the period 2006-
2027. Of this total some 5,810 dwellings have been completed between 2006/7-2012/13 requiring up to 22,545 additional new homes between 2013 and 2027. To provide this new housing and the necessary infrastructure to support sustainable communities, the plan’s Strategy for Development concentrates new development within the Bristol North Fringe/East Fringe urban areas, in places where essential infrastructure is in place or planned. This will reduce the need to travel and commute, accompanied by a package of public transport measures and supported by other community infrastructure.
1.28
  Development in the North F
ringe of Bristol is focused at two key areas. At Patchway/ 
Cribbs Causeway land is allocated for 2,400 dwellings/14ha of employment land at Charlton Hayes. Further strategic provision is also made for new neighbourhoods of up to 5,700 homes, around 50 ha. of employment uses, local services and facilities on land bounded by the Hallen railway line, the M5 motorway, the existing residential community of Patchway, the emerging community of Charlton Hayes and the A38. The second key area is West of the M32/ East of Harry Stoke where, in the first five years of the plan, a major element of the 2,600 dwellings planned to be delivered at three key sites Wallscourt Farm, Harry Stoke and land East of Coldharbour Lane will be completed. Provision will also be made for a major mixed use development of 2,000 dwellings with associated infrastructure on land east of Harry Stoke, extending south from Winterbourne Road to the A4174 Avon Ring Road. In the East Fringe of Bristol, a major mixed-use development on 177ha of land at Emersons Green East comprising in the region of 2,400 dwellings, a Science park (25ha) and 19ha of employment land is identified. 
1.29
  Outside the Bristol urban a
rea, development land will be provided in Yate/ Chipping 
Sodbury and Thornbury, to promote greater self-containment of these settlements. Within villages, the focus will be on supporting existing services and providing for new limited housing development by working with our communities through the principle of ‘bottom up’ community planning. At Yate and Chipping Sodbury, their separate but inter-related roles will be developed, achieving greater self-containment and strengthening the vitality of the towns as service centres, including major investment in Yate town centre, employment areas to the west of the Town and a new foodstore in Chipping Sodbury. A new neighbourhood of 2,700 new homes up to 2027 (with up to 3,000 new homes in total), including new sewerage infrastructure is planned at north Yate. This received www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 11
planning permission in 2013. Limited development of up to 800 new homes on two sites 
north of Park Farm and Morton Way which received planning permission in 2013 is also planned at Thornbury, and employment development at Severnside will be supported, subject to ecological/ biodiversity issues.
1.30
  The National Policy Stateme
nt for Energy Infrastructure on Nuclear Power Generation 
(EN-6) (NPS) has identified a site adjacent to the existing nuclear power station near Oldbury on Severn as potentially suitable for a new nuclear power station by 2025. As a result, the Council will need to evaluate the impacts and opportunities of both the listing of the site in the NPS and the emerging proposals for the power station and its associated development from the developer and make the case for appropriate planning mitigation, compensation and legitimate community benefit. Further details are set out in Chapter 18 – Major Infrastructure Projects.
1.31
  In promoting this Stra
tegy for Development, the Council has sought to limit the impact of 
new housing development on the Green Belt. The Council remains in principle opposed to significantly reducing the Green Belt to accommodate land for housing growth per se, where development proposals would be contrary to the Council’s adopted development plan. However, in order to meet the need for housing in sustainable locations, two areas of Green Belt have been released in the North Fringe of Bristol, to the west of the M32 and to the west of the A4018 at Cribbs Causeway. 
1.32
  The Plan provides a sens
ible strategy for the sustainable development of South 
Gloucestershire. It will ensure a rolling and deliverable supply of land for housing is available in the short to medium term to achieve new growth that is phased with the delivery of the necessary infrastructure required to support sustainable communities, while protecting and enhancing the District’s high quality natural and historic environment, and conserving the countryside and open spaces.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 12
2. Setting the scene
2.1   South Gloucestershire is situated within the West of England, lying to the north and east 
of Bristol. The West of Eng
land has a population of around 1.1 million, with a working 
population of 510,000. South Gloucestershire has close links, particularly transport and economic, with Bristol City. In addition, the villages in the north and east of the District have close functional links with places in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire and Bath and North East Somerset. South Gloucestershire covers an area of 497 square kilometres and has a population of 264,800. The settlement pattern is characterised by urban development within the North
1 and East2 Fringes of Bristol and a large rural area containing the towns of 
Yate/Chipping Sodbury (population 34,500) and Thornbury (population 12,500) and over 30 villages.  60% of the population live within the urban area, 19% within the two towns and 21% within the rural areas. 
2.2
  South Gloucestershi
re has seen substantial levels of development throughout the past 
half century (the population has grown by 13% in the last 15 years and by 23% in the last 25), but this development has not been matched by the provision of essential physical and social infrastructure. The heart of this growth is located to the south of the junction of the M4 and M5 motorways around the intersection of the north/south east/west rail links in the vicinity of Stoke Gifford and Bradley Stoke. Cribbs Causeway provides the largest concentration of shopping and leisure facilities in the District and is a major source of employment.
2.3
  Substantial growth has als
o taken place in the East Fringe of Bristol at Longwell Green 
and Emersons Green and, beyond the Green Belt, at Yate/Chipping Sodbury.  This expansion is currently contained by the Green Belt and motorways.  
2.4
  South Gloucestershi
re has many contrasting landscapes, ranging from the distinctive 
scarp and hills of the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty to the flat expanses of the Severn levels and the urban landscape around the edge of Bristol.  Many landscapes have undergone significant change as a result of the expansion of the Bristol urban area.
2.5
  Relics of historic settlemen
ts and the industrial past (coal mining and manufacturing) 
texture the landscape.  A rich and varied heritage of historic buildings, settlements, parks and gardens and archaeological features make an important contribution to the character of the area. South Gloucestershire also has a rich natural environment and an array of ecological assets, from international designations in the Severn Estuary to species of critical importance for local biodiversity. The Severn Levels is also an area of high archaeological potential.  
¹ the North Fringe includes the communities of Filton, Patchway, Bradley Stoke, Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay
²  the East Fringe includ
es Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, Warmley, Cadbury 
Heath, Oldland Common, Longwell Green and Hanhamwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
13
Map 1: Setting the scene
2.6
  
The population structure is very similar to the national average, with 20% aged under 
16 years, 65% aged 16 – 64 year
s and 15% in the 65 years and over age group. The 
proportion who are in employment is, however, higher than the national average (86% 
compared to 78%), reflecting the strong economy of the area. The service sector provides 
the majority of jobs in the area (78%), while the number of jobs in the manufacturing 
sector is higher than the national average because the aerospace industry is a major 
employer.
2.7
    
Congestion hot spots ar
e a significant problem. Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) 
have been declared due to the levels of traffic related air pollution. It is estimated that 
at least £350m is lost to the economy of the West of England area each year due to 
journeys delayed as a result of congestion.  Since 1991 traffic on the roads of South 
Gloucestershire has increased by 30% (compared to the national average of 21%), but 
Green Belt 
AONB 
Green Belt and AONB 
Main Settlements 
Rest of South Gloucestershire
 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
NSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
14
within the North Fringe of Bristol traffic has increased by 50%.  More households in South 
Gloucestershire have access to a car than the national average (87% compared to 73%) 
and the proportion of households with 2 or more cars is significantly higher than the 
national average (42% compared to 29%). Improvements have been made to the public 
transport system, but traffic congestion continues to adversely affect bus journey times 
and reliability.
2.8
 
South Gloucestershi
re has many diverse and separate communities.  
2.9
  
In the North and East Fringe
s of Bristol urban area, communities have grown up around 
historic settlements, many based on manufacturing/industrial tradition and non-conformist 
heritage. The North Fringe includes the communities of Filton, Patchway, Bradley Stoke, 
Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay, while the East Fringe includes the communities 
of Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, 
Warmley, Cadbury Heath, Oldland Common, Longwell Green and Hanham.  These areas 
have experienced substantial change, much of which has driven the economic success 
of the Greater Bristol area as a whole, but this has also created tension with protecting 
the distinctiveness and heritage of these individual communities. However, these 
communities aspire to maintain a strong and separate identity which is clearly distinctive 
from Bristol.  
2.10
  
Chipping Sodbury is a marke
t town with origins dating back many centuries.  The centre 
of the town is a Conservation Area and has remained the focus for later housing and 
community development.  The market town of Yate also has early foundations and a 
mining heritage, but was subject to substantial housing development in the late 1960s 
and 70s, and significant housing development continued until the late 1990s. The two 
towns have grown to adjoin one another and their communities benefit from the towns’ 
complementary roles and services.
2.11
  
Thornbury originated a
s a medieval market town and has an historic core on its western 
side centred around the High Street, Castle Street and Thornbury Castle. The town 
experienced significant housing development in the 1960s and 70s.Thornbury has a good 
range of services and facilities, and its proximity to Bristol and the motorway network has 
made it a popular place from which to commute. 
2.12
  
Avonmouth – Severnsi
de is located next to the River Severn to the west of the M49 and 
the urban area of Bristol. Due to planning permissions granted in 1957/58 covering 
approximately 650 hectares, the area has been recognised for some years as a potential 
major employment location. However, there are significant ecological, flooding and 
transport constraints to be overcome before this potential can be fully realised.  
2.13
  
There are over 30 villag
es in the rural area of South Gloucestershire, many of which have 
a mining or manufacturing heritage. These range from small hamlets to settlements with 
several thousand people.  The physical characteristics of the villages also vary greatly. A 
number of rural settlements are within the River Severn flood plain, while others are within 
the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and/or Green Belt.  All villages have 
and continue to experience the impact of ‘urban sprawl’ while coping with a decline in 
local services and facilities, poor access to local jobs, and a lack of affordable housing. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
15
3.
 
Key issues 
3.1
    
South Gloucestershire is a complex and diverse area.  To respond to the challenges 
of delivering sustaina
ble development we have identified the following 8 key issues.  
These key issues have been developed with our partners and communities who have 
contributed to the preparation of the Core Strategy. Our partners are comprised of parish 
and town councils, voluntary and community groups, local businesses and public sector 
agencies.  The Council is committed to addressing the issues that local communities 
feel are important to their social, economic and environmental well-being in a way which 
draws on the energy and expertise of all. 
 
Key Issue 1 - Reducing and Ad
apting to Climate Change
3.2
  
Scientific research ind
icates that climate change is occurring as a direct result of global 
warming brought about largely by the man-made increase in greenhouse gases. Activities 
in South Gloucestershire contribute slightly higher emissions than the UK average per 
year and significantly higher than the South West average. Energy consumption by 
businesses, homes and road transport is a major contributor to these emissions. There is 
a need to reduce emissions by living and working in more sustainable ways.
3.3
  
There is also a need to adap
t to likely changes in our environment resulting from climate 
change, in particular the increased risk of flooding associated with the River Severn. 
3.4
  
The Council has a leadersh
ip and facilitation role to play, in conjunction with its public 
and private partners, in managing the impact of climate change. This is expressed in its 
Sustainable Community Strategy, and Climate Change Strategy. The Local Plan, and in 
particular the Core Strategy, is a key policy document that supports this agenda.  
3.5
 
The challenge of climate c
hange is twofold: 
    
Mitigation
 is the act of re
ducing greenhouse gas emissions (such as carbon dioxide) 
thereby slowing and reducing as much as possible the amount of climate change that we 
are likely to experience.  This includes activities such as reducing car use and switching to 
renewable forms of energy.  
    
Adaptation
 is the act of pl
anning to deal with a change in climate and the impacts arising 
from it, such as overheating buildings, increased likelihoods of flooding, water shortage 
and changes in ecology.  Adaptation accepts that at least some climate change is 
inevitable and that we need to act to deal with it.
3.6
  
Living and working in les
s carbon intensive ways also: increases the resilience of 
residents and businesses to energy price rises and decreases energy security; 
provides economic opportunities for sustainable energy and environmental industries 
and encourages healthier ways of life.  South Gloucestershire is well placed to take 
advantage of these opportunities drawing on its high-tech industries, strong educational South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
16
establishments, varied landscapes and skilled communities.
3.7
  
Development can assist i
n low carbon transition and adaptation to climate change, for 
example, by providing new energy, home insulation and transportation opportunities for 
existing and new communities, improving habitat connectivity and ensuring that new 
development is not at risk of flooding or increasing flood risk elsewhere.
 
Key Issue 2 – Managing Futu
re Development
3.8
  
A key challenge is to accom
modate new housing and jobs in a way which enables 
people to make sustainable transport choices while keeping impacts on the existing 
natural and built environment to a minimum. Successful new neighbourhoods must 
integrate with existing communities, in a way that promotes cohesion, sense of place and 
be well designed.  Most importantly, new development must contribute and strengthen 
community identity. The services and facilities needed to support new development must 
be delivered at the right time.
3.9
  
Housebuilding in rec
ent years has been lower than expected. The economic downturn 
has seen a further slowdown in housing construction on sites with planning permission, 
however, it is anticipated that the rate of growth will return to higher levels in the next 
few years. Having an up to date planning policy framework to manage and guide 
development in accordance with the Council’s commitment to sustainable development 
will be essential. 
 
Key Issue 3 – Maintaining Ec
onomic Prosperity
3.10
  
South Gloucestershi
re has benefited from a buoyant economy but must provide for the 
land and transport infrastructure needs of existing and new businesses to ensure the 
continuation of this economic prosperity. This is a key priority given the importance of 
supporting economic growth and job creation in response to the recession.
3.11
  
Policy over the past decad
e has sought to achieve a more balanced mix of development 
in the North Fringe of Bristol by focusing major new housing development in the area 
and restraining major employment development. However, this re-balancing has been 
constrained by long lead-in times in bringing forward the housing development. While 
a continuation of the re-balancing approach is necessary to reduce commuting and 
achieve more sustainable patterns of development, this must not be at the expense of the 
North Fringe continuing as a major economic driver in the sub-region.  In the East Fringe 
of Bristol the loss of employment from the existing urban area has led to significant out 
commuting and there is a need to protect jobs, as well as create jobs (e.g. the Science 
Park), and improve access to major employment locations in the centre of Bristol and the 
North Fringe.
3.12
  
In the Severnside area, a
long with Avonmouth in Bristol, there are significant constraints, 
most notably flood risk, ecology, archaeology and transport infrastructure, and these 
need to be addressed so that the area’s economic potential can be realised.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
17
3.13
  
There is a disparity in job opportunities across South Gloucestershire. A key challenge will 
be to provide a more equita
ble distribution of opportunities and thereby share prosperity 
between all of the resident workforce and take opportunities to provide training for 
residents of priority neighbourhoods as and when development opportunities arise.
 
Key Issue 4 – Providing Hou
sing for All
3.14
  
In the last 20 years the popu
lation of South Gloucestershire has grown by around 18%. 
This same level of growth is projected for the next 20 years, with the number of people 
over 65 and 85 increasing by 55% and 78% respectively. 
3.15
  
Despite the housing mar
ket downturn of 2008 and 2009 and reduced access to mortgage 
finance, house prices have risen in South Gloucestershire compared to incomes over the 
last 10 years. This has resulted in an affordability gap with people unable to rent or buy 
homes on the open market. This is a particular issue in rural areas, where there is both a 
limited supply of affordable housing and where property prices are highest. Contributions 
to the overall supply of affordable housing has been lower than envisaged due to the 
slow rate of housing development on major sites in recent years.  There is also a need to 
provide more housing for older people, in particular for more Extra Care housing.
 
Key Issue 5 – Improving Exis
ting Communities
3.16
  
The rapid rate of developme
nt experienced in the North and East Fringes of Bristol has 
not been matched by supporting services and facilities. 
3.17
  
The main town centres hav
e tended to become more focused on providing services and 
day-to-day shopping requirements, with larger non-food items (e.g. furniture, carpets, 
white goods, DIY) and, increasingly, smaller items predominantly being met by out of 
centre facilities. In some cases this is impacting on the viability of these town centres, 
particularly the traditional centres at Staple Hill, Kingswood and Hanham.
3.18
  
New development should p
resent opportunities to support new and existing communities 
and provide additional services and facilities.  
 
Key Issue 6 – Tackling Cong
estion and Improving Accessibility
3.19
  
South Gloucestershi
re’s strategic position on the road and rail network has encouraged 
high levels of growth in housing and employment. This has led to high rates of traffic 
growth, increasing congestion, unsustainable commuting patterns and longer journey 
times, particularly in the North Fringe of Bristol. Congestion and longer journey times have 
created difficulties in delivering a reliable public transport service.
 
Key Issue 7 – Managing the En
vironment and Heritage
3.20
  
A significant proportio
n of South Gloucestershire’s countryside and estuary is protected South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
18
by local, national and international environmental designations and the area also has 
good quality heritage assets.  These heritage and environmental assets are increasingly 
under threat from development pressure. Yet it is the condition of these assets and our 
surroundings which has a direct impact on our quality of life, as well as having social and 
economic benefits for local communities.
3.21
  
Development is also putt
ing a strain on natural resources through depletion, damage 
and pollution. Air pollution, especially traffic related pollution, is a particular issue in some 
urban areas of the district,  Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) have been declared 
within the North and East Fringes of Bristol due to nitrogen dioxide levels.  
 
Key Issue 8 – Improving Heal
th and Wellbeing
3.22
  
Residents of South Glouc
estershire are generally healthier and have a better life 
expectancy than the national average, reflecting the relative affluence of the area. 
However, there are small pockets of deprivation within the North and East Fringes of 
Bristol and Yate resulting in lower life expectancy and poorer health. As recognised 
nationally, there is an upward trend in the incidence of chronic diseases, which have a big 
impact on quality of life, due in part to the increase in the elderly population and to the 
increased incidence of child and adult obesity. Poor air quality also has a direct effect on 
health, and traffic related pollution is an issue in parts of South Gloucestershire.
3.23
  
Making sure existing and n
ew communities continue to have the opportunity for physical 
activity, including children’s play, walking and cycling, access to formal and informal 
community meeting spaces and green spaces, has been demonstrated to have a major 
positive impact on people’s health and mental wellbeing.  
3.24
  
The following diagram sho
ws how these 8 Key Issues of the Core Strategy are closely 
aligned with the priorities of the Sustainable Community Strategy. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
19
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY STRATEGY PRIORITIES
Our Place
Our Economy
Our Communities
Our Health
Conserve 
and enhance 
our natural 
and built 
environment
Develop 
low-carbon 
integrated 
communities 
with a strong 
sense of place 
connected by 
well planned 
transport 
networks
Maximise 
opportunities 
to access 
first class 
education 
and prosper 
through a 
balanced 
economy, a 
well-trained 
workforce and 
sustainable 
jobs for all
Engage 
people of 
all ages so 
they feel they 
belong and 
can help 
provide local 
solutions
Support 
communities 
so they are 
safe and feel 
safe and have 
access to 
high quality 
services
Promote 
personal 
well-being, 
reduce health 
inequalities
Deliver 
high quality 
physical and 
mental health 
and social 
care services 
which protect 
our most 
vulnerable 
and offer 
people greater 
choice and 
control
Managing 
future
development
Managing 
future
development
Maintaining 
economic 
prosperity
Improving 
existing
communities
Improving 
existing
communities
Improving 
health and
wellbeing
 
Improving 
health and
wel
lbeing
 
Managing 
environment
and h
eritage
Tackling 
congestion 
and increasing 
accessibility
Managing 
future 
development
Managing 
future 
development
Providing
housing for all
Providing 
housing for all
Improving 
existing
communities
Reducing & 
adapting
to climate 
change
Reducing 
& adapting 
to climate 
change
Improving 
existing
communities
Maintaining 
economic
prosperity
Improving 
health and
wellbeing
Improving 
existing
communities
Managing 
future 
development
Improving 
health and
wellbeing
 
Tackling 
congestion 
and i
ncreasing 
accessibility
Improving 
health and
wellbeing
Tackling 
congestion 
and increasing 
accessibility
Improving 
existing
communities
Providing 
housing for all
Managing 
future 
development
Improving 
existing
communities
Maintaining 
economic
prosperity
CORE STRATEGY KEY ISSUESSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
20
4.
  
Visions, strategic objectives and 
strategy for devel
opment
 
Vision
4.1
    
The vision for the future of South Gloucestershire provides a picture of how the area should 
develop over the period 200
6 to 2027 and beyond. This vision has taken account of:
  
❙
 
the vision of the South Glou
cestershire Sustainable Community Strategy;
  
❙
  
the concerns, issues a
nd priorities which have come through our engagement and 
consultation work; and
		
❙
 
the vision for the West of En
gland.
 
Vision for 2027 and beyond
South Gloucestershire will continue to be a ‘great place to live and work’.  Within an 
attractive and accessible environment, everyone will be enjoying healthier and more 
sustainable lifestyles in balanced, vibrant and safe communities with ready access to 
jobs, supporting services and facilities.  Adaptation to a changing climate will be taking 
place through the active management of impacts. The economy will be buoyant and 
prosperous and recognised internationally. 
The North Fringe of Bristol urban area will continue to be a major economic driver in 
the South West region and the West of England sub region. It will continue to maintain 
its role as a major focus for employment, commercial and retail activity, education and 
learning. The distinctive identities and heritage of the existing communities will also have 
been strengthened and preserved. New neighbourhoods will provide opportunities for 
people to live near to where they work and be well integrated with existing communities.  
All residents and workers will have better access to local amenities and high quality 
public transport, walking and cycling links. Community identity and neighbourhood 
distinctiveness will be improved by the development of new public spaces and high 
quality landscaping. The green network will be enhanced through opportunities to 
provide new and improved green spaces, within the existing urban area and which 
connect to the wider countryside. This network will include new corridors along the 
Henbury Trym, and Stoke Park to Three Brooks Nature Reserve via the East of Harry 
Stoke new neighbourhood.
The distinctive identity and heritage of the linked communities in the East Fringe of 
Bristol will be preserved and enhanced.  The vibrancy and vitality of the traditional town 
centres at Downend, Staple Hill, Kingswood, and Hanham will be strengthened. The area 
will benefit from improved employment opportunities including the Science Park.  Public 
transport services, especially to the North Fringe and central Bristol from the north of the 
area, will be more reliable, punctual and frequent. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
21
Well designed housing developments, including the major development at Emersons 
Green, will be integrated with and connected to existing communities.  This will 
achieve a stronger town centre at Emersons Green and support balanced and quality 
neighbourhoods throughout the urban area. 
The landscape setting of the area and of surrounding villages will be preserved and 
opportunities will be taken to make the urban area greener.  Green spaces, walking and 
cycling routes will lead through and out of the area into the open countryside.  These 
routes will include key links to the commons, Warmley Forest Park and an enhanced 
forest park based around Overscourt Wood. 
Yate and Chipping Sodbury will build upon their distinct yet complementary heritage, 
character and roles to develop a coherent sense of place, and provide a richer mix 
of social, cultural and economic opportunities. The towns will develop as a popular 
destination and a more attractive service centre for their surrounding villages and farming 
communities. Chipping Sodbury town centre will realise its retail and tourism potential. 
Yate’s evening economy will develop and the range of town centre uses increased. Public 
transport services will be more attractive and accessible to users. 
The open spaces, playing fields, footpaths and cycleways, which contribute to each 
town’s unique identity will be strengthened and enhanced with improved linkages 
throughout the towns and beyond into the surrounding countryside. 
A new neighbourhood to the north of Yate, will accommodate around 3,000 new homes 
(2,700 up to 2027), employment and community uses. This will enable the towns to 
meet locally generated housing requirements, provide a broader employment base 
and provide opportunities for modern flexible working practices, enhancing their 
sustainability. 
Thornbury will be a thriving and socially cohesive historic market town with a diverse 
range of employment opportunities and modern healthcare facilities.  The vibrant town 
centre will provide a range of facilities for the needs of its residents, visitors & workers, as 
well as its surrounding villages and farming communities. 
These aims will be supported by an appropriate amount of high quality housing growth 
which will help to strengthen and develop the town centre, local schools and community 
facilities and activities.  This growth will provide for the needs of young families and 
the elderly.  The town centre will build on its rich historic character and setting and will 
promote itself as an attraction, a centre for the arts and an exciting place to shop.
Severnside will remain a strategically important location for employment uses.  
Employers, landowners and developers will work with the Council, other agencies 
and Bristol City Council to unlock economic potential and improve local transport 
infrastructure. The Severn Estuary and adjoining floodplain is internationally important 
for a wide range of ecology and will be safeguarded and maintained.  Its archaeological 
heritage and interest will also be protected and conserved, and a network of new nature 
reserves will be implemented. A longer term durable and robust strategy for addressing 
flood risk due to climate change will be adopted.  The area’s potential for power 
generation will be managed.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
22
The rural areas will continue to be an important asset contributing to the economy, 
biodiversity and heritage of the district; providing public access to the countryside 
and recreation opportunities; and supporting local food production.  The diversity and 
unique character of individual settlements and the open countryside will be conserved 
and enhanced and recognised as providing a valuable setting to the main urban area, 
contributing to a unique sense of place and identity.  Through engagement with rural 
communities, and where environmentally appropriate, new limited development will 
be provided which meets local needs.  Innovative transport solutions will link rural 
communities with centres of employment, services and facilities.  The rural areas 
will make a positive contribution to the generation of renewable energy and healthier 
lifestyles.
Strategic objectives
4.2
  
Based on the key issues identified in Chapter 3, feedback received during consultation 
and engagement on the p
reparation of the Core Strategy, and from the picture set out in 
Chapter 2 of what South Gloucestershire is like now, we have identified what we consider 
to be the strategic objectives of the Core Strategy.  Three of these are overarching and 
cross-cutting objectives which are reflected in all the Core Strategy policies, while the 
others have been grouped into 6 themes which form the basis of the following 6 policy 
chapters.
Strategic objectives 
Overarching & cross-cutting objectives
❙
 
Delivering sustainable c
ommunities  
❙
 
Improving health & well-bei
ng 
❙
 
Mitigating and adapti
ng to the impacts of climate change
Other objectives
Responding to climate change and high quality design
❙
  
Promoting high quality d
esign that responds to its context, the distinctive assets of the district 
and creates ‘sense of place’ and civic pride
❙
  
Using design to create att
ractive, cohesive, safe and inclusive communities with better 
integration between housing, jobs, services, public transport and facilities, so that people 
lead healthier lives and have the opportunity to reduce their CO² footprint and adapt to the 
impacts of climate change
❙
  
Protecting and enhan
cing valued open spaces and green links to create a network of 
connected and multi-functional, attractive and accessible spaces for people and wildlife, and 
to provide climate change adaptation and mitigation functions
❙
 
Providing opportunit
ies for flora and fauna to adapt to climate change
❙
  
Ensuring that environm
ents for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
23
sustainable communities
❙
  
Promoting energy effi
cient development and new sources of decentralised, renewable and 
low carbon sources of energy
❙
 
Understanding and red
ucing susceptibility to flood risk
❙
 
Managing the impacts of urb
an intensification
Tackling congestion and improving accessibility
❙
  
Reducing congestion an
d air pollution by improving accessibility by means other than the 
private car
❙
  
Widely, improving and en
hancing opportunities for walking, cycling and using public 
transport, and particularly to significant destinations, such as educational establishments, 
hospitals and employment areas
❙
  
Completing delivery of the G
reater Bristol Bus Network and delivering the North Fringe to 
Hengrove package, the link from Temple Meads - Emersons Green and the Greater Bristol 
Metro Project (see Key Diagram)
Managing future development
❙
  
Concentrating the maj
ority of new development to take advantage of existing services and 
facilities and higher levels of accessibility
❙
  
Locating development wh
ere it will provide the opportunity to minimise the need to travel and 
allow safe and convenient access to services by walking, cycling and public transport
❙
 
Recognising and protec
ting the identity and heritage of existing communities
❙
  
Promoting greater self
-containment and enhancing the service centre role of the market 
towns of Thornbury, Yate and Chipping Sodbury
❙
 
Supporting local hous
ing needs and services in villages
❙
 
Protecting the Green B
elt and the countryside from inappropriate development
❙
  
Providing a range of inf
rastructure, together with integration and access, in step with new 
development 
❙
  
The Council will continu
ally and positively work with communities, developers and 
infrastructure providers to ensure implementation of the plan is viable and not put at risk 
throughout the economic cycle as part of pursuing sustainable development
Managing the environment and heritage
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the character and distinctiveness of the district’s heritage assets 
and maximising their contribution to quality of place and the wider benefit of the district  
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the district’s distinctive landscapes, natural environmental 
resources and biodiversity
❙
  
Safeguarding minera
l resources for the longer term while ensuring an adequate and steady 
supply to meet identified needs
❙
 
Safeguarding the qual
ity of natural resources and ensuring prudent use
❙
 
Protecting land, air
, aqueous environments, buildings and people from pollution
Maintaining economic prosperity
❙
  
Ensuring that South Glouc
estershire plays its role in making the West of England economy South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
24
one of the most prosperous, innovative and vibrant in Europe, by providing a sufficient range 
of employment land for existing and new businesses of all sizes
❙
  
Providing for the key se
ctors of advanced engineering, including aerospace and defence; 
finance and business services; higher and further education; retail; environmental 
technologies and hi-tech industries
❙
  
Taking opportunities to p
rovide more balanced employment across the district so that every 
community has access to a range of employment opportunities locally
❙
 
Ensuring provision of app
ropriate communication technologies, such as broadband
❙
 
Enhancing town centr
e vitality and viability
Providing housing and community infrastructure
❙
 
Providing a range of hou
sing to meet the needs of the whole community
❙
  
Providing decent and a
ffordable housing in accessible locations and for local needs in rural 
areas
❙
  
Improving health and well-
being by provision and access to a range of social, cultural, 
community, recreational facilities and green space in step with development, whilst realising 
opportunities to redress any deficit
❙
  
Ensuring that environm
ents for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of 
sustainable communities 
Strategy for development
4.3
  
The purpose of the Strategy for Development (the ‘Spatial Strategy’) is to set out the 
overall approach to th
e provision of new homes, jobs, infrastructure and community 
facilities to deliver sustainable communities and manage the change necessary to 
achieve this, in the period up to 2027. It sets the context for the Core Strategy policies 
and outlines how the vision and strategic objectives will be delivered. This Strategy has 
evolved from consideration of the issues, needs and opportunities in different parts of the 
district and the capacity of places to meet these needs, as well as national policy, local 
objectives identified through consultation and the priorities of the Sustainable Community 
Strategy.
4.4
  
The Strategy for Develop
ment focuses on the level of development that is deliverable 
in the next 14 years and sets a broad framework for the longer term. Overall the Core 
Strategy makes provision for 28,355 new homes in the period 2006-2027 and beyond.   
Of this total some 5,810 dwellings have been completed between 2006/07-2012/2013. 
The plan therefore makes provision for an additional 22,545 new homes between 2012/13 
and 2026/27 and beyond.  Underpinning the strategy is a commitment to delivering 
development in the short and medium term that can be planned with some certainty with 
all necessary infrastructure already in place or programmed.
4.5
  
As detailed in the key issue
s, the high level of growth in South Gloucestershire throughout 
the past half century has led to high rates of traffic growth, increasing congestion, 
unsustainable commuting patterns and longer journey times. This growth has also 
not been matched by the appropriate level of supporting services and infrastructure, a 
situation which has been exacerbated by the impact of the economic recession. The 
Strategy for Development will address these issues by ensuring that new development www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
25
is concentrated within the Bristol North Fringe and East Fringe urban areas, thereby 
reducing commuting and the need to travel, accompanied by a package of public 
transport infrastructure measures giving greater access to public transport, improved 
frequency and quality of service. This will be supported by similar provision in other 
community infrastructure, including green infrastructure. The strategy therefore focuses 
development in the locations where essential infrastructure is in place or planned. This will 
be achieved with minimal loss of Green Belt land. 
4.6
  
Outside of the Bristol urba
n area, development will be provided in Yate/Chipping Sodbury 
and Thornbury to promote greater self-containment of these settlements. Within villages 
the focus will be on supporting existing services and facilities and limiting new housing, 
so as not to conflict with sustainability objectives and in recognition of the limited 
availability of public transport.  The open countryside in the rural area will be protected 
for its heritage, landscape, biodiversity, economic and recreational value and for food 
production.
North Fringe of Bristol urban area
4.7
    
The North Fringe of Bristol i
s one of the most economically important locations in the 
South West and includes the key sectors of aerospace engineering, defence procurement 
and supplies, financial services, retail and education.  The area supports in the order of 
70,000 jobs, which is twice as many jobs as resident workers. The area also has a long 
and extensive heritage as the foundation of the aircraft industry with a strong sense of 
separate, but inter-related communities. This sense of local identity and the distinctive 
and varied character of its communities is increasingly under threat as the pressure 
and pace of growth erodes the distinctive community foundations that have traditionally 
distinguished the area from Bristol. 
4.8
  
Overall, the Strateg
y for Development in the Bristol North Fringe has two main purposes.  
The first is to retain and strengthen the character and identity of Patchway, Filton and 
Bradley Stoke and protect and respect the village identities of Stoke Gifford and Frenchay. 
The second is to recognise the economic importance of the whole area and the need to 
redress the current imbalance between jobs and housing, caused by the scale and type 
of development that has taken place over the past 30 years.  Increasing the amount of 
housing in the area, while not eroding the character and identity of existing communities, 
will enable better integration between jobs and homes and the creation of more 
sustainable communities.  Employment land will continue to be safeguarded to provide 
for the needs of businesses including the key sectors. This will be supported by enhanced 
public transport measures including quality bus corridors, a bus rapid transit link to South 
Bristol, Bristol City Centre and Emersons Green, improvements to the heavy rail system 
and an improved cycling network.  
4.9
  
Within the North Fringe of B
ristol significant change will be managed in two areas: (a) 
Cribbs Causeway/Patchway and (b) West of the M32/East of Harry Stoke.  Targeting 
development and public and private sector investment in transportation in these areas will 
ensure that the North Fringe of Bristol urban area continues to maintain its role as a major 
focus for employment, commercial and retail activity, education and learning.  Small scale 
development will continue to take place throughout the area. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
26
4.10
  
(a) Cribbs Causeway/Patchway
 - At the heart of the plan’s strategy is the objective to 
create a stronger and mo
re cohesive Cribbs Causeway/Patchway community.  On the 
edge of this area, the new Wildlife Park will be an additional attraction.
4.11
  
In the period up to 2016 the main f
ocus of this strategy is delivering the major mixed 
use development at Charlton Hayes, Patchway, comprising  2,400 dwellings, 14ha of 
employment land and creating a new centre at Patchway. This development will provide 
enhanced opportunities for people to live near to where they work, access local amenities 
and move around by means other than the car as well as provide benefits for Patchway.  
4.12
  
In the period post 2016, the S
trategy for Development aims to integrate major new 
housing developments along with new transportation infrastructure to reinforce the 
strategic economic importance of the area whilst creating more sustainable communities 
including the priority neighbourhood at Patchway. The objective is to introduce additional 
new neighbourhoods at Cribbs/Patchway providing approximately 5,700 new homes, 
around 50ha. of employment uses, local services and facilities, Green Infrastructure and 
improved walking and cycling links. 
4.13
  
This will be achieved by tak
ing a comprehensive and co-ordinated approach to delivering 
opportunities for residential and mixed use development at Cribbs Causeway, on 
adjoining previously developed employment land between The Mall and Patchway, at 
Filton Airfield, on the greenfield land to the south of Filton Airfield (off Wyck Beck Road) 
and to the west of the A4018. This latter site is in the Green Belt, but the need for housing, 
together with the need to ensure sustainable patterns of development and sustainable 
communities, represent the exceptional circumstances which justify the release of 
this land from the Green Belt. This is a large area of development, but it provides the 
opportunity to strengthen linkages with existing and new communities and to reinforce 
and enhance community identities over the wider area.  Development also brings the 
opportunity to secure the long term future of the aerospace sector and address the need 
for physical, social and economic regeneration. To support development, a new transport 
package will provide improved connections through the area serving nearby employment 
and commercial uses and the greater Bristol area to the south. 
4.14
  
(b) West of the M32 area –
 Thre
e strategic housing developments will be progressed: 
Cheswick Village, Harry Stoke and Land East of Coldharbour Lane.  Collectively these 
combined developments will provide 2,600 new homes. Alongside these will be a major 
transport package of co-ordinated public/ private sector investment to help secure a more 
sustainable pattern of development.
4.15
  
In recognition of its locatio
n adjacent to a main line rail station, major employment and 
housing areas, Abbey Wood Retail Park will move away from bulky goods retailing to 
develop a role more suited to its location.  The University of the West of England (UWE) 
will re-model its campus to achieve its academic vision, including providing services and 
facilities for the local community and public transport and cycling linkages. 
4.16
  
The Joint Local Transpor
t Plan and the Regional Funding Advice identified as a priority 
the provision of a major Rapid Transit link between the Bristol North Fringe urban area 
and Hengrove in south Bristol.  This will include the Stoke Gifford Transport Link, a new 
public transport and road connection between Great Stoke Way, Bradley Stoke and the www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
27
A4174 Avon Ring Road. The need for housing and to ensure sustainable development and 
sustainable communities, in combination with the impact of the Stoke Gifford Transport 
Link, are the exceptional circumstances in which land will be removed from the Green 
Belt at this location to deliver a new neighbourhood. The new neighbourhood, comprising 
2,000 homes, would require major new access from the Avon Ring Road and would 
therefore be expected to make a substantial contribution towards the costs of providing 
the SGTL.  This new development would maximise the locational and accessibility 
strengths of this area, have a strong identity and sense of place and integrate well with 
existing residential areas, employment and commercial centres and the UWE. 
East Fringe of Bristol urban area
4.17
  
The East Fringe of Bristol inc
ludes a number of distinct communities within which there 
are pockets of deprivation in Kingswood, Staple Hill and Cadbury Heath that have 
been identified as priority neighbourhoods.  Employment land is mainly focussed on 
small ageing industrial areas, many of which have been lost over the years to other 
development, so that now the area significantly under-provides for the local workforce and 
18,000 people commute daily to central Bristol and 6,300 people commute to the North 
Fringe of Bristol. These changes in employment patterns, together with competition from 
out of town retail opportunities, have contributed to the declining economic fortunes of the 
traditional shopping centres. 
4.18
  
To address these issues t
he main thrust of the strategy for the East Fringe of Bristol up 
to 2027 is to complete the final development phase at Emersons Green.  This involves a 
major mixed use development on 177ha of land at Emersons Green, east of the A4174 
Avon Ring Road, to deliver an extended and improved town centre at Emersons Green, 
as well as in the region of 2,400 dwellings, a Science Park and 19ha for local employment. 
In total this development is expected to support over 6,000 jobs. The Science Park is key 
to the sub region in supporting the universities and existing industries and maintaining 
the region’s international competitiveness. Ensuring this new development integrates 
successfully to strengthen a sense of community with the existing development west of 
the A4174 Avon Ring Road is a key challenge.
4.19
  
Within the existing urba
n areas the strategy focuses on improving the employment 
opportunities available to residents, on regeneration to restore the vitality of the 
traditional centres and on improving the quality of the urban environment and links to the 
countryside.  This will be achieved by: safeguarding existing employment sites throughout 
the area; improving the vitality and viability of the traditional town centres; having a 
clear strategy for new retail investment; protecting and enhancing heritage assets and 
a network of green spaces; and the delivery of well designed small to medium housing 
developments within the established residential areas. 
4.20
  
To support these Strat
egy for Development objectives, there will also be transport 
infrastructure improvements with a new bus rapid transit link to Emersons Green from 
Bristol city centre and the North Fringe of Bristol, Park and Ride at Emersons Green East, 
and links into the Greater Bristol cycling network. This investment and delivery is planned 
to take place over the next 10 years.  For the local area strategy for the East Fringe of 
Bristol to be successful it is paramount that resources are focused on these priorities.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
28
4.21
  
The designated Green Belt in this area will remain. This area is not considered to be 
suitable for development b
ecause of major constraints, specifically the importance of 
the open countryside, hillside and ridgelines that establish the setting and help define 
the extent of the urban area, the current limited employment opportunities, the lack of 
potential for integrating new development and the extreme difficulty of delivering essential 
transport improvements. 
Yate and Chipping Sodbury
4.22
  
The Strategy for Develop
ment in Yate and Chipping Sodbury in the period up to 2016 is 
to further develop their separate but inter-related roles and identities as market towns. To 
achieve this, initiatives that enable greater self-containment and increase the strength and 
vitality of both towns as service centres will be undertaken, while avoiding development 
that would impact on the setting of the Cotswolds AONB and erode the separate 
character and identity of nearby settlements.  At Yate this will involve major investment 
in the town centre, the re-modelling and intensification of existing employment areas in 
the west of Yate in order to improve the balance of the local economy and some limited 
housing development on brownfield sites.  At Chipping Sodbury a new food store and 
limited housing to the north of the town centre will be developed helping to strengthen 
the role and vitality of the town centre subject to satisfactorily addressing environmental, 
heritage and transport constraints.
4.23
  
From the middle to later perio
ds of the Core Strategy, subject to the delivery of new 
sewerage infrastructure, a new neighbourhood of up to 3,000 new homes at north Yate 
will be delivered, of which 2,700 have the potential to be completed before 2027, as 
well as a broadening of the current employment base through new development and 
redevelopment. This new development will support a package of transport measures, 
including: improved local bus services connecting residential areas with the town 
centres, station and employment areas; more frequent bus services to key destinations; 
improvements to the rail service from Yate; and improved links into the Greater Bristol 
Cycle City network.  Development will address the need to reduce deprivation in the 
priority neighbourhoods in the west and south of Yate.
Thornbury
4.24
  
Thornbury is a market town w
ith a strong heritage and attractive environment, but the 
town centre and community facilities require investment and improvement.  The Strategy 
for Development in Thornbury in the period up to 2016 and beyond is therefore to 
revitalise the town centre and strengthen community facilities and services. The plan for 
the town centre is to provide for the day to day needs of residents, to make better use of 
existing employment space and to develop its tourist destination and overall shopping 
experience.  To support this and to strengthen the town’s community facilities and 
services approximately 800 new homes will be delivered at two locations: Park Farm and 
Morton Way North.  These locations have been selected as they are not located within 
the Conservation Area or Green Belt and would enable new development to integrate well 
into the existing fabric of the town helping to sustain and to improve local services and 
community facilities.  In addition to some new housing, the aim is to achieve a new sixth www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
29
form centre for the Castle School, which brings together education provision on a single 
site and supports existing primary schools, and to strengthen community health facilities 
in the town.
Severnside
4.25
  
While land at Severnsid
e is recognised as a regionally significant employment area 
with longstanding planning permissions, it lies within an ecologically important, fragile 
and visually prominent coastal area with special landscape characteristics which are 
recognised and protected for their international, national and local importance for 
biodiversity.  In addition the area is at significant risk from flooding and the Severn Levels 
are of high archaeological potential.  Highway capacity and public transport provision 
is limited.  All these critical issues need to be addressed in a comprehensive manner, 
working with Bristol City Council, the Local Enterprise Partnership, Natural England, the 
Environment Agency, the Lower Severn Internal Drainage Broad, the Marine Management 
Organisation, Network Rail and the Highways Agency, in order to achieve an acceptable 
and sustainable balance and deliver the strategy which supports the continued 
development of the area, primarily for warehousing and distribution.
Oldbury
 
4.26
  
Land near Oldbury on Sever
n and adjacent to the existing nuclear power station has 
been identified in the NPS as potentially suitable for a new nuclear power station.  This 
lies within an ecologically important, fragile and visually prominent location adjacent 
to the estuary, and access is currently via relatively narrow and low lying roads and 
lanes that pass by scattered settlements and/or through villages and hamlets.  The 
area has distinctive landscape characteristics which are recognised and protected for 
their international, national and local importance for biodiversity, as well as being at 
significant risk from flooding, adjacent to the Severn Way strategic recreational route and 
being within a landscape of high archaeological potential. These issues will need to be 
addressed in a comprehensive manner, with the objective of achieving an acceptable 
and sustainable balance and delivering optimal benefits while ensuring that social, 
environmental and economic impacts on the locality are reduced to an acceptable level. 
Currently, no conclusion has been reached by the Council about the suitability of Oldbury 
as a site for a new nuclear power station.
Rural Areas
4.27
  
The Strategy for Develop
ment within the rural areas will be to maintain the settlement 
boundaries defined on the Policies Map around rural settlements until they are reviewed 
either through Neighbourhood Plans, the Policies, Sites and Places DPD or a replacement 
Local Plan following engagement with local communities and other stakeholders/partners.  
Existing employment sites and services will be protected to reduce the need to travel.  
Outside settlement boundaries, development will be strictly controlled. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
30
Part 1 -
 
General Core Strategy Policies
www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
31
5.
  
High quality design and 
responding to climat
e change
Introduction
5.1
   
High quality urban design, the provision of Green Infrastructure, and new renewable and 
low-carbon energy sour
ces, all have a key role to play in responding to climate change, 
as well as creating distinctive, linked places that support social inclusion and healthy 
sustainable lifestyles. 
5.2
  
This chapter sets out the k
ey policies for managing the impact of climate change and 
directly links to the priorities of the Sustainable Community Strategy and the Council 
Strategy.
Core Strategy objectives
❙
  
Promoting high quality de
sign that responds to its context, the distinctive assets of the district 
and creates ‘sense of place’ and civic pride
❙
  
Using design to create attr
active, cohesive, safe and inclusive communities with better 
integration between housing, jobs, services, public transport and facilities, so that people 
lead healthier lives and have the opportunity to reduce their CO2 footprint and adapt to the 
impacts of climate change
❙
  
Protecting and enhanc
ing valued open spaces and green links to create a network of 
connected and multi-functional, attractive and accessible spaces for people and wildlife,  
and to provide climate change adaptation and mitigation functions
❙
  
Providing opportunitie
s for flora and fauna to adapt to climate change
❙
  
Ensuring that environme
nts for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of 
sustainable communities
❙
  
Promoting energy effic
ient development and new sources of decentralised, renewable and 
low carbon sources of energy
❙
  
Understanding and redu
cing susceptibility to flood risk 
❙
  
Managing the impacts of urba
n intensificationSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
32
High quality design
 
POLICY CS1 -  HIGH QUALITY DESIGN
Development will only be permitted where the highest possible standards of design 
and site planning are achieved.  Information submitted with an application should be 
proportionate to the scale, significance and impact of the proposal.  
Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that:
1.
  
Siting, form, scale, h
eight, massing, detailing, colour and materials, are informed by, 
respect and enhance the character, distinctiveness and amenity of both the site and its 
context; and
2.
  
density and overall la
yout is well integrated with existing adjacent development and 
connected to the wider network of foot, cycle and public transport links; and
3.
  
existing features of la
ndscape, nature conservation, heritage or amenity value and 
public rights of way, are safeguarded and enhanced through incorporation into 
development; and
4.
  
if the proposed scheme is o
f a sufficient scale or significance, explain how the 
development contributes towards the vision and strategic objectives of the locality and 
(as appropriate) how account has been taken of:
 
❙
 
community consultatio
n
 
❙
 
Green Infrastructur
e objectives
 
❙
 
the South Gloucester
shire Landscape Character Assessment (2005)
 
❙
 
the Cotswolds AONB Man
agement Plan
 
❙
 
endorsed parish plans, t
own centre strategies and village design statements
 
❙
 
adopted Conservation A
rea Appraisals, Management Plans, and
 
❙
 
 
other design guidance and/
or Area Action Plans that may be adopted as SPD from 
time to time; 
  
and in order to assist in me
eting climate change and health and well-being objectives, 
proposals  will be required in particular to: 
5.
  
enhance existing or deve
lop new public realm (and associated management & 
maintenance regimes) that enables people to gain access safely and conveniently, 
particularly to serve the needs of:
 
❙
 
 
pedestrians and cycl
ists
 
❙
 
 
children, the disabl
ed and older people, and 
 
❙
 
 
with regard to residen
tial and mixed use schemes, provide opportunities for social 
interaction and play; andwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
33
 
6.
    
ensure soft landscap
e proposals form an integral part of the design for the site 
and seek to make a net contribution to tree cover in the locality (particularly in 
urban areas), and prioritise biodiversity objectives and local food cultivation where 
possible; and
7.
    
where the scale, locat
ion and/or significance of the development proposal warrants 
it, embed public art within the public realm or in a location where it can be viewed 
from public areas; and
8.
    
ensure the design, orie
ntation and location of buildings, roof pitches, windows, 
habitable rooms, lighting and soft landscaping help to achieve energy conservation, 
the protection of environmental resources and assist the appropriate siting of 
renewable and/or low carbon energy installations and infrastructure.  Schemes that 
can demonstrate that they will outperform statutory minima, such as the building 
regulations, in terms of sustainable construction, at the time of construction 
commencement, will be considered a primary indicator of good design. All new 
developments will be required to meet the building regulations current at the time 
of full planning or reserved matters approval. Until the ‘Zero Carbon’ building 
regulations are implemented major residential (10 or more dwellings) and mixed-
use schemes will be encouraged to achieve full compliance with each Code level 
(currently level 3) or above, and/or Building Research Establishment Environmental 
Assessment Method (BREEAM) ‘very good’ or other equivalent standard; and
9.
  
take account of persona
l safety, security and crime prevention; and
10.
  
ensure sufficient spac
e provision is designed in for the sorting and storage of 
recyclable waste materials in a convenient location, the composting of household 
waste (where practicable), and the collection of these and other waste materials 
and, in larger development schemes, for recycling on site; and
11.
   
take account of the South G
loucestershire Strategic Flood Risk Assessments and 
provide, where appropriate, measures to manage flood risk and prepare surface 
water management plans.
At the detailed planning application stage, residential development of more than 10 
dwellings, will be expected to demonstrate how Building for Life (BFL12) criteria (or 
any nationally recognised methodology that may supercede Building for Life) will be 
achieved.
5.3
  
‘Urban design’ is about ho
w a place functions as much as how a place looks. High 
quality urban design therefore cannot be delivered through a single policy. It is the sum of 
all the Core Strategy policies, visions and area objectives, and supporting local strategies 
and guidance that will ultimately contribute to the ‘quality of place’. These include the:
		❙
  
Sustainable Communities St
rategy
		❙
  
South Gloucestershir
e Climate Change Strategy
		❙
  
Parish plansSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
34
		❙
  
Neighbourhood Plans
		❙
  
Village design stateme
nts
		❙
  
Conservation area SPDs
	
	❙
  
Local List of Buildings S
PD
		❙
  
Biodiversity and the Pla
nning Process SPD
		❙
  
Art & Design in the Public Realm Ad
vice Note
		❙
  
South Gloucestershir
e Landscape Character Assessment
		❙
  
Cotswolds Area of Outstan
ding Natural Beauty Management Plan
		❙
  
South Gloucestershi
re Council Play Policy & Strategy
5.4
  
The policy sets out criteria fo
r the assessment of high quality design in new development. 
In particular, through Design & Access Statements, development proposals should 
demonstrate a clear understanding of both the site and locality’s historic, archaeological, 
ecological and landscape context in drawing up development proposals. The policy also 
sets out key design priorities and a standard against the established national assessment 
methodology, ‘Building for Life’ (BfL12), that residential development proposals will be 
expected to achieve. 
5.5
  
Information required f
rom applicants should be proportionate to the scale, significance 
and impact of a proposal.  For example, householder applications for residential 
extensions will not be expected to submit information with regard criteria 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 
and 11.
Visions, strategic objectives and other design guidance
5.6
  
A wide range of guidance i
s available to promote high quality design and distinctiveness 
and how it should be taken into account in assessing planning applications. For example, 
a major development, particularly on the edge of an existing urban area should state how 
it has taken account of the South Gloucestershire Landscape Character Assessment. 
Similarly, smaller developments in a conservation area, the Cotswold AONB, or those 
settlements that benefit from parish plans and village design statements, should state 
how they have taken account of appropriate conservation area guidance, the AONB 
Management Plan and parish plan objectives, respectively. 
Design priorities
5.7
    
Criteria 5 - 11 of the policy ident
ify seven key components of design that the Council is 
committed to achieving, with particular emphasis on the Sustainable Community Strategy 
objectives to promote community health and well-being and climate change adaptation 
and mitigation measures. Specifically:
  
(5) Promote shared acc
essible public realm & play opportunities
5.8
  
Improving accessibi
lity, particularly for walking and cycling and opportunities for play 
across the public realm, particularly through the provision of highway schemes that 
utilise homezone and shared space principles. The Council’s Play Policy and Strategy 
recognises that the public realm should enable & encourage informal play opportunities, www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
35
as well as formal equipped play to take place, and recognises that children and young 
people have a right to be seen, heard and provided for. It will therefore be expected 
that this ethos with regard to play should be applied to development proposals. The 
Council will also seek to establish satisfactory management and maintenance regimes in 
perpetuity for all public areas of new development.  
  
(6) The role of landscap
e
5.9
  
Soft landscape schem
es should promote biodiversity and food cultivation as opposed to 
pure visual amenity and traditional recreational objectives. Net increases to tree cover are 
also required to help mitigate climate change, cool urban areas during the summer and 
improve air quality. 
  
(7) Public art 
5.10
  
Public Art should be viewed a
s an opportunity to enhance legibility, character, 
distinctiveness and civic pride. It should respond to the distinctive assets of the location 
and can form part of the landscape design, public realm and play opportunities. It can 
also be temporary or permanent and should seek to intrigue and delight, be robust and 
require minimal maintenance. The scale and location of the art should be appropriate 
to the site and its surrounds. The provision of public art will be a key indicator of good 
design (BfL criteria) and should be seen as an opportunity to involve the local community 
in support of Sustainable Community Strategy objectives.
  
(8) Sustainable const
ruction
5.11
  
Good design is a core princi
ple of sustainable development. Good design minimises 
the amount of energy and natural resources consumed during the lifetime of the 
development. It can also provide buildings with features such as generous space 
standards, good natural light and sound insulation, which can greatly improve the quality 
of life for people that live and work in them. Consideration should also be given to how 
buildings are laid out and orientated to enhance energy efficiency and the potential for 
the addition of renewable energy technologies (such as solar panels) and district heating 
networks, if not from the outset, then in the future.  Major residential and mixed-use 
schemes that meet Code for Sustainable Homes level 3 (level 4 from 2013) or above, 
and/or BREEAM ‘very good’ or other equivalent standard, (to be secured via planning 
condition or planning agreement), will assist in demonstrating compliance with criteria (8) 
of this policy, and other policy objectives and requirements of the Local Plan as well as 
the BfL criteria. The Council will review its approach to sustainable construction through 
the Policies, Sites and Places DPD in order to ensure the highest possible standards are 
being applied and there is no undue burden on delivery of housing.
  
(9) Tackling crime & the f
ear of crime
5.12
  
Design of new development s
hould assist to prevent and tackle crime and the fear of 
crime. 
  South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
36
  
(10) Waste reduction
5.13
  
New development will be re
quired to design-in sufficient space in a convenient location, 
(e.g. at the front of residential dwellings) for the sorting and storage of recycled materials. 
This will support objectives to reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfill.
 
 
(11) Flood risk and man
agement
5.14
  
The Level 1 and Level 2 South Glo
ucestershire Strategic Flood Risk Assessments 
appraise the risk of flooding, including the effects of climate change, and should be used 
to avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding and to direct development 
away from areas at highest risk.  Where new development is exceptionally necessary, 
proposals will need to ensure that risk is managed and reduced through location, layout 
and design and through sustainable methods of dealing with surface water (also see 
Policy CS9 – Managing the Environment Heritage).  Guidance on matters to be assessed 
in Flood Risk Assessments is included in the Level 2 South Gloucestershire Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment.
Delivery
5.15
  
The policy will be delivere
d through the development management process, including the 
use of Concept Statements, in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community 
Involvement, and Design & Access Statements. The Council will also work with 
stakeholders as appropriate in the preparation of area design frameworks, masterplans, 
design codes, site specific briefs and design guidance. 
5.16
  
The Council will expect n
ew residential development of more than 10 dwellings to carry 
out BfL12 assessment (or any nationally recognised methodology that may supersede 
BfL). The Council encourages Design & Access Statements to set out how the 
development performs against the BfL criteria. Where a BfL green light is not achieved 
the Design & Access Statement should set out reasons why. Public consultation, 
visioning and concept statement planning exercises will be used to inform priorities to 
be achieved on a site-by-site basis as appropriate, particularly where 12 BfL green lights 
may not be achievable. Careful consideration will be given to refusing schemes that do 
not demonstrate at the planning application stage why the development cannot achieve 
BfL green lights. On small sites of less than 10 dwellings where BfL criteria are not always 
applicable, a similar ‘small-sites’ scoring methodology will be developed as part of 
reviewing the South Gloucestershire Design Checklist SPD. Major developments will also 
be encouraged to submit schemes for Design Panel review. 
5.17
  
New housing built today w
ill be around for many years to come. The Council is therefore 
committed to promoting the highest possible sustainable construction standards. 
Hanham Hall in South Gloucestershire is proposed as one of the first Zero Carbon 
developments in the country. The Council is therefore, aware of the technical and 
financial viability issues with regard to promoting high sustainability standards. But, it 
believes these issues will diminish over time allowing Local Authorities greater flexibility 
to seek higher standards, whilst not undermining delivery of new homes. The Council 
will therefore review the standards it applies through Local Plan documentation such www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
37
as the Policies, Sites and Places DPD and the South Gloucestershire Design Checklist 
SPD (August 2007) that will continue to be relevant until it is reviewed. It will also expect 
developers of major (multi-phased) new neighbourhoods to ensure Zero Carbon 
standards are achieved on phases developed post 2016. To assist with these objectives, 
the Council is committed to a holistic approach to improving the sustainability of new and 
existing communities. Via its wider corporate activities, Policies, Sites and Places DPD 
and review of the Design Checklist SPD or other such SPD, the Council will progress an 
Allowable Solutions Policy and Community Energy Fund or other equivalent mechanism 
that may be proposed, that will assist developers to meet and go beyond their Zero 
Carbon obligations.
5.18
  
Further detailed policies an
d guidance on urban design principles will be set out in the 
Policies, Sites and Places DPD and a reviewed South Gloucestershire Design Checklist 
with regard to the sub-division of dwellings and building on gardens.
 
Green infrastructure  
 
POLICY CS2 -  GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
The Council and its partners will ensure that existing and new Green Infrastructure (GI) is 
planned, delivered and managed as an integral part of creating sustainable communities 
and enhancing quality of life, considering the following GI objectives:
1.
  
realising the potent
ial of Green Infrastructure to assist with  mitigation of, and adaption 
to, climate change
2.
  
delivering high qual
ity multi-functional and connected open spaces (including Green 
and Blue Infrastructure)
3.
  
protecting, creati
ng and improving recreational, play, access and local food cultivation 
opportunities
4.
  
protecting and enhanc
ing species and habitats, and creating new habitats and wildlife 
linkages between them
5.
  
conserving and enhanc
ing landscape character, historical, natural, built and cultural 
heritage features
6.
 
securing ongoing mana
gement and maintenance and creation of GI assets
7.
 
joint working with part
ners, including neighbouring local authorities.
The attainment of the above objectives should be addressed by development proposals 
and Local Plan Documents. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
38
 
The Strategic Green Infrastructure Network (figure 1) displays those current and potential 
GI assets which are important at a strategic scale. Some of these assets are protected 
by existing development plan policies, whilst other areas provide opportunities to extend 
(through the creation of new assets) and enhance the network. Opportunities to enhance, 
connect with and extend the strategic network will be taken.
 5.19
  
Green Infrastructur
e (GI) consists of a multi-functional network of high quality open space 
assets that can work together to support sustainable communities and enhance quality 
of life. The concept of GI looks beyond existing designations, seeking opportunities to 
enhance the physical and functional connectivity of assets, and extend the benefits for 
people (such as access, recreation and sport, health and well-being, space to grow food, 
and economic), biodiversity, and natural ecological processes (including responding 
to climate change, air quality and sustainable water management). It is also important 
to consider the associated plans, strategies, activities, management arrangements and 
community involvement that assist with enhancing the multi-functionality, quality and 
connectivity of GI assets.
5.20
  
Green Infrastructur
e assets include open spaces, recreational areas, parks, allotments, 
biological and geological conservation sites, landscape and heritage features, water 
courses, water features, sustainable drainage schemes, woodlands, trees, cycleways, 
pedestrian routes, bridleways, public rights of way and open access land and managed 
countryside. A more detailed list is contained in Appendix 3.
5.21
  
Green Infrastructur
e plays a critical function for informal recreation; in particular GI can to 
provide opportunities for play. The values, objectives and criteria of the Council’s adopted 
Play Policy and Strategy must be reflected when considering GI (protection, enhancement 
and new delivery) and overall site design in respect of new developments.
5.22
  
Green Infrastructur
e within and linking urban and rural environments has the potential to 
bring a range of social, economic and environmental benefits. These include but are not 
restricted to:
 
 
Biodiversity
5.23
  
Green Infrastructur
e provides space for nature, offers opportunities for community 
interaction with nature, encourages presence and diversity of species, and provides 
opportunities to link habitats and spaces together. This can include a range of actions 
from the protection of designated sites to more innovative encouragement of biodiversity 
opportunities such as green roofs and green walls.
 
 
Climate change
5.24
  
Green Infrastructur
e provides opportunities to manage water resources, by reducing run-
off, providing flood storage and acting as a natural soakaway. GI has a role in absorbing 
carbon dioxide, reducing ‘urban heat island’ effects, improving air quality and providing 
opportunities for increasing habitats and connections to help enable wildlife to adapt. 
Assets can provide opportunities for local food cultivation, contributing to local food www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
39
security, and are also important for biodiversity. GI can encourage walking and cycling, 
by providing pleasant traffic free routes thus helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
from car travel. GI can also incorporate space for renewable energy resources.
 
 
Recreation, play and a
ccess
5.25
  
Green Infrastructur
e can accommodate routes for walking, cycling and horse riding and 
includes accessible open spaces which people visit for formal and informal recreation, 
exercise, community activities, social interaction, and all types of play (for example 
equipped/built, natural, imaginative and creative). GI allows for improved connectivity 
between urban, urban fringe and rural assets for people and wildlife, and can also 
connect people with places of work and community facilities. GI benefits people’s 
health (mental and physical) and well-being, and provides opportunities for learning 
and studying. South Gloucestershire benefits from a significant number of long distance 
footpaths and cycleways, supported by the local network of rights of way (further details 
are contained in Appendix 3). Design of open spaces/local green spaces covered in 
Policy CS1.
  
Landscape, heritage a
nd geology
5.26
  
Green Infrastructur
e provides a means to improve landscape quality and protect 
landscape features and views. GI offers opportunities to protect, increase access to and 
understanding of landscape, geology/geomorphology, historic sites, conservation areas 
and heritage assets.
5.27
  
A series of sites, features, de
signations, connections and corridors form South 
Gloucestershire’s Strategic Green Infrastructure Network. These are assets which are 
important at the district and sub-regional scales.
5.28
  
The South Gloucesters
hire Strategic Green Infrastructure Network diagram (Figure 1) is 
indicative and broadly shows the strategic network and the strategic recreational and 
cycle routes which are important at sub-regional and district scales. It is not meant to be 
exhaustive; the strategic network can overlap and interrelate with other non-strategic GI 
assets. The diagram (details on the sites that make up the strategic network are contained 
in Appendix 3) is intended as a guide and is illustrative; details have been provided on the 
main assets that exist within six zones across South Gloucestershire. The diagram is not 
intended to designate sites; other detailed policies relating to these sites are contained 
within the South Gloucestershire Local Plan. 
5.29
  
The Strategic GI networ
k is complemented by other elements of Green Infrastructure; 
such as non-strategic assets that are important at the neighbourhood and local scales. 
These assets equally contribute to the objectives of this policy and critically provide the 
local connection with the strategic assets (examples of non-strategic assets are contained 
in Appendix 3).
5.30
  
This policy is complemented b
y detailed development management policies relating to 
existing GI assets. This policy provides a context for how a multi-functional network of 
spaces and linkages support sustainable communities and provide a range of benefits 
will be delivered through partnership work and the development management process.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
40
Key - Strategic Green Infrastructure Network (Figure 1)
Severn
Beach
Thornbury
Frampton
Cotterell
Avonmouth
Westbury
on Trym
Shirehampton
Horfield
Brislington
Hengrove
A
3
8
A
3
7
0
A
4
A
36
9
M
5
Ó
Bristol Airport
Weston-super-Mare
Weston-super-Mare,
Taunton, Exeter,
The South West
Portishead
A
4
0
3
A
4
1
6
2
A4018
M
4
M
4
8
Staple
Hill
Hanham
Filton
Bath
A
37
A
4
A
4
3
1
A
4
3
2
Bath
A
4
6
A
46
M
4
A
4
2
0
Chippenham
Swindon, Reading,
London
A
43
3
Tetbury
Gloucester, Cheltenham,
The Midlands
Gloucester
M
5
M3
2
A
3
8
Chepstow
Newport, Cardiff,
South Wales
Severn Estuary
Bedminster
Swindon, Reading,
London
Weston-super-Mare,
Taunton, Exeter
A
3
8
Patchway
Downend
Bradley
Stoke
BRISTOL
City Centre
Severn
Estuary
Marshfield
Yate
Emersons
Green
Charfield
Bitton
Pucklechurch
Warmley
Longwell
Green
Kingswood
1
5
4
3
2
6
Gloucester,
Cheltenham,
Birmingham
Nailsworth,
Stroud
A
4
2
0
St George
Fishponds
Coalpit
Heath
River
Frome
Ladden
Brook
River
Avon
River
Boyd
Winterbourne
Frenchay
Chipping
Sodbury
Severn
Beach
Pilning
Rangeworthy
Hawkesbury
Upton
Wickwar
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
Key – Strategic Green Infrastructure Network
South Gloucestershire Council Boundary
Strategic Green Infrastructure
Visually Important Hillsides
Strategic Recreation & Cycle Routes
Main Water Courses
Railways
Main Roads
ZONES
ZONE 1
Severn Estuary; SPA/SAC/RAMSAR; Floodzones 2&3; 
Strategic Nature Areas; Severn Way, Monarachʼs Way & 
Jubilee Way; Landscape Character Areas 19,20,21
ZONE 2
Strategic Nature Areas; SNCIs; Open Access Areas; Ladden
Brook; Floodzones 2&3; Visually Important Hillsides; Historic 
Parks & Gardens; Strategic Paths & Cycleways; Landscape 
Character Areas 7,8,9,10,17,18
ZONE 3
Commons; Local Nature Reserves; Strategic Nature Area; 
SSSI; Lower Woods Nature Reserve; Frome Valley; 
Floodzones 2&3, Strategic Paths & Cycleway; Visually 
Important Hillsides; Historic Parks & Gardens; Landscape 
Character Areas 5,6,8,12
ZONE 4
Cotswold AONB; Strategic Nature Area; Historic Parks & 
Gardens; Visually Important Hillsides; National Trail; SSSIs; 
Open Access Lane; Landscape Character Areas 1,2,3,4
ZONE 5
Visually Important Hillsides; Strategic Paths & Cycleways; 
Local Nature Reserves; Commons; Overscourt Wood; 
Warmley Forest; Hanham Hills; River Boyd; Avon Valley, 
Floodzones 2&3; Landscape Character Areas 6,11,12,14,16
ZONE 6
Visually Important Hillsides & Landscape; Commons, Frome 
Valley; Strategic Paths; Local Nature Reserve; M32 Corridor; 
Haw Wood; Stoke Park; Historic Parks & Gardens; Landscape 
Character Areas 13,15,18
Key – Strategic Green Infrastructure Network
South Gloucestershire Council Boundary
Strategic Green Infrastructure
Visually Important Hillsides
Strategic Recreation & Cycle Routes
Main Water Courses
Railways
Main Roads
ZONES
ZONE 1
Severn Estuary; SPA/SAC/RAMSAR; Floodzones 2&3; 
Strategic Nature Areas; Severn Way, Monarachʼs Way & 
Jubilee Way; Landscape Character Areas 19,20,21
ZONE 2
Strategic Nature Areas; SNCIs; Open Access Areas; Ladden
Brook; Floodzones 2&3; Visually Important Hillsides; Historic 
Parks & Gardens; Strategic Paths & Cycleways; Landscape 
Character Areas 7,8,9,10,17,18
ZONE 3
Commons; Local Nature Reserves; Strategic Nature Area; 
SSSI; Lower Woods Nature Reserve; Frome Valley; 
Floodzones 2&3, Strategic Paths & Cycleway; Visually 
Important Hillsides; Historic Parks & Gardens; Landscape 
Character Areas 5,6,8,12
ZONE 4
Cotswold AONB; Strategic Nature Area; Historic Parks & 
Gardens; Visually Important Hillsides; National Trail; SSSIs; 
Open Access Lane; Landscape Character Areas 1,2,3,4
ZONE 5
Visually Important Hillsides; Strategic Paths & Cycleways; 
Local Nature Reserves; Commons; Overscourt Wood; 
Warmley Forest; Hanham Hills; River Boyd; Avon Valley, 
Floodzones 2&3; Landscape Character Areas 6,11,12,14,16
ZONE 6
Visually Important Hillsides & Landscape; Commons, Frome 
Valley; Strategic Paths; Local Nature Reserve; M32 Corridor; 
Haw Wood; Stoke Park; Historic Parks & Gardens; Landscape 
Character Areas 13,15,18www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
41
5.31
  
Complementing this policy are the Core Strategy policies relating to Managing the 
Environment and Herita
ge (Policy CS9), Green Infrastructure, Sport, and Recreation 
Standards (Policy CS24), Design (Policy CS1), and Improving Accessibility (Policy 
CS8). The GI objectives have been embedded in the planning and policy wording 
relating to Part 2 of this Core Strategy, and will continue to be considered as the new 
neighbourhoods are progressed through the development management process.
Delivery
5.32
  
The Council is producin
g a Green Infrastructure Strategy, which provides further details 
regarding existing GI assets, associated activities, the functions and benefits of GI, 
the delivery mechanisms, standards and priorities for the future delivery of Green 
Infrastructure. The Green Infrastructure Strategy will be adopted as a Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD).
5.33
  
The Council has a central r
esponsibility for the provision, delivery and planning of Green 
Infrastructure, given its role as local planning authority and direct provider of significant 
areas of open spaces. This role is enhanced by acting in partnership with the public, 
private and voluntary sectors, whilst ensuring that delivery of Green Infrastructure is based 
on a strategic view of what is required to serve the needs of the community.
5.34
  
Joint working with local au
thorities and partners will help to ensure that GI is integrated 
and interlinked across the sub-region to maximise its benefits for biodiversity and people.
Renewable and low carbon energy
 
 
POLICY CS3 -  RENEWABLE AND LOW CARBON ENERGY GENERATION
Proposals for the generation of energy from renewable or low carbon sources, provided 
that the installation would not cause significant demonstrable harm to residential amenity, 
individually or cumulatively, will be supported. 
In assessing proposals significant weight will be given to:
1.
  
the wider environment
al benefits associated with increased production of energy from 
renewable sources
2.
  
proposals that enjoy signi
ficant community support and generate an income for 
community infrastructure purposes by selling heat or electricity to the National Grid
3.
 
the time limited, non-
permanent nature of some types of installations; and
4.
  
the need for secure and rel
iable energy generation capacity, job creation opportunities 
and local economic benefits.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
42
 
Renewable or low carbon energy installations will not be supported in areas covered by 
national designations and areas of local landscape value unless they do not individually 
or cumulatively compromise the objectives of the designations especially with regard to 
landscape character, visual impact and residential amenity.
Developments will also be required to meet objectives of Policy CS1 (High Quality 
Design), as far as engineering requirements permit. 
5.35
  
Renewable and/or low car
bon energy supplies include, but not exclusively, those from 
biomass and energy crops, Combined Heat and Power (see Policy CS4), waste heat from 
industrial processes, energy from waste, ground and air source heating and cooling, 
hydro, solar thermal, photovoltaic generation (including solar farms) and wind power. 
5.36
  
Given the close proximit
y of the Green Belt to the main urban areas, this will potentially be 
an attractive location for renewable or low carbon energy generation.  Greater weight will 
therefore be given to the ‘wider’ environmental benefits (CO2 reduction) in considering 
applications in this area, particularly where criteria 2, 3 and/or 4 are also met. 
5.37
  
With regard to criterion 2, ins
tallations that would generate a direct financial benefit to 
the local community will be encouraged. This can be achieved by legal agreement that 
guarantees to pay a percentage of the income generated by selling heat or electricity to 
the grid, into a Community Trust Fund, or other suitable mechanism, controlled by the 
local community for spending on other local infrastructure and energy efficiency initiatives. 
This approach is particularly promoted in the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), 
in order to support local communities and the objectives of the AONB Management Plan. 
5.38
  
Some installations, su
ch as wind turbines have an operational lifespan, typically 25 years. 
The temporary nature of these installations can be conditioned, allowing a review against 
the policy framework and energy environment at that time and potentially requiring the 
site to be returned to its former state. This may be an appropriate approach where the 
cumulative impact of such installations may begin to undermine landscape character.
5.39
  
Where Environmental A
ssessment regulations are not applicable, applicants will only 
be required to provide information on the likely significant environmental, social and 
economic effects, proportionate to the project.
Delivery
5.40
  
The policy will be implemente
d through the development management process. The 
policies of the Joint Waste Core Strategy should also be considered, specifically with 
regard to energy from waste schemes. The Council will also promote the delivery of 
renewable and low carbon energy generation through the Sustainable Community 
Strategy, the Climate Change Strategy and wider corporate functions.
5.41
  
The Council intends to pr
oduce guidance on the siting of non-household scale wind 
turbines at the earliest opportunity following further investigation.  The Council will also www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
43
consider the identification of areas and sites for the development of renewable and low 
carbon energy installations through the Policies, Sites and Places DPD.
5.42
  
The Council will also explo
re setting up an ‘allowable solutions’ fund to ensure that 
carbon savings are made on small-scale development sites where the provision of on-site 
renewable energy may not be technically viable. 
5.43
  
Planning obligation
s or a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) may in some cases be 
used to contribute towards the delivery of strategic renewable energy infrastructure.
POLICY CS4 -  RENEWABLE OR LOW CARBON DISTRICT HEAT NETWORKS
Any applications to develop a thermal generating station or proposals that have a 
capacity to generate significant waste heat as part of an industrial or commercial process 
must either:
1.
 
include heat recover
y and re-use technology; and 
2.
 
heat distribution in
frastructure; or 
3.
 
provide evidence tha
t heat distribution has been fully explored and is unfeasible.
Major development proposals (more than 100 dwellings that are wholly or in part greater 
than 50dph, or non-residential of more than 10,000sqm) should, where practical and 
viable:
4.
  
include renewable or l
ow carbon heating or CHP generation and distribution 
infrastructure on-site and demonstrate how opportunities to accommodate an energy 
and or district heating solution have been maximised, taking into account density, mix 
of uses, layout and phasing; or
5.
 
connect to an existing re
newable or low carbon heat distribution network; or 
6.
  
provide a heat distrib
ution network as part of the development where there are firm 
proposals for renewable or low carbon heat generation or CHP and distribution in the 
locality within a reasonable time frame; or 
7.
  
provide evidence tha
t renewable and low carbon sources of heating or CHP have been 
fully explored and are unfeasible. 
Developments of less than 100 dwellings or 10,000sqm of non-residential floorspace 
should connect to any existing available district heat network(s) in the vicinity, providing 
this is practical and would not adversely affect the viability of the development.
 
5.44
  
Combined Heat and Power (
CHP) is the generation of usable heat and electricity in a 
single process. By reducing transmission losses, and making use of waste heat, CO2 
emissions can be reduced substantially. CHP systems operate most efficiently where South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
44
there is a constant heat demand throughout the day and year. Given the mix of uses, 
particularly in areas like the North Fringe of Bristol, where large industrial and commercial 
uses are in close proximity to existing and proposed housing sites, it is considered 
that district heating networks provide the most efficient way to achieve substantial CO2 
reduction targets.
5.45
  
Through its planning, ass
et management programmes and other corporate functions, the 
Council will work to establish CHP plant and heat distribution infrastructure, particularly 
with owners/developers of sites identified as ‘Potential Anchor Heat Loads/Sources’ 
and Strategic Growth Areas identified on the Energy Opportunities Plan (see Report on 
the Potential for Renewable Energy Supply in South Gloucestershire) and other major 
developments as may come forward.  Positive additional weight will therefore be given 
to proposals that incorporate heat generation and distribution infrastructure and/or CHP 
plant.
5.46
  
If a thermal generation sta
tion or industrial or commercial process that produces 
significant waste heat is proposed without CHP plant or heat distribution infrastructure in 
any part of the district, the applicant should present evidence that the possibilities for CHP 
plant and heat distribution have been fully explored. This should be through an audit trail 
of dialogue between the applicant and prospective customers. Applicants should also 
have contacted agencies like the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA), Regen SW, 
the Council and other relevant stakeholders and obtained their advice on opportunities for 
heat customers.
5.47
  
Major development propo
sals (of more than 100 dwellings and greater than 50dph, 
or non-residential of more than 10,000 sq.m floorspace) should consider how heat 
distribution opportunities could be incorporated (taking into account high quality design 
objectives – see Policy CS1). Where there are multiple developers, they will be expected 
to collaborate in terms of developing a district heating/CHP solution for the site as a 
whole. Developers that do not propose to incorporate CHP plant and or heat distribution 
network(s) should explain why it is not economically feasible or practical e.g. if there is an 
alternative source of heat that delivers required CO2 reduction targets. 
5.48
  
Where there are potent
ial developments which could generate the heat required 
and which are due to be built within a timeframe that would make incorporation of a 
distribution network feasible, conditions may be imposed to ensure that the development 
is connected to the respective heat supply source. 
5.49
  
For developments of less t
han 100 dwellings or 10,000sq.m, where a district heating 
network does not yet exist, applicants should consider installing heat and cooling 
equipment that is capable of connection at a later date.
Delivery
5.50
  
The policy will be implemente
d through the development management process. The 
policies of the Joint Waste Core Strategy should also be considered, specifically with 
regard to energy from waste schemes. The Council will also promote the delivery of 
renewable and low carbon energy generation through the Sustainable Community www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
45
Strategy, the Climate Change Strategy and wider corporate functions.
5.51
  
The Council will also pro
gress setting up a ‘Community Energy / allowable solutions’ fund 
to ensure that carbon savings are made locally from small-scale development sites where 
the provision of on-site renewable energy may not be technically viable.
5.52
  
Planning obligation
s or a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) may in some cases be 
used to contribute towards the delivery of strategic district heating infrastructure.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
46
6.
 
Managing future development
Introduction
6.1
  
The core principle in national policy is delivering sustainable development.  
6.2 
  
Managing future developm
ent is a key priority of the Council’s Sustainable Community 
Strategy and the Council Strategy, so that we deal positively with the challenges posed 
by more growth, by planning in a sustainable and integrated way for high quality homes, 
associated employment opportunities, local community facilities and a convenient and 
safe transport network which meets our communities’ needs and aspirations. 
6.3
  
Future development in Sou
th Gloucestershire will put further pressure on existing 
infrastructure, much of which is at or nearing capacity. In order to cope with the 
additional demand generated by new development and to meet Sustainable Community 
Strategy objectives, this infrastructure will require improvement and in some cases 
additional provision. Without new investment, both existing communities and future 
new neighbourhoods will be neither sustainable nor acceptable. New development will 
therefore be expected to contribute towards the provision of necessary infrastructure 
to support the development of sustainable healthy communities and climate change 
mitigation and adaptation objectives. 
6.4
  
The first policy in this chap
ter relates to the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development, as set out in the NPPF, the second policy provides the broad spatial 
framework for developing in sustainable locations, with the third policy addressing the 
delivery of infrastructure.
Core Strategy Objectives
❙
  
Concentrating the maj
ority of new development to take advantage of existing services and 
facilities and higher levels of accessibility
❙
  
Locating development wh
ere it will provide the opportunity to minimise the need to travel and 
allow safe and convenient access to services by walking, cycling and public transport 
❙
 
Recognising and protec
ting the identity and heritage of existing communities
❙
  
Promoting greater self
-containment and enhancing the service centre role of the market 
towns of Thornbury, Yate and Chipping Sodbury
❙
 
Supporting local hous
ing needs and services in villages
❙
 
Protecting the Green B
elt and the countryside from inappropriate development
❙
  
Providing a range of inf
rastructure, together with integration and access, in step with new 
development
❙
  
The Council will continu
ally and positively work with communities, developers and 
infrastructure providers to ensure implementation of the plan is viable and not put at risk 
throughout the economic cycle as part of pursuing sustainable developmentwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
47
Sustainable development
 
POLICY CS4A - PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
There is a presumption in favour of sustainable development. When considering 
proposals for sustainable development the Council will take a positive approach. It will 
work pro-actively with applicants to find solutions so that sustainable development can 
be approved wherever possible.
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Plan will be approved without 
delay unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
Where there are no policies relevant to the application, or relevant policies are out of date 
at the time of making the decision, then the Council will grant permission unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise. Account will be taken of whether:
1.
 
 
Any adverse impacts of g
ranting permission would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits when assessed against the policies in the National Planning 
Policy Framework and other policies in the Council’s Local Plan, neighbourhood 
development plans, supporting supplementary planning documents and any emerging 
policy as it may be relevant.
2.
  
Specific policies in th
e National Planning Policy Framework, other policies in the 
Council’s Local Plan, neighbourhood development plans, supporting supplementary 
planning documents and any emerging policy as it may be relevant, indicate that 
development should be restricted.
 
6.5 
  
The purpose of the plannin
g system is to contribute to the achievement of sustainable 
development, of which there are three dimensions - economic, social and environmental. 
The role of the planning system in respect of these 3 dimensions is: 
		❙
  
economic role – contributi
ng to building a strong, responsive and competitive 
economy 
		❙
 
social role – supporting s
trong, vibrant and healthy communities; and
		❙
  
environmental role – cont
ributing to protecting and enhancing the natural, built and 
historic environment.
6.6  
  
These roles are mutually de
pendent and, to achieve sustainable development, economic, 
social and environmental gains should be sought jointly and simultaneously through the 
planning system. The planning system should, therefore, play an active role in guiding 
development to sustainable solutions. This involves seeking positive improvements in the 
quality of the built, natural and historic environment, as well as in people’s quality of life.
6.7    
  
Under the NPPF, propos
ed development that accords with an up-to-date Local Plan 
should be approved, and proposed development that conflicts should be refused, 
unless other material considerations indicate otherwise. In this way development which is 
sustainable can be approved without delay.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
48
Delivery
6.8
 
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process.
Location of Development
 
 
POLICY CS5 – LOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT
In order to deliver the Strategy for Development, the framework for the location and scale 
of development is:
1.
  
Most new development wi
ll take place within the communities of the North and East 
Fringes of Bristol urban area:
	❙
  
the focus will be the deve
lopment of existing commitments and the remaining South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan allocations, together with delivery of the Greater Bristol 
Bus Network, and the planning for the West of England transport package and 
future schemes; and
	❙
 
 
new neighbourhoods of su
stainable communities will be developed at Cribbs/
Patchway and to the east of Harry Stoke.
2.
  
At Yate/Chipping Sodb
ury, new development will be of a scale appropriate to achieve 
greater self-containment and to improve the separate but inter-related roles and 
functions of the towns, focusing on investment in the town centres and improving the 
range and type of jobs
	❙
 
 
provided infrastru
cture, particularly sewerage infrastructure, is delivered, a new 
neighbourhood at north Yate will be developed, supported by a package of 
transport measures and a new local centre.
3.
  
At Thornbury, new develop
ment will be of a scale appropriate to revitalise the town 
centre and strengthen community services and facilities.
4.
  
The economic potentia
l of Severnside will be realised as a strategic location for a 
range of employment uses, subject to the resolution of flood risk, environmental and 
infrastructure issues and taking into account the most recent government legislation 
and guidance.
5.
  
In the rural areas communiti
es will be empowered to shape the future of their own 
local area through opportunities presented by Neighbourhood Planning. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
49
 
 
 
 
Outside the Green Belt (
including settlements surrounded by the Green Belt):
 
(a) 
 
small scale developmen
t may be permitted within the settlement boundaries of 
villages defined on the Policies Map
 
(b) 
 
defined settlement bo
undaries will be maintained around rural settlements and 
reviewed in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD or a replacement Core Strategy/
Local Plan or Neighbourhood Plan. A review of the approach to the distribution of 
housing in the rural areas will be undertaken which will include engagement with 
the local community and other stakeholders/parties
 
(c) 
 
in villages and other se
ttlements without defined settlement boundaries, new 
development will be strictly controlled, but small scale development within or 
well related to villages or settlements may come forward through Neighbourhood 
Planning initiatives and rural housing exception site policy
 
(d) 
 
any changes/proposa
ls should be commensurate with the locality in terms of its 
form, character and landscape and cumulatively acceptable when considered with 
any other development identified in the Core Strategy,  Policies Sites and Places 
DPD, replacement Local Plan or Neighbourhood Plans.
 
(e) In the open countryside
, new development will be strictly limited.
6.
  
The extent of the Green Bel
t will remain unchanged from that shown in the South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan, except to the east of Harry Stoke/Stoke Gifford (north 
of the A4174 Avon Ring Road), and to the west of the A4018 at Cribbs Causeway, 
where the need to: meet future housing requirements; ensure sustainable patterns of 
development; create and plan comprehensively for sustainable communities; are the 
exceptional circumstances in which land will be removed from the Green Belt at these 
locations. In addition, the visual impact of the proposed Stoke Gifford Transport Link 
on the openness of the Green Belt to the east of Harry Stoke/ Stoke Gifford (north of 
the A4174 Avon Ring Road) is also considered to provide an exceptional circumstance 
which justifies the release of this land from the Green Belt. 
 
Elsewhere in the Green B
elt:
 
(a) 
 
small scale infill deve
lopment may be permitted within the settlement boundaries of 
villages shown on the Policies Map.  Settlement boundaries will also be reviewed 
through the Policies Sites and Places DPD or a replacement Local Plan or a 
Neighbourhood Plan
 
(b) 
 
development brought f
orward through a Community Right to Build Order is not 
inappropriate development in the Green Belt, provided it preserves the openness 
of the Green Belt and its purposes accord with Government policy
 
(c) 
 
other proposals for deve
lopment in the Green Belt will need to comply with the 
provisions in the NPPF or relevant local plan policies in the Core Strategy.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
50
 
7.
  
The sequential and exc
eptions tests will be applied to direct development to areas 
with the lowest probability of flooding, taking account of the vulnerability of the type 
of development proposed, its contribution to creating sustainable communities and 
achieving the sustainable objectives of the Core Strategy.
 
6.9
  
The largest share of new d
evelopment will take place within the North Fringe of the 
Bristol urban area, (incorporating land west of the A4018) which includes the new 
neighbourhood areas at Cribbs Causeway/Patchway, and on the edge of the North Fringe 
east of Harry Stoke, and at Emersons Green East in the East Fringe of the Bristol urban 
area. This represents places where essential infrastructure is in place or planned. This will 
reduce the need to travel and commute, accompanied by a package of public transport 
measures and supported by other community infrastructure. The boundaries of the North 
and East Fringes are shown on the Policies Map.
6.10
  
Other than in two locatio
ns, east of Harry Stoke/Stoke Gifford (north of the A4174 Avon 
Ring Road) and to the west of the A4018 at Cribbs Causeway, the general extent of 
the Bristol and Bath Green Belt will be maintained as shown on the Policies Map. The 
exceptional circumstances identified by the Council, which justify the release of this land 
from the Green Belt, are the need to:
	
		❙
 
meet future housing nee
d
		❙
 
ensure sustainable patt
erns of development
		❙
 
create and plan comprehen
sively for sustainable communities. 
   
In addition, in relation to th
e land east of Harry Stoke/Stoke Gifford (north of the A4174 
Avon Ring Road), the visual impact of the proposed Stoke Gifford Transport Link on the 
openness of the Green Belt is also considered to provide an exceptional circumstance 
which justifies the release of this land from the Green Belt. The Council’s Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD) “Development in the Green Belt, June 2007” will remain and 
provide guidance, where it accords with the Green Belt policy in the NPPF, until such time 
as it is replaced and updated either through a new policy in the Policies, Sites and Places 
DPD or a replacement Core Strategy/Local Plan.
6.11
  
Outside the Bristol urban a
rea, development land will be provided in Yate/ Chipping 
Sodbury and Thornbury, to promote greater self-containment of these settlements. This 
will include a new neighbourhood to the north of Yate.
6.12
  
In the rural areas communities w
ill be empowered to shape the future of their own 
local area through opportunities presented by Neighbourhood Planning.  Small scale 
development will be allowed in villages with defined settlement boundaries where it 
meets local housing needs or supports or enhances existing services and their viability. 
However where settlements with defined settlement boundaries are in the Green Belt 
then, to accord with government guidance, development will be limited to no more than 
infilling. Affordable housing will be supported in accordance with Policy CS19 (Rural 
Housing Exception Sites), where there is identified need and local community support. A 
small element of market housing will be permitted on such sites if it can be satisfactorily 
proved that this will facilitate the delivery of the local affordable housing need. Settlement 
boundaries are currently defined on the Policies Map for 37 villages. The defined www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
51
settlement boundaries to villages 
will be reviewed through the 
Policies, Sites and Places 
DPD or a replacement Local Plan or in Neighbourhood Plans. 
6.13
  
The Severnside area is recognised as being a regionally significant employment area, 
covered by longstanding planning permissions, much of which remains undeveloped. 
Planning policy continues to support its development, while recognising the significant 
constraints that affect the area by way of flood risk, highway infrastructure, ecology and 
archaeology.
6.14
  
Government guidance requires that a sequential test relating to flood risk is applied to 
the identification of land for development, to ensure that there are no alternative sites 
available in areas with a lower probability of flooding that would be appropriate to the type 
of development or land use proposed. Departures from this approach will only be justified 
in exceptional circumstances where it is necessary to meet the wider aims of sustainable 
development. The Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessments have helped inform the 
Strategy for Development. This work indicates that the Strategy for Development can be 
delivered despite the flood risk issues by following a sequential approach in accordance 
with national policy. This approach will be used for allocating land in the Policies, Sites 
and Places DPD or a replacement Core Strategy/Local Plan. 
6.15
  
The areas surrounding the existing nuclear licensed sites at Oldbury and Berkley are 
covered by ‘safeguarding zones’ designated by the Office of Nuclear Regulation, as 
shown on the diagram at Appendix 8. HSE will be consulted on proposed development 
in these zones in accordance with their published procedures and practices. The 
implications of any proposed development will also be considered from an emergency 
planning perspective, and responses received would be a material consideration in 
determining planning applications. The promoters of the proposed new build site at 
Oldbury may also have an interest in seeking to ensure that any proposed development 
in the surrounding area does not compromise their ability to deliver on the National Policy 
Statement nomination of the site near Oldbury as being potentially suitable for a new 
nuclear power station.
6.16
  
Where major infrastructure projects are proposed, including the NPS identification of a site 
near Oldbury for a potential new nuclear power station, a potential new power station at 
Severnside and National Grid Connections, the Council will seek to work with the scheme 
promoters, statutory bodies and the community, to seek to ensure optimal benefits for the 
locality and to minimise social, economic and environmental impacts. The Council may 
have a dual role in respect of these developments, either as consultee to Development 
Consent Order Applications that are assessed by the Planning Inspectorate and 
determined by the Secretary of State, or as consultee on applications that are determined 
by other statutory bodies such as the Environment Agency or the Marine Management 
Organisation, or as the determining authority for any applications for development 
associated with but not part of Development Consent Orders. 
Delivery
6.17
  
The development will be delivered by the private sector through the planning and 
development management process and by Neighbourhood Planning. More details on 
delivery are set out in the policies in Part 2 of the Core Strategy.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
52
Infrastructure and developer contributions
 
POLICY CS6 – INFRASTRUCTURE AND DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTIONS
The Council will work with partners to deliver infrastructure, services and community 
facilities to improve the sustainability of its communities. The Council will also continually 
and positively work with communities, developers and infrastructure providers to ensure 
implementation of the plan is viable and not put at risk throughout the economic cycle as 
part of pursuing sustainable development.
All new development of a sufficient scale that would add to the overall demand and 
impact on infrastructure will be required to provide:
❙
 
site specific measures to d
irectly mitigate the impact of the development
❙
 
 
infrastructure, ser
vices and community facilities to mitigate its impacts on existing 
communities and provide for the needs arising from the development, including 
financial contributions towards their maintenance where appropriate.
Where necessary infrastructure, services and community facilities cannot be provided 
on-site (in kind), financial contributions will be sought and may be pooled to secure 
the necessary off-site infrastructure investment to mitigate the cumulative impact of 
development(s).
6.18
  
Future development in Sou
th Gloucestershire will put further pressure on existing 
infrastructure, much of which is at or nearing capacity. In order to cope with the additional 
demand generated by new development and meet Sustainable Community Strategy 
objectives, this infrastructure will require improvement and in some cases additional 
provision. New investment and safeguarding measures may be necessary to ensure 
schemes are sustainable and acceptable in planning terms both for existing and new 
areas of development. New development will therefore be expected to contribute towards 
the provision of necessary infrastructure to support the development of sustainable, 
healthy communities and climate change mitigation and adaptation objectives. 
6.19
  
The infrastructure, f
acilities and services to which development may be required to 
contribute include:
		❙
 
Affordable housing
		❙
 
Strategic utilities
		❙
 
Education facilities
		
❙
 
Health facilities
		❙
 
Police, Fire and Ambulan
ce facilities
		❙
 
Community and cultural facil
ities and activities (See Policy CS23)
		❙
 
Transport infrastruc
ture
		❙
 
Sustainable transpor
t measures (including revenue support)
		❙
 
Green Infrastructur
e (Open Space, play and outdoor sports facilities) 
		❙
 
Ecological mitigation
		❙
 
Flood risk management meas
ureswww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
53
		❙
 
Waste facilities
		❙
 
District heating networ
ks and other renewable and low carbon energy infrastructure
		❙
 
Local energy efficiency i
nitiatives
		❙
 
Local climate change ada
ptation and mitigation initiatives
		❙
 
Public realm provision / impr
ovements
		❙
 
Local employment and train
ing initiatives
		❙
  
Telecommunications infra
structure (capable of delivering superfast internet 
connections)
		❙
 
Cemeteries
		❙
 
Commuted payments for t
he management and maintenance of facilities provided
6.20
  
This list is not exhaust
ive and this policy should be read in conjunction with Policies 
CS18 (Affordable Housing) and CS23 (Community Buildings & Cultural Activity), as other 
contributions may be sought depending upon the individual characteristics and impacts 
of a particular development. Contributions will only be sought where they are necessary, 
directly related and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development, 
in accordance with the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations (2010) Part 11 
(paragraphs 122 & 123).
6.21
  
Infrastructure is oft
en essential simply to make a development function. Developers are 
therefore required to consult and work with statutory undertakers and service providers 
to ensure that adequate provision is made for such infrastructure. Service infrastructure in 
this context includes highways, utility services (including fire hydrants and adequate water 
supply for fire fighting), surface water drainage and attenuation, and sewage disposal.
6.22
  
The Infrastructure Del
ivery Plan supports the Strategy for Development. Delivery will 
require close working with other public and private partners. Other sources of funding will 
also remain critical to the delivery of required infrastructure. The Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan supports the Strategy for Development. Delivery will require close working with 
other public and private partners. Other sources of funding will also remain critical to the 
delivery of required infrastructure. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan is a ‘living’ document 
and will therefore be kept under review and ongoing viability appraisal. The plan can be 
viewed at www.southglos.gov.uk. 
Delivery
6.23
  
Developer contribution
s will primarily be sought through the use of Section 106 planning 
obligations, and a Community Infrastructure Levy as set out in the CIL Regulations 2010. 
The policy will be implemented through the development management process. The 
Council will continue to work positively with communities, developers and infrastructure 
providers to ensure the New Neighbourhoods and other principal development locations 
referred to in the Core Strategy are viable and deliverable throughout the economic 
cycle(s). A South Gloucestershire Developer Contributions Guide SPD and CIL Charging 
Schedule will be prepared. CIL charges will be reviewed on a regular basis. Economic 
appraisal work necessary to justify CIL rates will provide further opportunities to review 
development viability in key locations and generally across the district over the plan 
period.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
54
7.
  
Tackling congestion and 
improving accessibi
lity 
7.1
   
The Council is committed to working with the other three Unitary Authorities on transport 
issues through, the Join
t Transport Executive Committee (JTEC) and the Joint Local 
Transport Plan (JLTP3) and with businesses through the Local Enterprise Partnership 
(LEP). The JLTP provides the primary strategy for improving transportation in the locality. 
Relieving congestion is paramount to the continued economic prosperity of South 
Gloucestershire, to the health and wellbeing of its residents and to climate change 
mitigation objectives. Delivery of enhanced travel options to significant destinations, 
by means other than the private car is therefore a key objective of the JLTP3 and 
Core Strategy. This is consistent with the Sustainable Community Strategy’s priority of 
managing future development in a positive way. 
Core Strategy Objectives
❙
  
Reducing congestion and a
ir pollution  by improving accessibility by means other than the 
private car
❙
  
Widely, improving and en
hancing opportunities for walking, cycling and using public 
transport, and particularly to significant destinations, such as educational establishments, 
hospitals and employment areas
❙
  
Completing delivery of the G
reater Bristol Bus Network and delivering the North Fringe to 
Hengrove Package, the link from Temple Meads - Emersons Green and the Greater Bristol 
Metro Project 
Strategic transport infrastructure 
 
POLICY CS7 – STRATEGIC TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
Priority will be given to the implementation of strategic infrastructure proposals that 
reduce congestion and improve accessibility by means other than the private car. In 
particular, the Council will work with its partners to deliver within the plan period the 
following key projects:
1.
  
Completion of the Grea
ter Bristol Bus Network
2.
   
The construction of a Ra
pid Transit network to serve the communities of the North 
& East Bristol Fringes, including:
		❙
 
North Fringe to Hengro
ve (South Bristol) Package, and its components
		www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
55
		
	
			
-
 
Rapid Transit link from H
engrove to North Bristol Fringe
			
-
 
The Stoke Gifford Tran
sport Link
			
-
 
Rapid Transit link from N
orth Fringe to Emersons Green;
		❙
 
 
Rapid Transit link from A
shton Vale to Emersons Green (Phase 2 - Temple Meads 
to Emersons Green.
3.
  
Improvements to rail se
rvices, including:
		❙
 
 
electrification of th
e Great Western Main Line and associated improvements at 
Bristol Parkway station
		❙
 
the Greater Bristol Me
tro Project
		❙
  
re-introduction of p
assenger services on the Hallen Line/ Henbury Loop (subject 
to a satisfactory business case).
4.
  
The Cribbs/Patchway N
ew Neighbourhoods Package
5.
  
The East of Harry Stoke New N
eighbourhood Package
6.
  
The Yate/Chipping Sod
bury Package
7.
  
The Rural Package
8.
  
The Ring Road Package.
The C
ouncil will also require, the following, key infrastructure elements to be delivered as 
part of major development schemes:
9.
    
Romney Avenue Bus Link (fro
m Lockleaze through the Cheswick Village 
development site to the Cheswick Village Bus Link)
10.
 
New Transport Interch
ange at UWE
11.
    
Emersons Green East Mu
lti-Modal Interchange and Rosary Roundabout 
improvements
12.
   
New Junction onto the A4
174 between Coldharbour Lane and the M32 (Junction 1) 
and access road to SGLP site 13 (Harry Stoke).
SAFEGUARDING LAND
Development will not be permitted where it is prejudicial to the Council’s strategy of 
developing the schemes set out above, or other strategic transport measures that may 
emerge through the Joint Local Transport Plan. Land to be safeguarded will be identified 
in the Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document, Area Action Plans or other 
Development Plan Documents, as appropriate. Rail track beds and associated land will 
be safeguarded for their continuing use or reuse for public transport or rail freight, or foot 
and cycleways. 
Details of delivery agencies, timescales and funding mechanisms are set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
The Council will also continue to work with schools, other educational establishments 
and major employers, in particular, to develop and promote Travel Plans.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
56
Figure 2 – Strategic Transport  Infrastructure Proposals Diagram
3 
1 
7 
Y 
E 
C 
S 
W 
U 
19 
17 
18 
22 
14 
19 
15/20 
18 
21 
16 
Bristol 
Parkway 
 
Yate 
M32 
Yate 
Station 
Nibley 
 
Coalpit 
Heath 
Frampton 
Cotterell  
 
 Thornbury 
Bristol 
City Centre 
To
 Bristol 
Southmead Hospital 
Falfield 
Park & Share 
Aust 
Park & Share 
Tormarton 
Park & Share 
P+
P+
Emersons Green 
Iron 
Acton  
 
Severn 
Beach 
 
 Pilning 
 T
ytherington 
Charfield 
 
 
Cromhall 
Wickwar 
 
 Rangeworthy 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
 
 Pucklechurch 
 
Marshfield 
Emersons 
Green 
Staple 
Hill 
Kingswood 
Warmley 
Longwell 
Green 
Hanham 
Bitton 
 
Severnside 
Hawkesbury 
Upton 
 
 
Wick 
 Alveston 
5 
2 
4 
6 
 
See inset drawing
 
P+
P+
E 
CC 
U 
P+
P+
3 
1 
1 
UWE 
W 
 
C 
1 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
N
Transport 
Motorways 
Railway and Stations 
Transport Schemes 
North Fringe to Hengrove Package (MetroBus) 
Future potential MetroBus extension (indicative 
alignment) 
Proposed MetroBus extension (indicative alignment) 
Rail: Proposed Greater Bristol Metro (MetroWest) 
Bus: Proposed Orbital Bus Route (SGL
P 
Funded) 
Rapid Transit: Proposed extension to the Cribbs 
Causeway New Neighbourhood 
Re-introduction of passenger services on the Hallen Line/
Henbury Loop  
Rail: Safeguarded station sites at Henbur
y,
 Filton and 
Charfield  
Bus: Existing corridors proposed for improvement 
Bus: Proposed extension of existing bus routes to serve 
New Neighbourhoods 
Bus: Proposed Orbital Bus Route extension (indicative) 
Bus: Extension of A38 Showcase Route to Thornbury  
Highway: Ring Road Major Scheme 
Proposed Park & Ride Sites 
Proposed Rural Park & Share site improvements close to 
motorway junctions 
Indicative locations for interchange improvements 
Proposed cycleways to connect with the Cycling City 
network 
 
14 
 Wick 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
Key 
South Gloucestershire Boundary 
Severn Estuary 
Main Built Up Areas 
Cribbs Causeway Retail Area 
University of the West of England 
Wildlife Park 
SGLP Committed Sites
: 
Severnside 
Filton Northfield (Charlton Hayes) 
Wallscourt Farm (Cheswick) 
Land East of Coldharbour Lane 
Harry Stoke 
Science Park 
Emersons Green East 
New Neighbourhood Areas
: 
Cribbs/Patchway 
East of Harry Stoke 
North Yate 
Housing Opportunity areas 
Y 
E 
C 
7 
CC 
19 
P+
P+
UWE 
W www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
57
Figure 3 – Inset to Figure 2 
19 
15/20 
17 
Easter 
Compton 
Hallen 
Almondsbury 
Bradley 
Stoke 
Stoke 
Gifford 
Filton 
Frenchay 
Winterbourne 
Frampton 
Cotterell 
A4174 
A4174 
A4018 
A4174 
Patchway 
0m                           1km                               2km                                3km 
Bristol 
Parkway 
Willow       
Brook  
 
Centre      
1 
Bromley 
Heath 
Wick 
Wick 
Hambrook 
Harry Stoke 
Winterbourne 
Filton 
Abbey 
Wood 
Shields Retail Park 
Airbus/ 
Filton College 
Rolls 
Royce 
Aztec 
West 
Charlton 
Hayes 
Airbus 
West Gate 
16 
Henbury Station 
Safeguarded Site 
P+
P+
P+
P+
P 
Severnside 
MOD 
UWE 
FH 
SH 
W 
LEoCL 
Cheswick 
Pilning 
Patchway 
Station 
Filton Station 
Safeguarded Site 
CC 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
Bus: Existing corridors proposed 
for improvement 
Bus: Proposed extension of 
existing bus routes to the Cribbs 
Causeway New Neighbourhood 
Bus: Extension of A38 Showcase 
Route to Thornbury  
Highway: Ring Road Major 
Scheme 
Proposed Park & Ride Site 
Indicative locations for interchange 
improvements 
Proposed cycleways to connect 
with the Cycling City network 
Proposed Extension to Spine Road 
Proposed M49 Junction 
 
P+
P+
P South Gloucestershire Boundary 
Main Built Up Areas 
Cribbs Causeway Retail Area 
University of the West of England 
MOD Abbey Wood 
Southmead Hospital 
Frenchay Hospital 
Wildlife Park 
SGLP Committed Sites 
CC 
MOD 
UWE 
FH 
SH 
W 
New Neighbourhoods: 
Cribbs/Patchway and East of Harry Stoke 
Transport 
Motorways 
Railway and Stations 
Transport Schemes 
North Fringe Hengrove Package (MetroBus) 
Proposed MetroBus extension (indicative alignment) 
Rail: Proposed Greater Bristol Metro (MetroWest) 
Bus: Proposed Orbital Bus Route (SGLP Funded) 
Rapid Transit: Proposed extension to the Cribbs 
Causeway New Neighbourhood 
Extension to Proposed Orbital Bus Route  
Rail: Safeguarded station sites at Filton and 
Henbury 
Re-introduction of passenger services on the Hallen 
Line / Henbury Loop 
 
19 
Bus: Existing corridors proposed 
for improvement 
Bus: Proposed extension of 
existing bus routes to the Cribbs 
Causeway New Neighbourhood 
Bus: Extension of A38 Showcase 
Route to Thornbury  
Highway: Ring Road Major 
Scheme 
Proposed Park & Ride Site 
Indicative locations for interchange 
improvements 
Proposed cycleways to connect 
with the Cycling City network 
Proposed Extension to Spine Road 
Proposed M49 Junction 
 
P+
P+
P 
South Gloucestershire Boundary 
Main Built Up Areas 
Cribbs Causeway Retail Area 
University of the West of England 
MOD Abbey Wood 
Southmead Hospital 
Frenchay Hospital 
Wildlife Park 
SGLP Committed Sites 
CC 
MOD 
UWE 
FH 
SH 
W 
New Neighbourhoods: 
Cribbs/Patchway and East of Harry Stoke 
Transport 
Motorways 
Railway and Stations 
Transport Schemes 
North Fringe Hengrove Package (MetroBus) 
Proposed MetroBus extension (indicative alignment) 
Rail: Proposed Greater Bristol Metro (MetroWest) 
Bus: Proposed Orbital Bus Route (SGLP Funded) 
Rapid Transit: Proposed extension to the Cribbs 
Causeway New Neighbourhood 
Extension to Proposed Orbital Bus Route  
Rail: Safeguarded station sites at Filton and 
Henbury 
Re-introduction of passenger services on the Hallen 
Line / Henbury Loop 
 
19 
NSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
58
7.2
    
The Greater Bristol Bus Network major scheme is nearing completion. It has provided 
a series of new showcase bu
s routes across the sub region in order to improve service 
reliability, frequency and speed.
7.3
   
In order to provide a step c
hange in public transport provision in the main urban areas, 
the West of England authorities have an agreed programme of major transport schemes. 
The elements of these schemes that fall within South Gloucestershire are set out as 
priorities in this strategy. These schemes were supported by the South West region for 
their strategic significance and as such were recognised as priorities in the Regional 
Funding Advice to the DfT. Since this time the Comprehensive Spending Review has 
announced reductions to the major scheme funding available in the next four years. As 
a consequence there will be some overall delay to the implementation of major schemes 
identified although the Council and West of England remain committed to their delivery.
7.4 
  
The Major scheme program
me includes for a series of Rapid Transit Routes. It is currently 
envisaged that it will be a bus based system, but could provide the opportunity to 
upgrade to a Light Rapid Transit (tram) based system in the future. This segregated route 
will provide significant improvements in public transport delivery in South Gloucestershire, 
thereby forming the primary element of the strategy to reduce congestion.
7.5
   
The Greater Bristol Metro P
roject (rail) was also part of a wider West of England project to 
encourage greater use of public transport, also subject to a Regional Funding Allocation 
bid. The principal elements of the Greater Bristol Metro Project (rail) comprise:
		❙
 
half hourly clock face serv
ices with separation of intercity, regional and local services
		❙
  
local network of cross cit
y services linking Yate, Weston-super-Mare, Bristol Parkway, 
Bristol Temple Meads, Bath and other local stations
		❙
  
Cardiff to Portsmouth i
ntercity-urban service and new all stations service Cardiff to 
Westbury
		❙
 
new infrastructure, i
ncluding Weston-super-Mare bay platform and Yate turnback
		❙
 
four car trains standard
, with possible extension to six along with platform lengthening.
   
Following the Comprehen
sive Spending Review, this project along with the Bus Rapid 
Transit from Temple Meads to Emersons Green, was not included in any DfT priority list.  
DfT will issue further guidance on major schemes by the end of 2011.
7.6
   
Multi-Modal Interch
anges will also be enhanced or developed at The Mall, UWE, 
Emersons Green East, Parkway and Yate Stations and at locations along the route as 
appropriate. The following transport schemes have been identified for delivery in the 
plan period. Their implementation is critical to the delivery of the Sustainable Community 
Strategy’s objectives. The identified ‘Packages’ will predominantly comprise the following 
elements. Further details are set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
7.7
   
The principal elements of t
he 
Cribbs/Patchway New Neighbourhoods Package
 
comprise:
		❙
  
land & financial contrib
ution to the Bristol North Fringe – Hengrove Rapid Transit Route 
& extension into the New Neighbourhoods
		❙
 
increased bus service fr
equency through the extension of the proposed orbital 
  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
59
    
bus across the Cribbs/ Patchway new neighbourhood area to key destinations and 
existing communities in B
ristol and the North Fringe including improvements to the A38 & 
A4018
	❙
  
new and improved strate
gic pedestrian and cyclist routes to ensure high quality links 
extending the Cycling City network to key destinations including to Airbus, Filton College 
and south to Southmead 
	❙
  
land will be safeguarde
d to enable the future provision of passenger stations on the 
Hallen Freight Line. Provision of passenger station(s) and re-introduction of services 
subject to a satisfactory business case
	❙
  
contributions toward
s the re-introduction passenger services on the Hallen Line/ Henbury 
Loop and increased rail service frequency in the wider area
	❙
  
contributions toward
s the Greater Bristol Metro and improvements to the rail stations at 
Parkway and Patchway
	❙
 
expansion of Smart Ticket
ing opportunities
	❙
  
appropriate highway mit
igation measures on surrounding routes, including the 
Strategic Road Network which is likely to include M5 Junctions 16 and 17 subject to the 
assessment of the cumulative impacts of development and the delivery of other transport 
measures set out in the Core Strategy over the plan period. 
7.8
   
The principal elements of t
he 
East of Harry Stoke New Neighbourhood Package
 
comprise:
		❙
  
land and financial cont
ribution to the North Fringe to Hengrove Package (including the 
Stoke Gifford Transport Link) 
		❙
  
provision of stops on the No
rth Fringe - Hengrove rapid transit line that passes through 
the development
		❙
  
connections and improv
ements to the local foot and highway network to provide 
improved cycle and pedestrian access, as may be appropriate, particularly to 
Parkway Station, south west towards UWE and north east to the open countryside and 
Winterbourne
		❙
 
contributions toward
s the A4174 Ring Road Scheme and the Greater Bristol Metro 
		❙
 
expansion of Smart Ticket
ing opportunities.
7.9
  
The principal elements of t
he 
Yate / Chipping Sodbury Package
 comprise:
		❙
  
improved stopping faci
lities and increased frequency on direct bus services between 
Chipping Sodbury and Yate to Aztec West/The Mall, Bristol Parkway, Bristol city centre 
via (a) Winterbourne and (b) Coalpit Heath, Emersons Green, Science Park and 
Kingswood 
		❙
  
extension of the propos
ed orbital bus service (to be delivered by the S106 contribution 
from the Charlton Hayes development) between The Mall and Emersons Green, and 
extension of rapid transit services using the Temple Meads – Emersons Green rapid 
transit route to Yate via Westerleigh
		❙
 
a new ‘Yate town’ bus serv
ice
		❙
 
a Yate/Chipping Sodbur
y cyclist and pedestrian network
		❙
  
cycling route from Chi
pping Sodbury and Yate to (a) Bradley Stoke via Winterbourne 
and (b) Downend via Coalpit Heath linking into the wider Cycling City network
		❙
 
Nibley Park and Ride
		❙
 
Improvements to Yate Rai
l Station, car park and passenger interchangeSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
60
		❙
  
provision of the Yate Rail turnback (or similar alternative scheme) and a half-hourly train 
service at Yate to and fro
m Bristol
		❙
  
contributions toward
s the A4174 Ring Road Scheme, the Greater Bristol Metro and the 
Extension of the A38 Showcase Bus Corridor to Thornbury
		❙
 
expansion of Smart Ticket
ing opportunities.
7.10
 
The principal elements of t
he 
Rural Package
 comprise: 
		❙
 
extension of the A38 Show
case Bus Corridor to Thornbury
		❙
 
extension of the A38 Cycl
ing City route to Thornbury
		❙
 
provision of real time inf
ormation (RTI) at strategic bus stops throughout the rural area
		❙
 
revenue support for Com
munity Transport and Demand Responsive Transport
		❙
  
park and share sites at Tor
marton, Falfield and Aust. Other interchange sites will be 
investigated including the provision of kiss and ride and sites for interchange between 
cycling, buses and trains
		❙
 
expansion of Smart Ticket
ing to bus services operating in the rural areas
		❙
  
safeguarding of 0.84h
a of land at the former Charfield station and adjoining land to the 
south east for the provision of a passenger rail station and a car park/interchange.
7.11
 
The principal elements of t
he 
Ring Road Package
 comprise:
		❙
 
widening eastbound fro
m M32 Jct1 to Bristol Road
		❙
 
Bristol Road southbound wide
ning
		❙
 
widening westbound to H
ambrook crossroads
		❙
 
merge West of Bromley Heat
h Roundabout
		❙
 
Bromley Heath Roundabout i
mprovement
		❙
 
Wick Wick M4 Overbridge repla
cement
		❙
 
widening Wick Wick to Lyde G
reen
		❙
 
widening Lyde Green to T
he Rosary
		❙
 
widening from the Roasar
y to The Dramway
		❙
 
The Dramway Improveme
nt.
7.12
  
The Council is committed t
o the long-term realisation (beyond 2027) of a new link road 
from the A4174 Ring Road to the M4 (between Junction 18 and 19) to relieve congestion 
to the M4 Junction 19, M32 Junction 1, the A4174 eastbound and within the communities 
of the north east Bristol fringe area. The Council will continue to make the case to the 
Highways Agency and central government during the plan period.
7.13
  
The Council will also wor
k to continue to identify funding and lobby central government 
and the Highways Agency to deliver a junction on the M49 to enable further employment 
development at Severnside and Avonmouth.
Delivery
7.14
  
Schemes 1-3 identifie
d in Policy CS7 are expected to be funded primarily by Central 
Government through a major transport scheme bid. Through the West of England 
Partnership and the Joint Local Transport Plan, the Council is committed to working 
alongside the other three unitary authorities and the LEP to achieve their delivery. Local www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
61
contributions will also be sought primarily from the private sector. Schemes 4-7 will 
predominantly be funded by the private sector through the development management 
process. The Ring Road Package is proposed to form the basis of a further Major 
Transport Scheme Bid. A local contribution would thereby be sought. Details of funding 
and timing are laid out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. The packages will remain under 
review subject to the availability of Central Government and other funding sources and 
detailed negotiations with the private sector. 
7.15
  
Compulsory Purchase Or
der powers may be employed, where appropriate, particularly in 
the delivery of the Rapid Transit network. 
Improving accessibility
POLICY CS8 – IMPROVING ACCESSIBILITY 
Priority will be given to providing the users of new development with a range of travel 
options other than the private car. The following principles will be applied in the 
consideration of planning applications and formulation of other Local Development 
Documents:
1.
  
Accessibility. New d
evelopment proposals which generate significant demand for 
travel will be more favourably considered the nearer they are located to existing 
and proposed public transport infrastructure and existing facilities and services. 
Developments which are car dependent or promote unsustainable travel behaviour will 
not be supported
2.
  
Off-site mitigatio
n. All new development proposals of a sufficient scale will be required 
to contribute financially or in kind to the schemes set out in Policy CS7 and the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan, as appropriate, and other physical off-site local transport 
improvements as may be necessary to make the scheme acceptable
3.
  
Provision and Promot
ion of sustainable travel options. All new development proposals 
of a sufficient scale will be encouraged to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, travel 
demand and support travel by means other than the private car, particularly to 
significant destinations such as educational establishments, hospitals, rail stations, 
bus interchanges and employment areas. This will be achieved through
 
❙
 
 
the provision of, and in
tegration of walking, cycling and public transport 
infrastructure into the local network
 
❙
 
providing mixed use dev
elopments in appropriate locations
 
❙
 
the active promotion o
f a Green Travel Plan approved by the Council
 
❙
 
 
the provision of shower a
nd changing facilities for use by staff in commercial and 
business premises
 
❙
 
 
contributions to bus s
ervices, and other initiatives such as commuter and car clubs 
and community transport projects, as appropriate; andSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
62
  
 
 
❙
 
 
access to high speed bro
adband and installation of electrical sockets, storage and 
sufficient space in dwellings such that allows homeworking 
	
	
❙
  
provision of facilit
ies for charging plug-in or other ultra low emission vehicles. 
   
The Council will expect e
arly implementation of sustainable travel infrastructure and 
initiatives in the construction and occupation of major schemes
4.
 
Parking and vehicula
r access for new development. 
   
Car parking and vehicu
lar site access should be well integrated and situated so it 
supports the street scene and does not compromise walking, cycling, public transport 
infrastructure and highway safety. 
  
All new development prop
osals will also be required to provide safe & secure cycle 
parking facilities in accordance with the Council’s standards. 
7.16
  
This policy seeks to ensure t
hat emerging DPDs, SPDs, Area Action Plans, Development 
Briefs, Concept Statements and development schemes all have regard to the need to 
improve transport infrastructure in accordance with Sustainable Community Strategy 
objectives.
7.17
  
National policy encourage
s development that is located where everyone can access 
services or facilities on foot, bicycle or public transport, rather than having to rely on 
access by the car, while recognising that this may be more difficult in rural areas.
7.18
  
New development that gen
erates the need to travel will be required to contribute 
financially or in kind to the strategic transport infrastructure set out in Policy CS7.
7.19
  
Contributions may also be u
sed to support sustainable travel measures that may be 
promoted by the Council and other partners from time to time (including those that may 
arise from Neighbourhood Development Planning), such as:
  
❙
  
revenue support to mainta
in, improve and expand community transport and demand 
responsive transport services in the urban and rural areas
  
❙
 
revenue to establish a com
munity car club scheme
  
❙
 
revenue and capital toward
s improvements in real time passenger information
  
❙
  
capital towards bus priority mea
sures to ensure reliable and punctual bus services and
  
❙
  
revenue and capital to suppo
rt access to health facilities arising from the new 
configuration of acute and community hospitals.
7.20
  
All but the smallest house
holder applications will be expected to consider, provide 
information on and a strategy for the minimisation of private car based travel. In addition 
to the measures set out in criterion 3, other innovative measures that reduce the CO2 
footprint of transport at the point of use, such as charging points for electric vehicles, will 
be welcomed.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
63
7.21
  
Development proposals should consider the integration of direct and attractive walking 
and cycling routes wit
h the wider network as a primary objective of high quality urban 
design. These routes should also take advantage of and integrate with existing and 
proposed Green Infrastructure, and vice versa where appropriate.
7.22
  
Parking remains an impor
tant part of demand management and an issue that will be kept 
under review.  Inadequate or poorly designed residential parking can add to congestion, 
hinder bus and emergency services and have a negative impact on quality of life. Lower 
parking standards may be more appropriate as elements of the strategic transport 
infrastructure are implemented. Consequently, the Council is preparing a Residential 
Parking Standards SPD in accordance with the timetable set out in the LDS adopted in 
2012.
 
Delivery
7.23
  
This policy will be delive
red through the development management process, the JLTP and 
working with partners. The car parking standards will be reviewed through SP .South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
64
8.
  
Managing the environment and 
heritage
Introduction
8.1
   
Valuing the environment is a key priority of the Council’s Sustainable Community Strategy 
and the Council Strate
gy and is central to the vision of the Core Strategy.
8.2
  
This chapter sets out th
e Council’s approach to managing the high quality and diversity 
of our natural and historic environment.  The features and resources which are integral 
to the character and identity of South Gloucestershire are increasingly under threat from 
development, as well as being at risk from the effects of climate change. However, these 
environmental assets can also be used to make a positive contribution to mitigating the 
impacts of climate change and to improving health and well-being.
8.3
  
The first policy in this chap
ter is an overarching policy relating to environmental resources 
and heritage, while the second policy specifically relates to managing the district’s 
limestone and clay resources.
Core Strategy Objectives
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the character and distinctiveness of the district’s heritage assets 
and maximising their contribution to quality of place 
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the district’s distinctive landscapes, natural environmental 
resources and biodiversity
❙
  
Safeguarding minera
l resources for the longer term while ensuring an adequate and steady 
supply to meet identified needs
❙
  
Safeguarding the qual
ity of natural resources and ensuring prudent use
❙
  
Protecting land, air
, aqueous environments, buildings and people from pollutionwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
65
Managing the Environment and Heritage 
 
 
POLICY CS9 – MANAGING THE ENVIRONMENT AND HERITAGE 
The natural and historic environment is a finite and irreplaceable resource. In order 
to protect and manage South Gloucestershire’s environment and its resources in a 
sustainable way, new development will be expected to:
1.
    
ensure that heritage a
ssets are conserved, respected and enhanced in a manner 
appropriate to their significance
2.
   
conserve and enhance th
e natural environment, avoiding or minimising impacts on 
biodiversity and geodiversity
3.
    
conserve and enhance th
e character, quality, distinctiveness and amenity of the 
landscape
4.
  
be located away from are
as of flood risk
5.
    
reduce and manage the im
pact of flood risk through location, layout, design, choice 
of materials and the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)
6.
  
protect the quality an
d quantity of the water environment and its margins 
7.
  
avoid the undeveloped co
astal area 
8.
    
utilise natural resou
rces, including minerals, soils and water, in an efficient and 
sustainable way 
9.
    
maximise opportunitie
s for local food cultivation by (a) avoiding the best and most 
versatile agricultural land and; (b) safeguarding allotment sites 
10.
 
promote the re-use of co
ntaminated land with appropriate 
 
remediation
11.
   
protect land, air and aq
ueous environments, buildings and people from pollution 
and
12.
  
avoid unstable land un
less appropriate mitigation or remediation measures can be 
taken.
8.4
  
This policy sets out the gen
eral approach to environmental resources and heritage 
assets in South Gloucestershire and should be read in association with the more detailed 
environmental policies in Chapter 4 (Environment) of the South Gloucestershire Local 
Plan (SGLP) until these policies are replaced by the Policies, Sites and Places DPD.  This 
policy also links with Policies CS2 (Green Infrastructure) and CS1 (High Quality Design) in 
this Core Strategy.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
66
8.5
  
There is an extensive portfolio of areas of nature and biodiversity importance in South 
Gloucestershire, ma
ny of which are protected by local, regional, national or international 
designations.  South Gloucestershire has a predominantly rural and agricultural 
landscape greatly influenced by large scale scarps, ridges, vales, levels and estuary 
landforms overlain by a variety of land cover, in places comprising unique natural or 
historic features. The importance of the diversity, character, natural beauty and amenity 
of the district’s landscapes is recognised and will be protected and, where possible, 
enhanced.  The Landscape Character Assessment Supplementary Planning Document 
provides detailed analysis to support this. 
8.6
  
The landscapes of Sout
h Gloucestershire, both outstanding and everyday, contribute to 
the wellbeing and sustainability of its neighbourhoods and should be protected for its 
own sake.   In order to conserve the character, distinctiveness, quality and amenity of the 
landscape, new development should identify and retain those site attributes and features 
which contribute to the landscape character.  Landscape features, such as woodland 
(including ancient woodland), trees and hedgerows should be incorporated into new 
development and given sufficient space for their longevity. These site features and 
attributes should be managed and where appropriate enhanced with new landscape.
8.7
  
The Cotswolds Area of Outs
tanding Natural Beauty (AONB) delivers a range of benefits 
for society in terms of its scenic beauty, cultural heritage and important habitats. 
Proposals for development within, or affecting the setting of, the AONB should take 
account of the objectives of the Cotswolds AONB Management Plan and seek to 
conserve and enhance the unique character, tranquillity and special qualities of the 
Cotswolds landscape. 
8.8
  
South Gloucestershi
re has an important legacy of heritage and cultural assets, including 
over 2000 listed buildings, approximately 1500 locally listed buildings, 30 conservation 
areas, 8 registered historic parks and gardens, and 37 scheduled monuments. There 
are a wide range of undesignated historic buildings, archaeological sites and remains, 
and historic parks and gardens as well as places, areas and landscapes of historic 
interest. Information about heritage assets can be found in the South Gloucestershire 
Historic Environment Register (HER). These assets make a significant contribution 
to the identity of the locality in which they are set, helping to create a sense of place. 
Applications for development which affect heritage assets and their settings directly or 
indirectly will need to describe the nature of the significance of the assets affected, and 
set out how development will maintain and enhance heritage assets and their settings in 
a manner appropriate to that significance. New development should seek opportunities 
to draw on the historic environment in order to maintain and enhance local character and 
distinctiveness.
. 8.9
  
In order to ensure that herita
ge assets are properly recognised and protected, the 
Council will maintain or provide access to an up to date Historic Environment Record and 
periodically appraise heritage assets including Conservation Areas, and its list of locally 
listed buildings. The Council will periodically assess its heritage assets at risk register in 
order to identify heritage assets at risk through neglect or decay.  The Council will assess 
whether the benefits of a proposal for enabling development, which would otherwise 
conflict with planning policies but would secure the future conservation of a heritage 
asset, outweigh the disbenefits of departing from those policies. Applications for enabling www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
67
development relating to a heritage asset should be in accordance with English Heritage 
guidance, ‘Enabling Development and the Conservation of Significant Places’ (English 
Heritage 2008).
8.10
  
In the coming years, Sout
h Gloucestershire, like the rest of the United Kingdom, will 
increasingly experience the effects of climate change. The risk of coastal and river 
flooding will increase as a result of the predicted effects of climate change, through rising 
sea level and increased winter rainfall. The district contains land at risk of flooding, most 
notably in the vicinity of the tidal Severn Estuary and areas along the Rivers Avon, Frome 
and Boyd. New development will therefore be directed away from areas at high risk of 
flooding and where the risk of flooding is likely to increase.
8.11
  
New development has a signi
ficant role to play in managing flood risk by minimising its 
own surface water run-off through use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) and 
positive land management. SuDS provide a method of discharging surface water in a 
sustainable way to reduce the risk of flooding and pollution.  Some SuDS techniques 
offer opportunities for environmental and landscape enhancement as well as improving 
biodiversity and local amenity. Development is required to incorporate SuDS and, where 
this may not be practicable, an acceptable alternative means of surface water disposal 
should be used.  In instances where SuDS alone cannot provide total surface water 
drainage solutions, they can be used beneficially in conjunction with conventional piped 
systems.
8.12
  
The Severn Estuary for
ms the western boundary of South Gloucestershire, and is a 
significant and internationally important environmental resource which is protected under 
national and European law. Other rivers also play a significant role in the environment, 
landscape and setting of large parts of the district and should also be protected. This 
includes protecting landscape features that contribute to the setting, as well as protecting 
and enhancing views of the river and the water environment, as a whole.
8.13
  
The Severn Estuary Coas
tal Zone (as defined on the Proposals Map) consists of the 
estuary itself and the adjoining low lying land which is criss-crossed by rhines which 
drain to seven outfalls into the Estuary. The coastal zone contains species, landscapes 
and habitats of local, national and international importance, many of which are protected 
under European legislation and are recognised as being of high value by the UK 
Biodiversity Action Plan (UKBAP). In recognition of the Coastal Zone’s importance 
for its landscape, nature conservation and archaeological value, as well as its risk of 
flooding, development will be resisted. Such development that requires a coastal location 
will be directed to the developed areas of the Zone (these are the areas within the 
settlement boundaries of Aust, Oldbury-on-Seven, Pilning and Severn Beach, Severnside 
employment area and Severn View Motorway Services Area at Aust), subject to satisfying 
the requirements of the Exception Test in national policy, the legal provisions of the 
Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010, Regulation 61 and meeting the 
conservation objectives of the Severn Estuary SPA/SAC/Ramsar.
8.14
  
In order to be sustainable
, development must minimise the impact and mitigate the likely 
effects of climate change through the prudent and efficient use of natural resources, 
including energy, water, soil and the best and most versatile agricultural land, and the 
increased re-use and recycling of materials. The repair and re-use of existing buildings South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
68
is generally more sustainable than demolition and replacement.  Developers will need to 
demonstrate why re-use of buildings, particularly those that contribute to the character 
and distinctiveness of their locality cannot be achieved within their development 
proposals. The conservation of water resources will become increasingly important as 
summer rainfall declines and droughts become more common. New development should 
not compromise the ability of wildlife – particularly European waterfowl and other species 
of wildlife for which the Estuary is designated a European site - to adapt to climate 
change. New development will be expected to demonstrate that it will not cause any 
deterioration in the quality or quantity of underground, surface or coastal water resources.  
8.15
  
Soil is a fundamental natura
l resource on which life depends. It provides many essential 
services on which we rely including food cultivation, water management and support 
for valuable biodiversity and ecosystems. Soils should be managed for increasing 
organic matter which improves its qualities for water retention, mineral release and food 
production. Across South Gloucestershire, agricultural activity is varied – ranging from 
predominantly arable land in the Cotswold Hills in the east to the flats of the Severn 
Estuary in the west. The best and most versatile agricultural land (defined as land 
in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land Classification) should be protected in 
recognition of the increasing need to produce food locally due to climate change. This 
need is increasing due to the anticipated reduction in the ability of countries continuing to 
export food to the UK due to increased flooding, erosion or drought. Allied to this, existing 
allotments should be safeguarded, and levels of provision should be increased in areas 
where there is a current shortfall or where demand is high (see Policies CS1 and CS24).
8.16
  
The development of previo
usly developed land is central to the principles of sustainable 
development as it minimises pressure to develop greenfield land. Previously developed 
or brownfield sites are often critically important for wildlife in an urban environment. 
Their loss will inevitably mean a loss of biodiversity in the surrounding communities. 
Development will not be permitted where it would have a significant impact on 
biodiversity. Where permitted, development should include appropriate mitigation 
to ensure that biodiversity is protected and where possible enhanced as part of the 
proposals. While the benefits of recycling previously developed land are clear, there is the 
possibility that land may be contaminated as a result of its previous use. For this reason, 
contaminated land should be remediated to make it safe for use.
8.17
  
Pollution from developme
nt to land, air or water can occur in a number of forms including 
smoke, fumes, dust, smell, vibration, noise and an increase in levels of artificial light. 
These can have adverse impacts upon health both directly, for example a reduction 
in air quality can affect respiratory health, and indirectly through degradation of the 
natural environment and local amenity, which can affect quality of life and wellbeing. 
Certain types of development also pose risks to ground and surface water quality. South 
Gloucestershire has recently declared Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs)), where 
national air quality objectives for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are not being met. Protection 
of the environment, buildings and people from potentially polluting development or land 
uses is integral to achieving sustainable development.
8.18
  
Past mining activity is t
he main source of unstable land in South Gloucestershire although 
natural causes such as landslides can also be a threat. There is a long history of coal 
mining activity in South Gloucestershire and the Council consults with the Coal Authority www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
69
in respect of issues relating to land instability. If land is found to be unstable, appropriate 
action will be required to ensure the stability of any structures proposed and the potential 
environmental impacts of any such remedial works should be identified and addressed. 
The Coal Mining Development Referral Areas shown within Appendix 7 identify the areas 
that are most likely to be affected by land stability issues associated with past coal mining 
activities.
8.19
  
Tranquil and peaceful e
nvironments have been found to be good for people’s health, so 
development should not give rise to high levels of noise in the vicinity of residential areas 
and areas of high landscape or ecological value.  
Delivery
8.20
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process as well as in 
conjunction with the delivery of Policies CS1 (Design) and CS2 (Green Infrastructure).
Minerals
 
POLICY CS10 – MINERALS
Supply
Provision will be made for the extraction of 58 million tonnes of crushed rock 
between 2008 and 2026 (which represents 60% of the West of England’s sub-regional 
apportionment) by maintaining a landbank of at least 10 years.  In order to maintain this 
landbank, the existing Preferred Areas in the South Gloucestershire Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan will be rolled forward and any further resource requirement will be identified in 
the Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document.  
Any proposal for the working of clay will only be allowed where it would support the level 
of capital investment required to maintain or improve Cattybrook Brickworks, or would 
meet a shortfall in the supply of clay to this brickworks.
Safeguarding
Mineral resources will be protected from permanent sterilisation by identifying Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas for the indicative hard rock and shallow coal resources identified by 
the British Geological Survey.  These safeguarding areas will be defined in the Policies, 
Sites and Places Development Plan Document, together with consideration of the need to 
safeguard other mineral resources. Until then, the Mineral Resource Areas defined on the 
Proposals Map will remain in effect.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
70
8.21
  
National policy requires that provision is made for a steady and adequate supply 
of minerals to suppor
t the economy, that the best use is made of these resources 
and that they are protected for the longer term. Provision of supplies to meet current 
needs is achieved through the maintenance of ‘landbanks’ (mineral reserves with 
planning permission for extraction), while future supplies are protected through Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas (areas with mineral resources which do not yet have planning 
permission for extraction).  
8.22
  
Within South Glouceste
rshire, mineral activity is dominated by crushed rock aggregates 
and, to a lesser extent, brick making clay, although other minerals have been worked in 
the past. For aggregates, there are national and regional guidelines which set down the 
level of contribution expected from each region to meet forecast national requirements. 
The South West regional guidelines for 2005 – 2020 have been apportioned down to sub-
regional level. The West of England figure has been split between South Gloucestershire 
and North Somerset, as the only two unitary authorities in the West of England with 
aggregate resources, on a ratio of 60% : 40% to reflect sales in recent years. 
8.23
  
While the crushed rock la
ndbank is in excess of 80 million tonnes, and there is an 
additional 20 million tonnes in the three Preferred Areas identified in the Minerals and 
Waste Local Plan (one of which has planning permission), the landbank is unevenly 
distributed between the five crushed rock quarries in South Gloucestershire. Two of the 
quarries are likely to exhaust their reserves before the end of the Core Strategy plan 
period and, in order for South Gloucestershire to meet its crushed rock guideline figure, 
additional resources may need to be released. This situation will be kept under review 
and, if necessary, when the Policies, Sites and Places DPD is in preparation, additional 
resources will be identified for release to meet the guideline figure.
8.24
  
Cattybrook Brickworks p
roduces a range of specialist bricks by blending various clays, 
some of which are imported from outside of South Gloucestershire.  Sufficient clay 
reserves exist in the adjoining claypit and in a long term stockpile at Shortwood to meet 
requirements, at least for the medium term.  However, should an unforeseen situation 
arise with the supply of the clay material, or additional capital investment in the Brickworks 
be required, consideration will be given to the release of additional resources to support 
the continued operation of the Brickworks.
8.25
  
The efficient and sustain
able use of mineral resources will be supported by maximising 
opportunities to recycle waste and other materials for use as secondary aggregates, 
and minimising the unnecessary consumption of minerals in new construction.  This is 
required by Policy CS9 and by Policy 1 of the Joint Waste Core Strategy for the West of 
England.  Policies 2 and 4 of this Joint Waste Core Strategy provide the policy framework 
for locating recycling facilities.
8.26
  
Mineral Safeguardin
g Areas are intended to safeguard proven deposits of minerals 
which are, or may become, of economic importance within the foreseeable future, from 
unnecessary sterilisation by surface development.  Although minerals are currently 
safeguarded by way of Mineral Resource Areas in Policy 1 of the Minerals and Waste 
Local Plan, these areas were based on limited geological information and adapted from 
earlier planning documents.  Guidance has been produced by the British Geological 
Society on the definition of Mineral Safeguarding Areas and this will be used to identify www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
71
Mineral Safeguarding Areas in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD. Until new policies are 
adopted in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD, development proposals in the surface 
mining coal area extending through the East Fringe of Bristol and north/north-east 
towards Cromhall will be considered in the light of:
		❙
  
the potential for prior ex
traction of coal and the need to avoid unnecessary sterilisation; 
and
		❙
  
potential ground instab
ility associated with historic mining and the need for related 
remedial measures.
   
The general extent of th
e surface mining coal resource areas and the historic mining 
areas (legacy areas) are shown in the diagrams in Appendices 6 and 7 respectively.
8.27
  
There is a growing inter
est in exploiting new sources of natural gas in the UK. The impact 
of any gas extraction, whether by ‘fracking’ or any other means, will need to be kept under 
review and assessed on an individual basis. Consideration will be given in the Policies, 
Sites and Places DPD to addressing this issue.
Delivery
8.28
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process. Any further 
provision of land for the winning and working of minerals, as well as Mineral Safeguarding 
Areas, will be identified in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
72
9.
  
Maintaining economic prosperity
Introduction
9.1
   
South Gloucestershire has a robust, diverse and vibrant economy which has experienced 
high job growth rates and lo
w unemployment. The area has many strengths including 
excellent road and rail connections, the successful key sectors of aerospace engineering, 
the MOD and the financial services industries, as well as the University of the West of 
England (UWE) and the large retail area at Cribbs Causeway.  Major development in the 
pipeline, including the Science Park at Emersons Green, will help to reinforce the local 
economy. However, after 20 years of high growth, there is a need for a more balanced 
and manageable strategy for economic development, within which some growth is 
steered towards other parts of the West of England sub region.  
9.2
  
Maintaining economic pr
osperity is a key priority of the Council’s Sustainable 
Community Strategy and the Council Strategy and is reflected in the Council’s Economic 
Development Strategy, and in the Council’s partnership with the West Of England Local 
Enterprise Partnership.
Core Strategy Objectives
❙
  
Ensuring that South Glouc
estershire plays its role in making the West of England economy 
one of the most prosperous, innovative and vibrant in Europe, by providing a sufficient range 
of employment land for existing and new businesses of all sizes
❙
  
Providing for the key se
ctors of advanced engineering, including aerospace and defence; 
finance and business services; higher and further education; retail; environmental technology 
and hi-tech industries
❙
  
Taking opportunities to p
rovide more balanced employment across the district so that every 
community has access to a range of employment opportunities locally
❙
 
Ensuring provision of app
ropriate communication technologies, such as broadband
❙
 
Enhancing town centr
e vitality and viability
Economic Strategy
9.3
  
The Core Strategy’s Economic Strategy outlines how the economic objectives will be 
delivered through the pol
icies in this chapter, which manage change on economic 
development sites and town centres, together with the policies on the delivery of new 
neighbourhoods in Part 2 of the Core Strategy.  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
73
Economic Strategy 
Objectives
Outcomes
Safeguarding existing 
economic development 
areas
A range of areas across the district will be safeguarded for economic development 
use. In deciding which areas to safeguard, consideration has been given to their 
suitability for continuing employment uses, the needs of businesses (including the 
key sectors) and the potential to improve the balance between jobs and resident 
workers across communities.
Increasing productivity
Making more efficient and intensive use of existing employment areas will 
be achieved by safeguarding the best sites whilst also encouraging their 
redevelopment and re-design.  A wider range of employment uses to provide more 
high quality jobs may be considered appropriate. Further guidance will be required 
on sites where major change or regeneration is proposed.
Allocating new 
employment land 
Limited allocation of new employment land will be made in association with housing 
development in the new neighbourhood north of Yate. The locational strategy 
proposes further housing growth at Cribbs Causeway/Patchway, part of which 
will be achieved through the re-modelling of existing employment areas. Some 
employment land in this area may therefore be released to provide for residential 
or mixed use development. An area of employment land will be retained to the 
east and west of the A38 to accommodate a range of business, industrial and 
warehousing uses that will support and enhance the existing cluster of aerospace 
excellence, and other employment sectors.
Managing change on 
economic development 
sites
To meet the need for small business premises, and to provide employment in mixed 
and balanced communities near to where people live, change will be managed on 
existing economic development sites, as appropriate, to ensure employment uses 
are retained.  
Securing economic and 
social benefits from 
major infrastructure 
projects
If any major national infrastructure projects (see Chapter 18) are approved, the 
Council will ensure that the potential economic benefits for South Gloucestershire 
are realised.
Promoting and 
diversifying town 
centres
There is a need to redefine the role and increase the competitiveness of certain 
centres to ensure they continue to meet the needs of the local community and 
maintain viability and vitality. Further out-of-town development will be carefully 
controlled so as not to undermine this strategy.  New or improved local centres will 
be planned to serve new neighbourhoods.
Severnside
A substantial area of land at Severnside has planning permission for employment 
uses dating from the 1950s.  The Council will seek to realise the potential of this 
area for distribution uses and to meet other needs whilst seeking to minimise 
environmental impacts (see Policy CS35). South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
74
Definition of economic development
9.4
 
The Core Strategy uses the following definition of economic development.
   
Economic development in
cludes development within the B Use Classes, public and 
community uses and main town centre uses. It also includes other development which 
achieves at least one of the following objectives: 
  
1.
 
provides employmen
t opportunities
  
2.
 
generates wealth; or
  
3.
 
produces or generate
s an economic output or product.
  
The definition does not inc
lude housing developments
  
The definition of town cent
re uses is set out in national policy
 9.5
  
While the definition is broad
, not all uses are appropriate in all locations.  In particular, the 
strategy and policies distinguish between uses of a traditional employment character and 
those which are appropriate in a town centre location.
POLICY CS11 - DISTRIBUTION OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LAND 
The Council will maintain a supply of economic development land in accordance with the 
Strategy for Development set out in Policy CS5.  This will be distributed as follows:
Location
 
Total (Ha)
North Fringe of B
ristol urban area
 
Safeguarded areas
 
355 Ha
East Fringe of Bris
tol urban area
 
Safeguarded areas
 
147 Ha
Yate & Chipping Sodb
ury
 
Safeguarded areas 
 
88 Ha
Allocated within t
he new neighbourhood at North Yate 
 
Up to 9 Ha
Thornbury
 
Safeguarded areas
 
19Ha
Rural Area
 
Safeguarded areas
 
14 Ha
Severnside
 
Safeguarded area (exi
sting area with planning permission)
 
635 Ha
In addition to the abo
ve there is also provision for employment uses in the interim 
safeguarded sites listed in Policy CS12 Table 2, the sites within settlement boundaries 
covered by Policy CS13 and in rural employment sites.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
75
9.6
  
The South Gloucestershire Employment Land Review analysed the existing supply of 
employment land, econo
mic forecasts, recent trends in the take up of employment land 
and local policy objectives to quantify the amount of land for employment uses required 
in the district to 2026. This policy sets out the overall quantum and distribution of land 
safeguarded or allocated in the Core Strategy in line with the recommendations of the 
Employment Land Review, the Strategy for Development and Policy CS5 (Location of 
Development).  Safeguarded sites include those already in employment use, as well as 
South Gloucestershire Local Plan allocations and commitments which are at an advanced 
stage of planning and are central to the Strategy for Development.  
Delivery
9.7
   
The policy will be implemente
d through Policy CS12 which safeguards land for economic 
development with criteria for managing change. Policies CS26, CS27 and CS31 provide 
detailed guidance on the new neighbourhoods at Cribbs/ Patchway, East of Harry Stoke 
and North Yate. South Gloucestershire Local Plan Policies E1, M1 and M2 set out detailed 
requirements for the major developments at Charlton Hayes (Northfield) and Emersons 
Green East. 
 
Safeguarded areas for economic development
 
POLICY CS12 -  SAFEGUARDED AREAS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Land identified in Table 1 will be safeguarded for economic development. Proposals for 
change from B Use Classes to other economic development uses, including town centre 
uses, or to non-employment uses, will need to demonstrate that:
1.
  
the proposal would not pr
ejudice the regeneration and retention of B Use Classes 
elsewhere within the defined employment area; and
2.
  
it can be clearly demonst
rated that it would contribute to a more sustainable pattern 
of development in the local area as a consequence of the appropriateness of the 
proposed use to the location; and 
3.
  
the proposal would impr
ove the number or range of jobs available in the local area; 
and
4.
  
no suitable alternati
ve provision for the proposal has been made elsewhere in the 
Local Development Framework.
Development proposals on sites identified in Table 2 will be assessed against the above 
criteria unless a more fundamental review of their long term future, to enable regeneration 
in line with Policies CS25, CS26, CS28 or CS30, is resolved through endorsed Concept 
Statements (as set out in the Council’s SCI), masterplan SPD or the Policies, Sites and 
Places DPD. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
76
 Table 1 - Safeguarded Areas
Communities of the North Fringe of Bristol
1.
Abbey Wood Business Park – Emma Chris Way
7.
Land West of A38 and south of Hallen railway 
line (inc.Airbus) - South  
2.
Almondsbury Business Park  
8.
Ministry of Defence - Abbey Wood  
3.
Aztec West  
9.
Old Gloucester Road, Hambrook  
4.
Bristol Business Park  
10.
Parkway Business Park  
5.
Employment Land at Filton Northfield  
11.
Parkway North Business Park  
6.
Land East of A38, Filton/Patchway  
Communities of the East Fringe of Bristol
12.
Emersons Green 
21.
McBraida site  
13.
Chapel Lane, Warmley  
22.
Longwell Green Industrial Estate  
14.
Tower Road, Warmley  
23.
Southway Drive, North Common  
15.
Bristol Uniforms site  
24.
Hanham Business Park
16.
Oatley Trading Estate, Kingswood 
25.
Former Kleeneze site
17.
The Civic Centre, Kingswood  
26. Bath Road, Willsbridge  
18.
Station Road, Kingswood  
27.
Hayward Industrial Estate  
19.
North of Douglas Road  
28.
2-8 London Road, Warmley
20.
Eclipse Office Park  
Yate and Chipping Sodbury
29.
Beeches Industrial Estate  
33.
Great Western Business Park  
30.
Bowling Hill, Chipping Sodbury  
34.
Indesit Site, Station Road  
31.
Broad Lane, Yate  
35.
The Ridge, Yate  
32.
Council Offices, Badminton Road  
36.
Westerleigh Business Park  
Thornbury and Rural Area
37.
Thornbury Industrial Estate  
41.
Pucklechurch Trading Estate  
38.
SGC Offices, Thornbury  
42.
Station Premises and Yard, Winterbourne 
39.
Arnolds Fields Trading Estate, Wickwar  
43.
Station Road, Charfield  
40.
Old Cider Mill Trading Estate, Wickwar  
44.
Sungard Vivista Premises, Marshfield  
Severnside
45.
Severnside Employment Areawww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
77
 Table 2 - Interim Safeguarded Areas
Communities of the North Fringe of Bristol
46.
Employment Land at Filton Northfield  
50.
Pearce/ Auto Techniques site, Hambrook Lane  
47.
Cribbs Causeway  
51.
University of the West of England Site  / Hewlett 
Packard (see Policy CS28)
48.
Jupiter Road  
52.
Land West of A38 (inc.runway & Royal Mail 
Depot)  
49.
Patchway Industrial Estate  
Yate and Chipping Sodbury
53.
Badminton Court / Dairy Crest Site
56.
Minelco Site / Yate Mills, Broad Lane  
54.
Coopers Site 
57. 
Stover Road and North Road Industrial Estate 
55.
Hatters Lane
58.
Badminton Road Trading Estate
9.8
  
National policy requires that a supply of employment land is maintained to meet the 
identified needs of bu
sinesses. Consultation has highlighted support for: continuing to 
protect employment land, meeting the needs of the aerospace cluster/airfield and UWE 
and improving the balance between jobs and workers in the different communities of 
South Gloucestershire.
9.9
  
The South Gloucesters
hire Employment Land Review has considered the current supply 
and projected demand for employment land up to 2026, as well as an assessment of the 
suitability for continued employment use of existing and new sites. Sites for safeguarding 
have been chosen to reflect the Strategy for Development set out in Policy CS5 and in the 
spatial policies in Part 2 of the Core Strategy. The chosen sites are listed in Tables 1 and 
2. 
9.10
  
Priority on the safeguarded s
ites will be given to uses which fall within the B Use Classes. 
Retail and other main town centre uses will have to meet the sequential test set out in 
national policy. Office development outside town centres may be appropriate as this 
reflects the existing pattern of development in South Gloucestershire and is in line with the 
local and sub-regional strategy. Residential use will not be acceptable as provision has 
been made elsewhere in the Core Strategy.
9.11
  
Within the boundaries of som
e safeguarded areas there are areas of Green Infrastructure 
which will continue to be protected and managed as green assets.
9.12
  
Assessing contribut
ions to sustainable patterns of development includes consideration 
of the range of jobs and services in the locality, transport and accessibility, the availability 
of alternative locations and the relationship to town and local centres. The area visions 
and policies in Part 2 of the Core Strategy should also be used in assessing a proposal’s 
contribution to the local area.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
78
9.13
  
The Council has identified some existing employment areas which will be subject to 
review (see Table 2).  The
se are primarily in the Cribbs Causeway/Patchway area where 
new neighbourhoods are proposed in Policy CS26, and at UWE, as part of the long term 
expansion of the University (see Policy CS28).  In the long term, alternative uses on these 
areas may be more appropriate, such as residential or mixed use. An area around 50ha 
of employment land will be safeguarded through the redevelopment of Filton Airfield to 
support, complement and enhance the existing cluster of aerospace excellence and 
provide for other employment needs as appropriate (see Policy CS26). At Stover Road, 
North Road and Badminton Road, Yate the aim is to improve the range and increase the 
number of jobs and to create a more attractive western approach to Yate, as set out in 
CS30.
9.14
  
These sites will be safegu
arded while their long term future is resolved. Within the Cribbs/
Patchway new neighbourhood this will be implemented through SPD. The Council’s 
preferred approach on the remaining sites is to do this through Concept Statements, or 
masterplan SPD in accordance with the Council’s SCI or the Policies, Sites and Places 
Development Plan Document.  However, it is recognised that depending on the nature 
of the proposals (size, site, scale and proposed uses), the development management 
process may be an alternative if this would lead to an effective outcome that accords 
with the Plan’s objectives. Following the review of a site the need for any consequential 
changes to the Policy CS12 designation will be confirmed in the development plan at the 
earliest opportunity.
9.15
  
Opportunities to redevelo
p existing employment sites, through intensification or re-
modelling, will be encouraged.  Redevelopment can increase productivity through the 
more efficient use of land and enable the site to make a better contribution to the local 
area through better design and improving the number and range of jobs available.  Where 
major change is proposed, more detailed guidance should be prepared.  Sites listed in 
Table 2 will be reviewed on a regular basis and amended as necessary where there is 
clear evidence to support revisions. 
Delivery
9.16
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process.  Developers 
promoting major development proposals will be required to carry out pre-application 
consultation in accordance with the Council’s concept statement process as set out in the 
Statement of Community Involvement. The Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan 
Document will provide further detailed guidance.  At Cribbs/Patchway development will be 
guided by a masterplan and detailed SPD in accordance with the Council’s Statement of 
Community Involvement.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
79
Non-safeguarded economic development sites
 
POLICY CS13 -  NON-SAFEGUARDED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SITES
Proposals for change of use on economic development sites not safeguarded in Policy 
CS12, within the settlement boundaries of the urban areas and villages defined on 
the Proposals Map, will not be allowed unless it can be clearly demonstrated that all 
reasonable attempts have failed to secure a suitable economic development re-use. 
Where these circumstances occur, then priority will be given to alternative uses in the 
following sequence:
1.   a mixed use scheme
2.   a residential only scheme. 
9.17
  
Evidence shows that in t
he last ten years, locally significant amounts of non-safeguarded 
employment land have been lost to residential uses in the urban areas and villages. The 
need to prevent further losses of smaller scale employment opportunities in the context of 
pressure to meet housing targets has been identified through engagement as a key issue.  
In the light of local evidence of loss of employment sites in villages, this policy sets out a 
preferred sequence for change of use on economic development sites and a process for 
determining when change of use would be acceptable.  
9.18
  
Proposals for reside
ntial re-use of buildings will need to be accompanied by a statement 
clearly demonstrating that a market appraisal has been undertaken to assess alternative 
economic development uses, and that every reasonable attempt to secure a suitable re-
use has been made and failed.  
9.19
  
This assessment shou
ld take account of the visions and policies for the local areas set 
out in Part 2 of the Core Strategy and demonstrate that a sustainable solution for the local 
community has been found. In some cases a mixed use or residential scheme may be 
the most sustainable and appropriate solution for a site. Change of use to residential will 
only be allowed where appropriate in terms of flood risk in accordance with Policy CS9.
Delivery
9.20
 
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process.  
9.21
  
Where the loss of a community or cu
ltural building is proposed, the tests in Policy CS23 
(Community Buildings and Cultural Activity) will be applied before applying Policy CS13.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
80
Town centres and retail
 
POLICY CS14 -  TOWN CENTRES AND RETAIL 
The Council will work with partner organisations and the local community to protect 
and enhance the vitality and viability of existing centres in South Gloucestershire in 
recognition of their retail, service and social functions: 
Centres
Role & Function
Town Centres
Bradley Stoke 
Town centre 
Emersons Green
Town centre.  Opportunity for expansion to serve new housing  
Kingswood 
Larger High Street shopping and service centre 
Thornbury 
Market town 
Yate (including Station 
Road)
Market town 
Chipping Sodbury 
Market town 
Downend
High Street shopping and service centre
Filton
Convenience shopping and service centre 
Hanham 
High Street shopping and service centre
Staple Hill 
High Street shopping and service centre
District Centres
Patchway (new)
New centre to be developed by extending the existing local 
centre on Rodway Road to support Charlton Hayes development
Sainsbury’s/B&Q, Stoke 
Gifford (new)
New centre to be investigated to serve the Stoke Gifford, Harry 
Stoke, UWE and Cheswick village area
Local Centres & Parades 
49 Centres/Parades (listed 
in Table. 3)
Provide local level services  
Out-of-Centre
Cribbs Causeway/Mall
Cribbs Causeway/Mall, Abbey Wood and  Longwell Green 
Retail Parks will be treated as out-of-centre and development 
proposals will need to satisfy the sequential test. The future role 
of Abbey Wood Retail Park is addressed under Policy CS25.
Abbey Wood and Longwell 
Green Retail Parkswww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
81
 
New investment in main town centre uses consistent with the NPPF will be directed into 
the town and district centres, reflecting the scale and function of the centre including 
making provision for 34,000 sq.m. net of new comparison floorspace by 2026 to meet the 
needs of the communities in South Gloucestershire. The distribution of this floorspace 
will be through the Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document or a 
replacement Core Strategy/Local Plan.
Development in local centres/parades will be primarily to meet local needs only and of 
a scale appropriate to the role and function of the centre/parade and where it would not 
harm the vitality and viability of other centres.
This will be achieved by:
1.
   
identifying in the Pol
icies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document or a 
replacement Local Plan/Core Strategy centre boundaries, primary shopping areas, 
shopping frontages, and development opportunities in accessible locations within and 
on the edge of centres
2.
   
encouraging retail
, commercial, leisure and cultural development within a centre of an 
appropriate type and scale commensurate with its current or future function
3.
   
safeguarding the reta
il character and function of centres by resisting developments 
that detract from their vitality and viability and protecting against the loss of retail units
4.
   
applying the sequent
ial approach when considering proposals for new town centre 
uses
5.
  
requiring impact ass
essments for edge-of-centre and out-of-centre proposals with a 
floorspace over 1,000 sq.m. gross
6.
  
encouraging conveni
ent and accessible local shopping facilities to meet the day to day 
needs of residents and contribute to social inclusion.
Shops and services, both in urban and rural areas, are also safeguarded from loss under 
Policy CS13 and policies in the NPPF.
9.22
  
This policy sits alongside t
he town centre and retail policies in the South Gloucestershire 
Local Plan, until these Local Plan policies are replaced by the Policies, Sites and Places 
DPD or a replacement Local Plan/Core Strategy and Policy CS13 (Non-Safeguarded 
Economic Development Sites). These policies are aimed at protecting and strengthening 
the health and vitality of centres, recognising their important social function and sense 
of place, as well as safeguarding against the loss of shops and other services in centres 
and villages, including individual premises within the urban area, in recognition of their 
importance to the local community and the local economy. Policy CS14 is supported by 
the South Gloucestershire Town Centre and Retail Study. This Study sets out a strategy for 
the management and growth of centres over the plan period, including a centre hierarchy 
and identifies future retail floorspace requirements. Communities will also be empowered 
to shape the future of their town, district and local centres through opportunities 
presented by Neighbourhood Planning. 
9.23
  
National policy requires a n
etwork and hierarchy of centres to be defined.  Due to 
its settlement pattern, South Gloucestershire is characterised by a number of town South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
82
centres.  These centres, particularly the traditional ones, are highly valued by their local 
communities for their heritage and functions. In addition to retail, all the centres provide, to 
a greater or lesser extent, a range of services and facilities including financial, community, 
leisure, employment and housing. 
9.24
  
Over the past 20 years, reta
il expenditure has polarised towards the out-of-town 
retail parks, The Mall Regional Shopping Centre and freestanding stores. Partly as a 
consequence, the traditional centres have seen a decline in the proportion of shop 
frontages in retail use, with an increase in non-retail uses such as cafes, takeaways, and 
building societies etc. The role of the centres has become more focused upon meeting 
day to day convenience needs with comparison shopping comprising more of amenity 
goods such as chemist items, household hardware etc. Furthermore, a number of these 
centres do not offer the space for development or find it difficult to attract comparison 
retail investment. There is, therefore, a need to redefine the role and increase the 
competitiveness of certain centres to ensure they continue to meet the needs of the local 
community and maintain viability and vitality. Further out-of-centre development will be 
carefully controlled to support this strategy.
9.25
  
In addition to existing ce
ntres, a new district centre will be created at Patchway with the 
development of Charlton Hayes, as an expansion of the current local centre on Rodway 
Road. The classification of ‘district’ is in recognition that, unlike the town centres, the role 
of this centre will be more local. This classification will be kept under review. A new centre 
is also proposed, potentially on land currently occupied by Sainsburys and B&Q off Great 
Stoke Way, to serve the new housing areas to be developed along the Ring Road in the 
Stoke Gifford/Filton area, UWE and nearby existing housing and employment areas. As 
part of the development and re-modelling of the area between Filton and the M32, a 
broader range of uses, including an element of retail, will be promoted at Abbey Wood 
Retail Park in line with its location adjacent to a main line rail station, major employment 
and housing areas, and away from the sale of bulky goods. The park will continue to be 
treated as out of centre for the purposes of national planning policy (see Policy CS25).
9.26
  
At Cribbs Causeway, develop
ment comprises The Mall, retail parks, free-standing stores 
and leisure development. New communities are to be developed in the area and will 
require the provision of additional retail facilities.  The Council will undertake a review of 
the scope for permitting some additional development at this location to support the Mall 
consistent with the need to maintain the vitality and viability of other centres.  Additional 
provision will be delivered through the Policies, Sites and Places DPD or a replacement 
Local Plan/Core Strategy. Until this review is completed, any additional retail floorspace 
provision in out-of-centre locations will be considered against national policy guidance in 
the NPPF having regard for the sequential approach and retail impact tests.
9.27
  
In addition to the larger ce
ntres, there are 49 local centres/parades within the urban 
area and larger village settlements which meet the needs of local residents for everyday 
convenience goods and basic services within walking distance, thereby providing an 
essential and valuable service. New local centres will be created to serve the strategic 
housing areas referred to in the Strategy for Development. There are also a significant 
number of smaller village shopping centres and local shops throughout the district.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
83
Table 3 - Local Centres and Parades
Communities of the North Fringe of Bristol
1.
Gloucester Road North
7.
Gloucester Road, Patchway
2.
Filton Avenue (Nos. 508-550 & 551-557)
8.
Kingsway, Little Stoke
3.
Filton Avenue (at junction with Conygre Rd)
9.
Chelford Grove, Patchway
4.
Station Road, Filton
10.
Ratcliffe Drive, Stoke Gifford
5.
The Parade, Coniston Road, Patchway
11.
Peartree Road, Bradley Stoke
6.
Coniston Road, Patchway
12.
Webbs Wood Road, Bradley Stoke
Downend/Hanham/Kingswood/Staple Hill
13.
Baugh Gardens
26.
Oldland Common Village
14.
Burley Grove
27.
Poole Road, Soundwell
15.
Cleevewood Road, Downend
28.
Pound Road, Kingswood
16.
Dibden Road, Mangotsfield
29.
Quakers Road Parade, Downend
17.
Ellacombe Road, Longwell Green
30.
Soundwell Road, Kingswood
18.
High Street, Hanham
31.
Station Road, Kingswood
19.
Holly Hill Road
32.
Stockwell Drive, Mangotsfield
20.
Longwell Green Parade, Bath Road
33. Tibberton, Kingswood
21.
Mangotsfield Village (St James Place, St 
James’s St, Cossham St)
34.
Warmley Village (Deanery Road, High St, 
Stanley Rd, Tower Rd North)
22.
Memorial Road, Hanham
35.
Westbourne Road Parade, Downend
23. New Cheltenham Road, Kingswood
36.
Westcourt Drive, Oldland Common
24.
Newton Road/School Road, Cadbury Heath
37.
Westons Way, Kingswood
25.
North Street/Pleasant Street/Victoria Street
Thornbury
38.
Oakleaze Road
Winterbourne/Frampton Cotterell
39.
Lower Stone Close, Church Road and 
Woodend Road, Frampton Cotterell                          
41.
Bradley Avenue, Winterbourne
40.
Flaxpits Lane, Whitegates and High Street, 
Winterbourne
42.
Park Avenue, Winterbourne
Severnside
43. Abbotswood Shopping Centre
47.
Cranleigh Court Road
44.
Brimsham Park, Yate
48.
Firgrove Crescent
45.
Heron Way
49.
Westerleigh Road Stores
46. Wellington RoadSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
84
9.28
  
Beyond existing commitments, the Town Centre and Retail Study does not identify 
any requirement for c
onvenience floorspace, although it does recognise that further 
floorspace is justified where this addresses a shortfall in provision in a local area (see 
Policy CS30 which identifies a new food store in Chipping Sodbury). By contrast, after 
taking account of commitments, a shortfall in comparison floorspace is identified for the 
period 2011 – 2026 of 34,000 sq.m. net. The Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan 
Document or a replacement Local Plan/Core Strategy will distribute floorspace between 
the various centres, identify sites, define town centre and primary retail area boundaries 
and define primary and secondary frontages.
9.29
  
National policy requires a
n impact assessment for any edge-of-centre or out-of-centre 
proposal over a floorspace threshold of 2,500 sq.m. gross unless a local lower threshold 
is set.  This national threshold does not allow for the situation in South Gloucestershire 
where centres are relatively small, there is a dominance of out-of-town floorspace, 
particularly for retail, and a number of the centres are experiencing reduced vitality.  As a 
consequence, smaller developments can, on their own or cumulatively, have a significant 
impact on existing centres and the threshold, therefore, is lowered to 1,000 sq.m gross to 
reflect this.  
Delivery
 
9.30
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process and 
developed further through the Policies, Sites and Places DPD or through a replacement 
Local Plan and through neighbourhood planning. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
85
10.
  
Providing housing and 
community infrastru
cture
Introduction
10.1
  
Creating mixed and balanced communities is one of the government’s aims for 
sustainable developme
nt and a core aim of the Council. This means providing sufficient 
good quality housing of the right types and mix, in the right places, which will be attractive 
to, and meet the identified needs of, different groups in society. The types of housing 
include market, social rented, mixed tenure, special needs and housing for groups like 
Gypsies and Travellers.
10.2
  
Access to community facil
ities is fundamental to creating sustainable communities. 
Similarly, opportunities to participate in the cultural life of communities can contribute 
greatly to the health and wellbeing of individuals and communities as a whole. New 
development will clearly put additional pressure on existing facilities, but can also create 
opportunities to bring about new or enhanced facilities and support participation in 
existing or new activities, thereby improving social cohesion.
Core Strategy Objectives
❙
 
Providing a range of hou
sing to meet the needs of the whole community
❙
  
Providing decent and a
ffordable housing in accessible locations and for local needs in rural 
areas
❙
  
Improving health and well-
being by provision and access to a range of social, cultural, 
community, recreational facilities and green space in step with development whilst realising 
opportunities to redress any deficit
❙
  
Ensuring that environm
ents for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of 
sustainable communities
10.3
  
This chapter directl
y links with the Sustainable Community Strategy’s key priorities of 
managing future development and promoting safe and stronger communities, and with 
the Council Strategy.
10.4
  
The first policy sets out the s
cale and distribution of new housing development across 
South Gloucestershire in accordance with the vision and the Strategy for Development 
detailed earlier in this Core Strategy. The level of housing growth and the timescale 
for its delivery is set out in this strategy and the supporting Policy CS5 (Location of 
Development) and is conditional on the delivery of major new strategic infrastructure to 
support sustainable communities.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
86
10.5
  
Subsequent policies address specific aspects of the mix and balance of housing 
provision, with the fina
l policies covering provision of community buildings and cultural 
activity in new development and Green Infrastructure, sport and recreation standards.
Distribution of housing
 
POLICY CS15 -  DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING
Between 2006 and 2027, covering a period of up to 14 years from adoption of the Plan, 
a supply of deliverable and developable land will be identified to secure the delivery 
of a minimum of 28,355 new homes in accordance with the plan, monitor and manage 
approach and the location of development set out in Policy CS5.  The indicative phasing 
capacity is shown below.
2013/14-
2017/18
(5yrs)
2018/19-
2022/23
(5yrs)
2023/24
2026/27
(4yrs)
Total
2006-
2027
Completions 2006 – 2013
5,810
North & 
East Fringes 
of Bristol 
urban area
Existing Local Plan Allocations
4,175
2,885
-
7,0 60
Potential housing sites, 
including infill development
3
4,175
2,885
-
7,0 60
New Neighbourhoods:
•East of Harry Stoke
370
900
730
2,000
•Cribbs/Patchway
1
1,265
2,400
2,035
5,700
Rest of 
South Glos
Potential housing sites, 
including infill development
3
805
160
-
965
New Neighbourhood at Yate
1
,
795
1,090
815
2,700
Housing Opportunities at 
Thornbury
4
800
-
-
800
Small Site Windfall allowance
750 750
600
2,100
TOTAL available supply (excluding 
completions, and inc. 20% “buffer” for the 
first five year period) 2013 - 2027
10,125
 8,435
4,180
22,740
TOTAL including completions 2006 - 2027
28,550
Footnotes 
1 
 
Development of the new neighbourhoods at North Yate and Cribbs/Patchway is contingent on the delivery of major new 
strategic infrastructure to support sustainable communities subject to confirmation from delivery partners.
2 
Remainder of the 3000 dwellings capacity at Yate new neighbourhood to be delivered post 2027
3 
 
Potential housing sites including infill development on both large and small sites that have planning permission (outline or full 
planning permission that has not been implemented), specific, unallocated brownfield sites that have the potential to make a 
significant contribution to housing delivery during the first 5 year period of the Core Strategy. Does not include allowance for 
large windfall sites.  
4 
Includes two sites: North of Park Farm, and at Morton Way North, Thornbury.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
87
10.6
  
The overall level of housing provision put forward in this Plan reflects the underlying 
spatial objective
s, the sustainable development principles set out in Policy CS1 and the 
locational strategy set out in Policy CS5. In establishing the strategic housing provision, 
consideration has been given to the following factors that have shaped capacity: 
		❙
  
the relationship betwe
en projected local employment growth and housing to plan for 
prosperous local economies over the duration of the plan period 
		❙
 
putting into a local con
text the demographic drivers to housing demand 
		❙
  
protecting environ
mental assets and making the most effective use of developed land 
and buildings
		❙
  
the physical, green and co
mmunity infrastructure needed to support additional 
housing and the importance of its delivery through comprehensive and co-ordinated 
plan making 
		❙
  
providing a framewor
k which takes a long term view to support the delivery of housing, 
for which there is likely to be genuine demand, but which is resilient and flexible to 
respond to rapidly changing circumstances; and 
		❙
  
consistency with the und
erlying commitment to sustainable patterns of development 
across the area and the principles of localism.
10.7
  
Between 2006 and 2027 pr
ovision will be made for 28,355 new dwellings, 5,810 of which 
have already been completed, this means providing up to 22,545 dwellings, between 
2013 and 2027. 
10.8
  
The Council will seek to ac
hieve an annualised rate of housing delivery over the 14 year 
plan period 2013 – 2027.  This equates to 1,610 dwellings per annum.  To comply with the 
requirements of paragraph 47 of the NPPF the Council will provide an additional buffer of 
20% to ensure choice and competition.  As the required 5 year supply + 20% cannot be 
achieved for the current 5 year period when compared against the indicative phasing set 
out above, an additional site is identified at Thornbury to satisfy this requirement.
Actual and Expected Housing Completions 2006 - 2027
689
1,003
916
742
714
923
823
541
1,248
1,829
2,003
1,691
1,300
1,253
1,192
1,351
989
861
812
709
513
305
417
641
730
718
489
484
480
466
431
395
370
313
207
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
2006/2007
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010
2010/2011
2011/2012
2012/2013
2013/2014
2014/2015
2015/2016
2016/2017
2017/2018
2018/2019
2019/2020
2020/2021
2021/2022
2022/2023
2023/2024
2024/2025
2025/2026
2026/2027
Total Completions
Market Housing Projected
Affordable Housing ProjectedSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
88
10.9
  
It is important housing land supply is monitored in order to ensure that there remains a 
flexible supply of delive
rable and developable land for housing. To achieve this, an annual 
report and supporting technical methodology will be prepared which will confirm the level 
of housing provision to be provided for the basis of the 5 year land supply in the context 
of paragraph 47 of the NPPF.
10.10
  
To ensure sufficient land i
s made available to meet housing needs to the end of the 
plan period the Council will undertake a review of the Core Strategy/Local Plan to be 
completed before the end of 2018.  This should be based on a revised Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment undertaken in conjunction with other relevant authorities in the West 
of England region.  Regard will also be had to all available evidence sources including 
demographic evidence, economic conditions and forecasts. If evidence suggests that 
additional provision of homes will be required the review will consider the appropriate 
response. If additional strategic provision is required its delivery will be determined on 
a West of England-wide basis through the duty to cooperate. This will involve reviewing 
the general extent of the Green Belt. This will enable, should the further release of land 
for development prove necessary, land currently within the Green Belt to be assessed 
against other reasonable alternatives.
10.11
  
The April 2013 Update to th
e 2012 Annual Monitoring Report shows there was outline, 
detailed or reserved planning permission for 11,191 dwellings.  A further 8,684 dwellings 
awaited completion of a legal agreement or are otherwise allocated in the South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan or identified in the Core Strategy.
10.12
  
To supplement the existi
ng permissions and commitments, the Core Strategy identifies 
3 new neighbourhoods which will deliver 10,400 dwellings. Development at Thornbury 
will provide a further 800 dwellings to support local housing needs and to address a 
deficiency in the Council’s 5 year housing land supply.  The additional site at Morton 
Way North is necessary to provide a 20% buffer to ensure choice and competition in the 
market for housing land as required by the NPPF.
10.13
  
Over half of the dwelling
s to be provided in the new neighbourhoods will come forward in 
the Cribbs/Patchway New Neighbourhood, a significant proportion of which are expected 
with the anticipated closure, and subsequent release for development, of Filton Airfield. 
BAE Systems has announced its intentions in this respect. This level of development is 
justified in order to deliver a comprehensive and sustainable development in this area 
of the Bristol North Fringe, well integrated with the existing communities surrounding the 
area, and to secure the level of infrastructure investment required, particularly transport 
and education. 
10.14
  
In recent years at least 60% of h
ousing development in South Gloucestershire has 
taken place on previously developed land.  Many of the committed sites are also on 
previously developed land. However, because of the level of housing growth which South 
Gloucestershire has to accommodate up to 2027, increasingly new housing development 
will have to be on greenfield sites, as there is a declining amount of brownfield land 
available in sustainable locations. These greenfield sites support the Core Strategy’s 
Strategy for Development and will help in delivering the longer term vision for the West of 
England.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
89
Delivery
10.15
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process by private 
developers and affordable housing providers approved by the Council.  Policies CS26, 
CS27 and CS31 provide detailed guidance on the new neighbourhoods at Cribbs 
Causeway, East of Harry Stoke and north Yate. South Gloucestershire Local Plan Policy 
M2 sets out detailed requirements for the major development at Emersons Green.
Housing density
 
POLICY CS16 - HOUSING DENSITY
Housing development is required to make efficient use of land, to conserve resources 
and maximise the amount of housing supplied, particularly in and around town centres 
and other locations where there is good pedestrian access to frequent public transport 
services.
In addition, the density of new development should be informed by the character of the 
local area and contribute to:
1.
 
the high quality design obj
ectives set out in Policy CS1
2.
 
improving the mix of hous
ing types in the locality; and
3.
  
providing adequate l
evels of public open space, semi-private communal open space 
and private outdoor space.
10.16
  
The primary purpose of a dens
ity policy is to make efficient use of land, where density is a 
measure of the number of dwellings which can be accommodated on a site or in an area.  
This is an important aspect of housing delivery as the density of housing development 
has implications for sustainability.  Higher densities mean more housing units can be 
provided in an area, thereby minimising the land take for development. Where there is 
good access to local facilities by walking or cycling, or good public transport, then higher 
density housing supports local businesses, services and infrastructure. 
10.17
  
However, higher densit
y housing that is poorly designed or poorly located can have an 
adverse impact on a locality and on sustainability. Therefore, housing density policies 
must be capable of being applied flexibly in order to support other objectives. In 
particular, development will be considered against the requirements of Design Policy 
CS1, which includes compatibility with the character of the local area.  Also relevant are 
the objectives of providing a mix of housing to support a wide variety of households and 
maintaining a pattern of green and open space. Appropriate application of this policy will 
help to broaden the range and mix of homes available.
Delivery
10.18
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process by private 
developers and affordable housing providers approved by the Council.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
90
Housing diversity
 
POLICY CS17 -  HOUSING DIVERSITY
In order to support mixed communities in all localities, new housing development, 
comprising both market and affordable, must provide a wide variety of housing type and 
size to accommodate a range of different households, including families, single persons, 
older persons and low income households, as evidenced by local needs assessments 
and strategic housing market assessments. 
On the strategic sites which are key to the implementation of the Core Strategy, the 
broadest possible mix should be achieved. Such a mix should reflect:
1.
 
the guidance on the amoun
t and type of affordable housing set by Policy CS18; and
2.
  
the need to provide for sm
aller family houses, in order to enable new households to 
get on the housing ladder and for older households to downsize.
On all other sites, the mix of housing should contribute to providing choice in tenure and 
type, having regard to the existing mix of dwellings in the locality and the character and 
relative accessibility of the location.  
Sub-division of existing dwellings to form flats and building on gardens will be allowed 
where this would not adversely affect the character of an area and where, cumulatively, 
it would not lead to unacceptable localised traffic congestion and pressure on parking. 
Such development will be allowed where each home has adequate private/semi-private 
and/or communal outdoor space and where occupiers have access to adequate open 
and play space within the immediate vicinity. 
Housing developments will also need to contribute to the provision of homes that are 
suitable for the needs of older people, persons with disabilities and those with other 
special needs, in a way that integrates these people with the wider community. 
10.19
  
The Council is committed t
o improving housing choice and to creating sustainable, 
inclusive and mixed communities in both urban and rural areas.
10.20
  
In 2001, the average hou
sehold size was 2.45 persons. Approximately 25% were single 
person households, 31% were 2 person households, and another 30% were households 
with dependent children. By 2026, the average household size is projected to shrink 
to around 2.19 persons, with single person households representing about 35% of all 
households.
10.21
  
In 2001, flats and maisone
ttes represented 9% of the total housing stock, terraced 
housing 28%, semi-detached 35% and detached 28%.  Over the past few years the 
proportion of flats built annually has been between 40-60% of all new homes, with 75-
85% of all 1-bed and 2-bed homes being built as flats. While the overall proportion of 
flats is still relatively low and the West of England SHMA indicates a need for smaller 
properties to reflect the changing demographic profile, there is a concern that the mix www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
91
of new housing is not reflecting community need for smaller family housing.  In terms of 
social housing, for example, South Gloucestershire needs a significant proportion of this 
to be 2 and 3 bedroom family suitable housing, with some areas requiring no additional 
non-family 1 and 2 bedroom homes. 
10.22
  
Within the owner/occupie
r market, the existing mix of supply is biased towards larger 
homes. There are indications that in some areas additional smaller properties would 
be appropriate for first time buyer demand and there is evidence of a shortfall of two 
bedroom properties for older people trading down in property size.
10.23
  
Demographic trends sho
w that the population is ageing, increasing the demand for 
smaller size housing, a significant proportion of which will need to be accessible.  There is 
also evidence of increasing demand for Extra Care housing.  
10.24
  
The strategic sites refe
rred to in this policy are: 1) the South Gloucestershire Local Plan 
allocations of Charlton Hayes, Harry Stoke, Wallscourt Farm, East of Coldharbour Lane 
and Emersons Green; 2) the new neighbourhoods at Cribbs/Patchway, East of Harry 
Stoke and north Yate; and 3) the Housing Opportunity Areas at Thornbury. These sites 
provide the opportunity to secure a mix of housing type and tenure. 
10.25
  
On non-strategic sites
, the Council will be looking for housing sizes which improve 
the housing choice in an area.  Very small developments generally tend to provide a 
disproportionate number of 3 and 4 bedroom houses. The demand for 4+ bedroom 
house sizes is also provided through extensions to existing properties.  Therefore the 
Council will expect smaller family housing to be included in the mix of housing on other 
sites.  The emphasis of this policy is providing housing choice and mix.  While new 
development must respect the character of the locality, this does not mean replication of 
existing housing style.  Through the neighbourhood planning process and the Policies, 
Sites and Places DPD opportunities exist to identify details of local character.
10.26
  
Many localities in the distric
t are suffering from the cumulative impact of residential 
conversions to flats and building on gardens. This can lead to problems of congestion, 
parking conflict (including managing expectations for car ownership) and loss of green 
space which threatens the health and well-being of existing residents. However, some 
intensification, if carried out sensitively, and where it would not adversely affect the 
character of an area, can contribute to the local mix and affordability of housing, viability 
of local services, vitality of local areas and contribute to the Council’s housing delivery 
targets. Policy CS1 promotes good design in the broader sense and provides a basis for 
dealing with intensification issues. The need to provide sufficient open space should also 
be recognised (see Policy CS24). Further guidance on the sub-division of dwellings and 
building on gardens will be set out in a reviewed South Gloucestershire Design Checklist 
SPD.
Delivery
10.27
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process by private 
developers and affordable housing providers approved by the Council.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
92
Affordable housing
 
 
POLICY CS18 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING
The Council is committed to improving affordable housing provision to meet housing 
need in South Gloucestershire. This will be achieved through:
1.
  
requiring developer
s to achieve 35% on-site affordable housing on all new housing 
developments, normally without public subsidy, in urban areas of 10 or more 
dwellings, or 0.33 hectares irrespective of the number of dwellings (except in rural 
areas where the threshold will be 5 or more dwellings or 0.20 hectares) unless the 
developer demonstrates that the economic viability of a particular site is affected by 
specific factors and as a result that a lower percentage should be provided without 
public subsidy, in which case other financial contributions should be sought to achieve 
the 35% requirement
2.
 
delivery of direct pro
vision on sites by registered providers
3.
 
the delivery of Rural Hous
ing Exception sites in accordance with Policy CS19
4.
  
providing affordab
le housing in suitable mixed use schemes, where this would form a 
viable element of a commercial development, and through existing properties in need 
of investment brought back into use as permanent affordable housing by registered 
providers
5.
  
seeking off-site pro
vision, or a broadly equivalent financial contribution in lieu of on-
site provision, but only in exceptional circumstances where it can be robustly justified, 
for the provision of affordable housing elsewhere in South Gloucestershire; and
6.
  
empowering local comm
unities through opportunities presented by Neighbourhood 
Planning.
In implementing this policy the Council will negotiate the maximum level of affordable 
housing on each site that is feasible up to the 35% figure and will aim to ensure that:
7.
  
developments contri
bute to a range of housing provision in local areas, with the aim of 
achieving mixed and balanced communities, and refer to the findings of the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment, (and in rural areas, where appropriate, to local housing 
needs surveys), in providing the specific housing mix required to meet housing needs; 
and that
8.
  
the different types of de
fined affordable housing are used effectively to maximise 
appropriate provision in line with the West of England Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment 2009 or as updated by future housing market assessments.
The Council will further develop policy guidance on affordable housing through updating 
and replacing the current SPD including its approach to the calculation of financial 
contributions and to the provision of affordable housing in Extra Care housing schemes.  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
93
  
Evidence of housing need
10.28
  
The findings of the West of E
ngland (WoE) Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA), May 2009, which was undertaken in line with good practice advice published 
by the government, provide the background to this policy. The study shows that there is 
a high need for affordable housing in the West of England that is not being met through 
existing policies.
10.29
  
In South Gloucestersh
ire there is an estimated average annual need for 903 new 
affordable housing units over the period 2009 to 2021 compared to a potential average 
annual housing supply (both market and affordable) of around 1,550 units. The proportion 
of younger households able to buy or rent in the market had fallen from 52.3% in 2002 to 
45.3% in 2007. Other key features are the large backlog of need for affordable housing, 
the projected annual increase of newly forming households continuing to need social 
rented accommodation, and the relatively small existing stock of affordable housing 
limiting the ability to meet needs through re-lets. 
  
Percentage of affordabl
e housing
10.30
  
The main source of new affor
dable housing is expected to arise through Section 106 
agreements on sites for market housing. The Council requires 35% of affordable housing 
on such sites given that a range of market conditions need to be taken into account, a 
position supported by the SHMA; para.10.34 sets out how the impact of current market 
conditions will be considered. The expectation is that such affordable provision would 
normally take place without public subsidy. However, the economic viability of individual 
site developments would be considered where the developer raised a site viability issue 
and a site appraisal was undertaken.
10.31
  
The definition of afforda
ble housing is as set out in national policy, and includes social 
rented housing, affordable rented and intermediate affordable housing. Where affordable 
rent is provided, flexibility will be sought to provide such affordable rent housing at rent 
levels best suited to prevailing local levels of income whilst achieving a policy compliant 
percentage of affordable housing.
10.32
  
Delivery will comply with th
e provisions of national policy and other published national 
guidance. All provision will therefore include the expectation that affordable homes 
provided remain at an affordable price for future generations of eligible households and 
for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision within South 
Gloucestershire where this is not so. 
10.33
  
On sites allocated solely for a
ffordable housing, or where only affordable housing is 
proposed, there will be no requirement to deliver a percentage without public subsidy 
where the threshold is exceeded, as set out in this policy, providing that the proposed 
affordable housing meets identified need and complies with the requirements of the 
Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning Document.
10.34
  
The expectation is that af
fordable housing will be provided on the application site. 
However, where it can be robustly justified, off-site provision, or a financial contribution South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
94
in lieu of on-site provision of broadly equivalent value may be accepted, providing 
the agreed approach contributes to the creation of mixed communities in South 
Gloucestershire.
  
Threshold (size of site
)
10.35
  
The size site threshold at wh
ich on-site affordable housing should be provided will be set 
at 10 dwellings or above in urban areas, or 0.33 hectares irrespective of the number of 
dwellings, and 5 dwellings or above in rural areas, or 0.20 hectares, in order to maximise 
the provision of affordable housing whilst acknowledging viability issues. Some flexibility 
will need to be maintained to take account of site specific issues which may have a 
particular impact on smaller sites. The approach to seeking off-site contributions towards 
affordable housing will be set out in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD.
10.36
  
In accordance with Policy C
S16 Housing Density all housing development will also be 
expected to make efficient use of land, maximising the amount of housing supplied. 
Therefore, where a planning application for residential development is made on a site, and 
the dwelling numbers proposed fall below the thresholds for affordable housing provision 
set out in Policy CS18, then an assessment of the housing density appropriate to the site 
will be made with a view to determining whether affordable housing should be required.
10.37
  
Similarly, where it is pro
posed to phase development, sub-divide sites or where recent 
sub-division has taken place, or where there is a reasonable prospect of adjoining land 
being developed for residential purposes in tandem, the Council will take the whole 
site for the purpose of determining whether the scheme falls above or below the site 
thresholds for the provision of affordable housing. 
  
Site viability
10.38
  
The 35% figure is considere
d a robust target, capable of being achieved in an improving 
housing market in the medium to longer term, where a real increase in housing prices 
can be anticipated. In some cases, higher percentage targets have been achieved, but 
these have generally been in areas of higher land value where different viability conditions 
apply.
10.39 
 
In a less favourable nation
al economic climate, and without a real increase in house 
prices, then for some sites, total reliance cannot be placed on funding through land 
values alone to deliver this 35% affordable housing figure.  A combination of other 
financial support measures therefore may be required to achieve the 35% target.
10.40
  
In finalising targets it wi
ll be important not to jeopardise the overall delivery of housing 
within South Gloucestershire that is required to meet both market and affordable need; a 
continuing supply of deliverable and developable residential sites being a requirement of 
national guidance.
10.41
  
Therefore, in seekin
g to negotiate the maximum level of affordable housing on each site, 
the Council will have regard to the economic viability of site development, likely costs, www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
95
market conditions, the availability of public subsidy and the aim of achieving a mixed 
and balanced community. Developers will be expected to demonstrate the validity of 
such viability factors, providing supporting evidence. This, the Council will seek to verify 
independently, with the developer being liable for reasonable costs incurred by the 
Council.
10.42
  
Where developers have clea
rly demonstrated that scheme viability prohibits the full 
provision of affordable housing, the Council may support an application for grant funding, 
or consider alternative financial support measures, to increase affordable housing 
provision to the 35% target figure.  Alternatively it may negotiate a lower level of affordable 
housing provision and/or a different housing mix.  Where public subsidy has been made 
available, unrelated to viability, the Council will consider seeking additional affordable 
housing above the targets where viability is not jeopardised.
  
Rural Areas
10.43
  
Local communities will be empo
wered to shape the future of their own areas, including 
the provision of affordable housing, through opportunities presented by Neighbourhood 
Planning.  In the absence of an adopted Neighbourhood Plan Policy CS19 sets out the 
approach to rural housing exception sites. This policy allows for affordable housing to 
be developed in locations where market housing would not normally be acceptable, 
subject to there being an identified local need.  Where it can be satisfactorily proved that 
an element of market housing will facilitate the delivery of the identified local affordable 
housing need this will be allowed subject to the proposals fulfilling other requirements of 
the policy. A legal obligation will limit occupancy to those with a local connection. Where 
there are small rural schemes for market housing, an affordable housing element will be 
sought on sites of five dwellings, or 0.20ha and over.
10.44
  
The particular shortage o
f affordable housing supply in rural areas, and the need 
to maintain and sustain rural communities, is recognised by the Council. Therefore, 
in planning agreements related to market housing sites where affordable housing 
is provided, consideration will be given to seeking specific provision for those who 
have both a housing need and a defined local connection to a settlement, or group of 
settlements, where evidence is available through local needs assessments that such 
needs exist. The development of a local connections policy will take place during the 
preparation of a future supplementary planning document. 
  
Improving affordable h
ousing provision
10.45
  
In order to further expan
d the provision of affordable housing, and recognising that 
there will be some residential sites that fall below the proposed size thresholds, it is 
also proposed that in future (a) consideration is given to seeking mixed use provision in 
suitably located commercial schemes so that a housing element might be provided, and 
(b) additional investment might be put into bringing more empty homes back into use 
by registered providers as permanent affordable housing, where these have fallen into 
disrepair and/or remained vacant for a long period. The use of commuted sums made in 
lieu of on-site provision will be considered for this purpose.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
96
10.46
  
The SHMA provides guidance on the tenure split, type and mix of affordable housing the 
Council will seek in dev
elopment schemes and developers will be expected to incorporate 
this guidance into housing proposals to ensure that affordable provision addresses the 
main housing need.
10.47
  
Within the wider contex
t of Policy CS20 (Extra Care Housing), the Council will seek to 
deliver an affordable element in Extra Care schemes. These schemes are designed 
specifically to promote independent living in self-contained flats, predominantly for older 
people, who are also able to access high quality flexible support and care services on-
site to suit their needs, and use a range of on-site communal facilities. In applying the 
affordable housing policy particular considerations will pertain because of the special 
nature of this accommodation; it will not normally be appropriate to seek the general size/
type mix of housing set out in the SHMA.
Delivery
10.48
  
Affordable housing wi
ll be delivered within the framework of this Core Strategy and the 
Council’s Housing Strategy and will also need to reflect Government policy.  Delivery will 
be supported by more detailed guidance on policy requirements and implementation 
matters in a revised Supplementary Planning Document. The precise details of quantities, 
type and mix of affordable housing on specific sites will be a matter for negotiation 
with the Housing Enabling team and Planning Officers.  Delivery will support the 
wider objective of creating sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities. To this end, 
affordable housing will normally form part of the overall development, well integrated 
with market housing. The “pepperpotting” of affordable housing in small clusters within 
mixed tenure developments will be sought in accordance with the design guidance in 
the revised SPD.  Affordable housing can also be delivered through the neighbourhood 
planning process.
Rural housing exception sites
10.49
  
Where communities wish to support further housing development which would not 
normally be acceptable b
ecause of planning policy constraints, South Gloucestershire 
Council’s preference would be to achieve this by empowering local communities through 
opportunities presented by Neighbourhood Planning. In the absence of an adopted 
Neighbourhood Plan the following policy will be applicable.
 
POLICY CS19 - RURAL HOUSING EXCEPTION SITES
Proposals for permanent affordable housing to meet an identified local need (including 
a small element of market housing where this will facilitate the successful delivery of the 
affordable housing) will be permitted as an exception on sites where market housing 
would not normally be acceptable.  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
97
 
Proposals should be:
1.
 
supported by an approv
ed housing needs survey
2.
 
well related to a rural set
tlement
3.
  
modest in scale and in kee
ping with the form and character of the settlement and local 
landscape setting; and
4.
 
supported or initiate
d by the appropriate Parish Council.
Permission will be subject to conditions, or a legal obligation will be negotiated, to ensure 
that the affordable housing is reserved in perpetuity for those in local affordable housing 
need. 
10.50
  
The Council is committed t
o delivering affordable homes in the rural areas to meet the 
identified local needs of households unable to meet their housing needs on the open 
market and to promote inclusive and thriving communities.
10.51
  
This policy allows for the de
velopment of affordable housing in rural locations where 
market housing would not normally be acceptable, because of planning policy 
constraints, subject to there being identified need.  This policy will deliver both 100% 
affordable housing sites and sites where it can be satisfactorily proved that a small 
element of market housing will facilitate the delivery of an identified local affordable 
housing need, subject to the proposals fulfilling the other policy requirements.  Proposals 
containing an element of market housing should be supported by a viability assessment, 
which demonstrates that the proportion of market housing provided should be no greater 
than that required to deliver the agreed amount of affordable housing identified from an 
approved housing needs survey.
10.52
  
Proposals must be well rel
ated and in sympathy with the scale, form and character of the 
settlement and the locality and should pay particular attention to the local distinctiveness 
of the settlement and the surrounding area.  Environmental considerations including 
landscape and heritage matters and other constraints, including the impact on the 
openness of the Green Belt and AONB policy, may determine the number of dwellings 
considered to be acceptable.  This may result in fewer dwellings than that identified in the 
local housing need survey (see paragraph 10.55).
10.53
  
Proposals must be well rel
ated, in terms of their physical proximity and design, to an 
existing rural settlement.
10.54
  
The identification of ap
propriate sites and design principles will be best achieved through 
an appraisal of the whole rural settlement(s) concerned and should include engagement 
with the communities/parishes.  Where proposals include an element of market housing, 
the design of the site and individual units should ensure integrated with the affordable 
housing.  Development should be supported by the appropriate parish council.
10.55
  
Development proposal
s should be consistent with the local need identified by a housing 
need survey carried out in the last 5 years in accordance with national or any superseding 
Council approved guidance covering the rural settlement or parish (or group of rural South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
98
settlements or parishes) to which the proposal is related.  Advice on the preparation of 
these surveys and their validation can be obtained from the Council.  The local housing 
needs survey must demonstrate that there is a genuine local need for affordable housing 
within the settlement/parish (or group of rural settlements or parishes) from people who 
are or have been closely connected with the village/parish (or group of rural settlements 
or parishes) due to family ties, support network, birth or formative years spent in that 
locality or who have an existing employment connection to the area covered by the 
survey.
10.56
  
Affordable housing on r
ural exception sites will be subject to a condition or legal 
obligation, which limits occupancy to those with the local connection, defined in 
paragraph 10.55 above.  Should dwellings remain unoccupied for a period of time a 
cascade approach to widen the area of connection will come into effect.  The cascade 
approach will be defined in a legal agreement, together with details of how the dwellings 
will be reserved as affordable in perpetuity.
10.57
 
Policy CS18 does not apply to P
olicy CS19.
10.58
  
Rural communities are encour
aged to undertake local housing needs surveys and 
prepare parish plans and/or design statements to set out the future needs and aspirations 
for their communities, in order to help inform proposals for rural housing exception sites 
and provide information to assist in determining such applications.  The Council expects 
that affordable housing will also be delivered through the Neighbourhood Planning 
process.
10.59
  
Should rural affordab
le housing not be delivered in sufficient numbers through 
Neighbourhood Planning, the Rural Housing Exceptions (Policy CS19) and the Affordable 
Housing (Policy CS18), then consideration will be given to allocating Affordable Housing 
Only Sites in or adjoining a rural settlement.  This will be considered in conjunction with 
the review of the defined settlement boundary approach  to villages outlined in the text 
to the Rural Areas Policy CS34 and will involve engagement with local communities and 
other stakeholders/partners.  Any such allocations will be identified in the Policies, Sites 
and Places Development Plan Document and will need to be supported by up to date 
and validated local housing needs surveys.
10.60
  
The Council will prepar
e a revised Affordable Housing Supplementary Planning 
Document to amplify this policy and Affordable Housing Policy CS18.
Delivery
10.61
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through partnership working with parish councils, rural 
landowners, the Council (as planning and housing authority) and affordable housing 
providers approved by the Council.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
99
Extra Care housing 
POLICY CS20 -  EXTRA CARE HOUSING
In order to assist in meeting emerging need, and creating sustainable, inclusive and 
mixed communities, the provision of Extra Care Housing will be required in South 
Gloucestershire, including the new neighbourhoods identified in Policies CS26, CS27 and 
CS31.  Regard will be had to the nature of a scheme to determine whether it comes within 
category C2 or C3 of the Use Classes Order and is subject to the provisions of Policy 
CS18 in relation to affordable housing provision.
Extra Care schemes should be located so they are accessible to local facilities, 
proportionate in scale to the locality and provide ancillary facilities as part of the 
development. These ancillary facilities should complement locally available amenities 
and be made available to the wider community.
 
10.62
  
The strategic importanc
e of Extra Care as an alternative accommodation choice for older 
people and those with special needs is reflected in the Sustainable Community Strategy, 
the Council Strategy, the Housing Strategy 2013-18 and the Better Services for Older 
People programme.
10.63
  
For most people Extra Care Ho
using is designed to be a home for life. It promotes 
independent living in self-contained accommodation, where people are able to readily 
access high quality, flexible support and care services on site to suit their needs.  Differing 
from traditional sheltered/ retirement accommodation, schemes also incorporate a wide 
range of communal facilities, available not only to service users but also as a potential 
resource for the wider community.
10.64
  
Community inclusion is a cen
tral ethos of Extra Care Housing.  Communal spaces can 
be used by health and social care partners to deliver a menu of services on site and 
into the community.  A range of facilities, dependent on the scale and location should 
be considered to improve the heath, fitness and well-being of individuals and provide a 
‘lifestyle’ option.  These facilities may range from a communal living room, small shop, 
hairdressing salon, gym and café/bistro to specialist health care facilities. Such facilities 
should complement the amenities available in the locality, not compete with them. 
Residents should be able to access locally available amenities as well, either by foot, 
mobility scooter or community/public transport.
10.65
  
Extra Care Housing sche
mes will be required throughout South Gloucestershire and the 
Council will particularly look to the strategic housing allocations set out in Policies CS26, 
CS27 & CS31 to deliver such schemes as an integral part of those developments. Extra 
care housing can take a variety of forms which can influence whether it is classified as a 
C2 or C3 use under the relevant Use Classes Order.  The Council will consider the nature 
and type of accommodation to be provided in each scheme in order to determine this 
and whether the proposal therefore needs to accord with the provisions of policy CS18 in 
relation to affordable housing contributions where this is viable and appropriate.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
100
10.66
  
Developers will be encouraged to contribute to the provision of homes that are suitable for 
the needs of older people, p
ersons with disabilities and those with other special needs, 
in a way that integrates these people with the wider community in accordance with Policy 
CS17 (Housing Diversity).  This could include Extra Care Housing.
10.67
  
Extra Care should be part o
f wider, balanced communities. Stand alone schemes should 
not be separate, gated developments. Equally, where provision is proposed as part of 
a larger development, Concept Statements and master plans should clearly define the 
scale and location of the Extra Care provision.
10.68
  
The Affordable Housin
g SPD will set out in greater detail how this policy will be 
implemented.
Delivery
10.69
  
Extra Care Housing is curr
ently being delivered by the Council using a capital programme 
to meet the present need.
10.70
  
Delivery will be through pa
rtnership working with the Council (as planning and housing 
authority) and affordable housing providers approved by the Council and private 
developers. 
10.71
  
Consideration will al
so be given to meeting emerging need by allocating sites through the 
Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan Document.
Gypsy and Traveller accommodation 
POLICY CS21 -  GYPSY AND TRAVELLER ACCOMMODATION
Provision will be made for Gypsy and/ Traveller accommodation through the Policies, 
Sites and Places DPD or a replacement local plan (whichever is the sooner) following a 
review of the need for further pitches up to 2027.  Additional provision will be addressed 
through the intensification of existing sites in the first instance while not excluding sites in 
the new neighbourhoods.
Applications for Gypsy and Traveller windfall sites will be considered having regard to the 
outstanding level of need and in accordance with the most recent government guidance. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
101
Sites for Gypsies and Travellers will be considered appropriate where they meet the 
following criteria
1.
  
the development would n
ot have unacceptable environmental effects; and
2.
    
the land is not the subjec
t of unacceptable levels of noise disturbance, air pollution, 
smell, dust or contamination; and
3.
    
the proposal would not un
acceptably prejudice the amenities of existing and new 
neighbouring residential occupiers; and
4.
     
adequate provision i
s made for vehicular access, parking and manoeuvring. 
 
Preferably sites should be within a reasonable distance of local services and facilities, 
though more remote sites may be acceptable. 
Proposals for sites within the Green Belt or Cotswold AONB will only be acceptable 
where it can be demonstrated that very special circumstances exist. 
Existing authorised* land for accommodation by Gypsies and Travellers will be 
safeguarded at the following sites:
1.
  
Hill View, Badminton Ro
ad, Nibley
2.
  
Swan Lane, Winterbour
ne (3 sites)
3.
  
Frampton Park, (Cog Mi
ll), Bristol Road, Frampton Cotterell
4.
  
Elm Farm, Westerleig
h Road, Westerleigh 
5.
  
Green Orchards, Berwi
ck Lane, Easter Compton 
6.
  
Shortwood Yard, Shortw
ood Hill, Pucklechurch
7.
  
Greengate Yard, Short
wood Hill, Pucklechurch
8.
  
Parkfield Road, Puckl
echurch (2 sites)
9.
  
Siston Lane, Siston (2 s
ites)
10.
 
Orchard Farm, Pomphr
ey Hill, Mangotsfield 
11.
  
Westerleigh Road, Ma
ngotsfield
12. 
 
Burton Road, Tormart
on (2 sites)
13. 
 
Appletrees, New Stree
t, Charfield 
14. 
 
Bank Road, Pilning
15. 
 
Henfield Paddock, Henfi
eld Road, Coalpit Heath
16. 
 
Cottage View, Glouce
ster Road, Almondsbury 
17. 
 
56 Ram Hill, Coalpit Hea
th
18. 
 
Moor Paddock, Westerl
eigh Road, Pucklechurch 
19. 
 
Tall Trees, Over Lane, Al
mondsbury 
20. 
 
Bridge View, Westerl
eigh Road, Westerleigh 
21. 
 
Meadow View, Shortwood R
oad, Pucklechurch 
22. 
 
Highwood Park, Highw
ood Road, Patchway 
23. 
 
Northwood Park, Old Gl
oucester Road, Winterbourne 
24. 
 
Homefield, Hall End Lan
e, Wickwar
25. 
 
1 Dibden Lane, Emerson
s Green 
26. 
 
Land at Giddy End, High La
ne, Winterbourne
27. 
 
The Meadows, Parkfield, P
ucklechurch
28. 
 
Leechpool Dairy Farm
, Tanhouse Lane, Yate
29. 
 
Caravan Near Aust Serv
ices,  Sandy Lane, Aust
30. 
 
Tytherington Road Nur
sery, Tytherington Road Thornbury
* See paragraph 10.76South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
102
10.72
  
The West of England Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) 
established that the
re was a need for 58 residential pitches and 25 transit pitches in South 
Gloucestershire to be provided in the period 2006 - 2011 and a further 22 pitches up until 
2016 thereafter. 
10.73
  
When the GTAA was prepar
ed in 2007, unauthorised encampments in South 
Gloucestershire had historically been very high.  It is considered that there are appropriate 
circumstances to reconsider the basis upon which provision for Gypsy/Traveller sites was 
established in the West of England GTAA in 2007.
10.74
  
It is believed the high numbers o
f unauthorised encampments were due to particular 
and unique circumstances in the district at that time.  As a result, the GTAA placed a 
disproportionate reliance on the historic high numbers in setting provision for the district 
up to 2011 and, as a consequence, this figure now looks increasingly outdated as a basis 
to establish provision against, particularly in relation to transit provision. 
10.75
  
Gypsy/ Traveller pitches w
ill continue to be provided through the development 
management process. Any additional new sites will be allocated through the Policies, 
Sites and Places DPD following a review of the need for further pitches up to 2027.  Firstly 
by working with Gypsy/ Traveller families on existing sites by making more efficient use 
of their land, where considered suitable, for additional pitches. Secondly, through new 
site provision, as part of delivering the strategic new neighbourhoods and finally through 
individual applications through the Council’s Development Management process. It is 
anticipated that a proportion of new pitches/sites will continue to be met through the 
submission of windfall applications. Providing extra pitches on existing, family sites could 
potentially generate an additional 27 residential and 9 transit pitches and it is anticipated 
that between 24 and 32 residential pitches could be provided as part of delivering 
the new neighbourhoods.  The need for a single, open transit facility within the area is 
acknowledged and it is anticipated this can be progressed in the plan period.
10.76
  
Existing, authorise
d sites will be safeguarded and this will apply to public and private 
Gypsy/Traveller provision. ‘Authorised’ land includes existing Gypsy and Traveller sites 
which benefit from a permanent planning permission or alternatively, a temporary 
planning permission. The term ‘safeguarded’ means that existing, authorised land for the 
accommodation of Gypsies and Travellers will be retained until such time as it can be 
proved no longer a need. In the case of sites with temporary planning permission, the site 
will be retained, or ‘safeguarded’ until such time as the existing permission expires and 
safeguarding status will no longer apply.
Delivery
10.77
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through partnership working with the Council (as planning 
and housing authority) and affordable housing providers approved by the Council, private 
housing developers and private landowners.
 www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
103
Travelling Showpeople
 
POLICY CS22 -  TRAVELLING SHOWPEOPLE
Provision will be made for Travelling Showpeople through the Policies, Sites and Places 
DPD in accordance with identified need and taking into account other provision within the 
district.
Sites for Travelling Showpeople will be considered appropriate where they meet the 
following criteria:
1.
 
the development would n
ot have unacceptable environmental effects; and
2.
  
the land is not the subject of u
nacceptable levels of noise disturbance, air pollution, 
smell, dust or contamination; and
3.
  
the proposal would not pr
ejudice the amenities of neighbouring residential occupiers; 
and
4.
 
adequate provision i
s made for vehicular access and parking; and
5.
 
sites are within a reaso
nable distance of local services and facilities.
Applications for unallocated sites will be considered having regard to the above criteria 
and in accordance with identified need.  Unallocated sites within the Green Belt or 
Cotswolds AONB will only be acceptable where it can be demonstrated that very special 
circumstances exist.
Existing land for accommodation by Travelling Showpeople will be safeguarded at the 
following sites:
1.
  
Fairlands, Earthcot
t Green, Alveston
2.
  
Acres Fair, North Road
, Yate
3.
  
Frog Lane, Coalpit Hea
th
4.
  
Land at Beanwood Park, W
apley
5.
  
The Burgage, Chippin
g Sodbury
6.
  
Land at Cotswold Road, C
hipping Sodbury
7.
  
Land at Alexandra Road
, Coalpit Heath
8.
  
Land at the Causeway, Coa
lpit Heath
9.
  
Land at Park Lane, Framp
ton Cotterell
10.
 
Land adjacent to Hares F
arm, Mapleridge Lane, Yate
11. 
 
Bristol Rd, Cromhall
12. 
 
Engine Common Lane, Yat
e
10.78
  
The Draft RSS Panel Report r
ecognised that the needs of Travelling Showpeople required 
further work in the next round of GTAAs but, in the meantime, endorsed the approach 
regarding transitional arrangements outlined in Circular 04/2007 and recommended 
interim figures be provided at the county/sub-regional level. 
10.79
  
Existing sites listed 1
-12 above will be safeguarded.  Sites 1 to 4, and 10 to 12 benefit from 
planning permission and sites 5 to 9, while not benefiting from planning permission, have 
been used as such for a number of years.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
104
Delivery
10.80
  
This policy will be deliver
ed through private landowners in accordance with identified 
need.
Community infrastructure and cultural activity
 
POLICY CS23 -  COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND CULTURAL ACTIVITY
The Council will work with partners to provide additional, extended or enhanced 
community infrastructure and encourage participation in cultural activity.
New development will be required to provide or contribute towards additional, extended 
or enhanced community and cultural  infrastructure where it would generate a need for 
such facilities, in accordance with the following sequential criteria:
1.
  
enhance the quality, ro
le and viability of existing facilities that are within easy walking 
distance of the new development
2.
  
provide adaptable mu
lti-use building(s) on site in easily accessible location(s) for 
pedestrians and cyclists.
 
Existing community infrastructure will be retained, unless it can be demonstrated that:
3.
 
the use has ceased and the
re is no longer a demand; or
4.
 
the facility is no longe
r fit for purpose; and
5.
  
suitable alternati
ve provision is available within easy walking distance to the required 
standard.
Developers of Major Residential Schemes, and schemes that will attract a large number 
of users, will be required to demonstrate how their proposals will contribute to the 
objectives of the South Gloucestershire Cultural, Heritage and Arts Strategies, through 
the provision of additional, extended or enhanced facilities and access to/or facilitation of 
art and cultural activities for the new residents.
 
10.81
  
Community and Cultural Infr
astructure cover a wide variety of services and facilities. 
These can include:
  
❙
 
education facilities
  
❙
 
health & social care facil
ities
  
❙
 
police, Fire & Ambulance f
acilities
  
❙
 
libraries, museums & galle
ries
  
❙
 
community centres
  
❙
 
youth, children’s an
d childcare facilities
  
❙
 
arts & cultural centres and v
enues
  
❙
 
Extra Care & other older peo
ples housing needs
  
❙
 
local pubs & clubs
  
❙
 
places of worshipwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
105
  
❙
 
training centres
  
❙
 
public & private sports & rec
reation facilities
  
❙
 
civic & administrativ
e facilities
  
❙
 
allotments/community g
ardens
  
❙
 
public conveniences.
10
.82
  
The list is not exhausti
ve and may include any facility that provides for the health, welfare, 
social, educational, spiritual, recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the community. 
Retention of such facilities and provision in step with growth is an important objective of 
the Council. In particular, the Council considers that providing services for children and 
young people (0-19) is key to developing sustainable communities.
10.83
  
Many existing facilitie
s will play multi-functional roles. Where new development creates 
additional need, the starting point should be to seek to enhance the role and viability of 
existing facilities that are within easy walking distance of the new development. Should 
this not be possible or appropriate, adaptable multi-use buildings should be provided on-
site, in easily accessible and visible locations at the heart of the community it is intended 
to serve. Educational facilities or community centres should often form the core element 
of such multi-use facilities. 
10.84
  
Where the redevelopmen
t of an existing community facility is proposed for another use, 
the developer should clearly demonstrate that the use has ceased. In doing so it should 
be demonstrated that a reasonable amount of time has lapsed for an alternative agency 
or organisation to re-establish the use, or an alternative community use, or the facility 
no longer provides for the needs of its users to modern day standards and alternative 
suitable provision is available within a reasonable walking distance. Distances should 
be measured along suitable walking routes (easy walking distance is considered to be 
approximately 800m). This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy CS13 (Non-
Safeguarded Sites for Economic Development Sites).
10.85
  
The policy should not be use
d to obstruct the re-organisation objectives of local service 
providers where a re-organisation plan has been adopted through their appropriate 
approval processes. In this context, local service providers include the Emergency 
Services, Local Education Authority, Primary Care Trust and NHS, and Council services. 
Similarly, new development will be expected to provide, or make contributions to meet 
good practice service standards that prevail at the time of the application.
10.86
  
The following strategie
s and plans are relevant and have been taken into account in 
developing this policy:
		❙
 
The Council Plan (SGC)
		
❙
 
Children & Young Peoples Pl
an (SGC)
		❙
 
Schools Commissionin
g Strategy (SGC)
		❙
 
Library Delivery Plan (
SGC)
		❙
 
South Gloucestershi
re Heritage Strategy (SGC)
		❙
 
Joint Accommodation & Car
e Strategy (SGC/PCT)
		❙
 
Joint Strategic Needs As
sessment (South Glos NHS)
		❙
 
Police, Fire, Ambulanc
e Service Delivery Plans
		❙
 
South Gloucestershi
re Cultural Strategy (SGC)
		❙
 
SW Regional Cultural Strat
egy (A Better Place to be…) (WEP)South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
106
❙
 
The vision for the West of England in 2026 and delivery priorities (WEP)
❙
 
Regional Cultural Infras
tructure Development Strategy (People, Places & Spaces) (WEP)
❙
 
Play Policy and Strategy 2
006 (SGC)
❙
 
South Gloucestershi
re Physical Activity and Sports Plan 2007-2009 (SGC)
Delivery
10.87
  
The policy will be implemente
d through the development management process, in 
conjunction with Policy CS6 (Infrastructure and Developer Contributions) and South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan Policies LC4 and RT11, and also through the wider functions of 
the Council and its partners in supporting local communities. 
Green Infrastructure, sport and recreation standards
 
POLICY CS24 -  GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE, SPORT AND RECREATION STANDARDS
Green Infrastructure assets are integral to sustainable communities. Where existing 
Green Infrastructure provision, including informal recreational open space, outdoor 
sports facilities, playspace, allotments, and natural/semi-natural spaces are inadequate in 
terms of providing for the quantity, quality and accessibility to meet the projected needs 
arising from the future occupiers of new development, those occupiers’ needs must be 
met by the new development, together with provision for subsequent management and 
maintenance. 
Provision for Green Infrastructure, outdoor space, sport and recreation facilities will be 
sought according to the following principles:
1.
  
new developments must co
mply with all the appropriate local standards of provision in 
terms of quantity, quality and accessibility
2.
  
provision must be deli
vered on-site, unless it is demonstrated that partial or full off-site 
provision or enhancement creates a more acceptable proposal; and 
3.
  
the functionality and u
sability of spaces and facilities must be suitable for their 
intended purposes.
New developments may also be required to contribute to Green Infrastructure schemes 
identified in the Green Infrastructure Strategy and the requirements contained within 
the Design Policy CS1. New Green Infrastructure should be an integral part of new 
employment areas, and should meet local objectives to be agreed as part of the planning 
application process. These spaces should adhere to the Green Infrastructure objectives 
(Policy CS2) and be managed to allow open access to both local workers and residents, 
unless it can be demonstrated that there is an overriding security issue such that access 
to local residents should be restricted. 
Environments for play are required to be delivered as an integral part of site design within 
both public and semi-private communal open space areas. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
107
10.88
  
Provision of Green Infrastructure is essential for sustainable communities. Green 
Infrastructure, sp
ort and recreation facilities are all highly valued assets to South 
Gloucestershire’s communities.
10.89
  
Where existing provi
sion, in terms of quantity, quality and accessibility would be 
inadequate to meet the needs of future residents, then new provision and/or enhancement 
must be made in accordance with the appropriate local standards. Local open space 
standards, for informal recreational open space (including parks/public gardens, amenity 
green space and green corridors), outdoor sports facilities, playspace, allotments and 
natural/semi-natural green space, relating to quantity, quality and accessibility will be 
set out in the Green Infrastructure Strategy (to be adopted as Supplementary Planning 
Document). The local standards are set out in Appendix 5.
10.90
  
Open spaces can contrib
ute to a range of social, environmental and economic benefits. 
These should be realised in accordance with the Design and Green Infrastructure Policies 
(CS1 and CS2).
10.91
  
Where development prop
osals on their own are too small to generate adequate provision 
of useable space, the Council will seek a financial contribution to enhancements or 
expansion of existing site(s) and/or to proposed sites in accordance with national 
guidance and local standards, in order to create a more acceptable proposal. Pooling of 
contributions may be necessary in order to provide enhancements and/or new provision.
10.92
  
In some areas, small pocke
ts of open space exist within established urban areas that are 
not usable for recreational purposes due to scale, configuration and/or locations adjoining 
main roads. Whilst potentially of visual amenity and biological value, such spaces will 
be discounted when undertaking audits of existing open space for the purposes of 
calculating the need for additional provision to meet the requirements of this policy.
10.93
  
In appropriate circumsta
nces the need for outdoor sports facilities (pitches and courts) 
can be met through the provision of all weather surface facilities. The Council accepts 
that such synthetic surface facilities allow for a greater intensity of use and therefore 
a smaller quantum of space will be required. The design and construction of each 
facility must be carefully planned according to the specific demands and priorities it is 
intended to address. Where required for competition use, facilities must be constructed 
to the standards adopted by the Governing Body of the sport. Where a need for more 
informal sports activities and training purposes for several sports is identified, design and 
construction must be to standards approved by the Council. Ancillary facilities that enable 
outdoor sport facilities to function, such as changing facilities, pavilions and parking 
(cycle and car), will be required to be provided where current provision is not adequate, in 
accordance with Policies CS6 and CS23. 
10.94
  
Informal recreational o
pen spaces should wherever possible link to existing open spaces, 
rights of way and cycle routes in accordance with the requirements and objectives in 
Policies CS1 and CS2. Where open spaces incorporate landscaping and planting, these 
should be provided in accordance with Policies CS1 and CS2 and, in particular, provide 
opportunities to make a net contribution to tree cover, biodiversity habitat creation and 
connectivity.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
108
  
Employment development
10.95
  
Employment development wi
ll not require a specified quantity of Green Infrastructure 
provision, therefore the needs will be dealt with on a case by case basis, taking account 
of local objectives. It is important that these spaces are accessible to both workers and 
local residents, unless there are overriding security issues such as those relating to the 
Ministry of Defence. 
  
Play
10.96
  
The Council’s adopted P
lay Policy and Strategy recognises that there are various spaces 
that can contribute to local play opportunities, for example thoroughfares, residential 
estates, parks and open space, school grounds and designated play provision. These 
opportunities need to be delivered through the development management process and 
other delivery processes. The Play Strategy seeks to ensure that public spaces are places 
where individuals, groups and communities of all ages can share a common public 
realm, and recognises that children and young people have a right to be seen, heard 
and provided for. Opportunities for play should be provided for in public and semi-private 
areas, such as communal gardens shared by a group of flats, and should be within safe 
walking distances of residential areas.
  
Private/Semi-priva
te outdoor space
10.97
  
Private or semi-privat
e outdoor space will be required in accordance with the Design 
Policy (CS1). Adequate provision must be provided to meet the needs of the future 
occupiers, commensurate with design considerations. This space will be used for informal 
recreation and/or clothes drying, and includes private gardens, communal gardens and 
balconies.
Delivery
10.98
    
The Green Infrastruc
ture Strategy (to be adopted as Supplementary Planning Document) 
will set out the methodology for calculating the requirements to meet the local provision 
standards for informal recreational open space (including parks/public gardens, amenity 
green space and green corridors), outdoor sports facilities, playspace, allotments and 
natural/semi-natural green space. The Strategy will also provide details of the subsequent 
management and maintenance costs of provision and will specify the quantity, quality 
and accessibility standards and detail minimum site sizes for the different types of Green 
Infrastructure.
10.99
   
This policy will be deliver
ed through the development management process. Planning 
Obligations or Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) may be used to ensure the open 
space provision standards are met.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
109
10.100
   
Appropriate arrangements will be put in place to secure the satisfactory future 
maintenance of any ope
n spaces and outdoor recreation facilities (for sport, recreation 
and play) that are to be provided in conjunction with new development. The Council 
may be willing to negotiate their adoption and future maintenance providing that the 
developer meets the costs associated with future maintenance and all fees associated 
with land transfers. The Council will also require the deposit of a refundable bond, 
as a surety for the cost of provision of open space facilities, should the development 
company for whatever reason not implement the proposed space to an acceptable 
standard. The Council will require developers to enter into a Section 106 Agreement to 
cover these matters.
 South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
110
Part 2 -
 
Spatial strategy
www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
111
Introduction
 
11.1
  
A key role of the Core Strategy is to set out the spatial policies required to achieve the 
Council’s place shapin
g objectives. South Gloucestershire remains committed to the 
importance of spatial planning to create strong, safe and prosperous communities 
which contribute to the principals of sustainable development. The Council believes that 
there should be clear visions for the future of places which respond to local challenges 
based on the community’s views and locally derived area strategies. This we consider is 
fundamental to effective local spatial planning and the concept of place shaping through 
partnership.
11.2
  
This section of the Core Str
ategy connects the Strategy for Development with the 
individual visions for the different areas of South Gloucestershire.  For each area the key 
issues are identified, together with a policy setting out the framework to achieve the vision.  
This is supported by details of how the policy will be delivered and how the Council will 
work with our partners to achieve our sustainable development objectives.  This section 
also includes the policies and conceptual planning principles to guide and manage future 
growth.  
11.3
  
The visions and proposal
s for this section have been drawn up following extensive 
engagement with local communities and taking account of locally relevant strategies.  
In particular workshops and community visioning exercises have steered the direction 
of the policies and proposals in the areas of future growth. Further information about 
the community visioning and engagement undertaken is set out in the Consultation 
Statement that supports the Core Strategy. 
11.4
 
South Gloucestershir
e has been divided up into 6 areas:
  
1.  
  
The communities of the North Fri
nge of Bristol urban area (including the communities 
of Filton, Patchway, Bradley Stoke, Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay)
  
2.
  
The communities of the East Fring
e of Bristol urban area (including the communities 
of Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, 
Warmley, Cadbury Heath, Oldland Common, Longwell Green and Hanham)
  
3.
 
Yate and Chipping Sodbury
  
4.
 
Thornbury
  
5.
 
Rural Areas
  
6.
 
SevernsideSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
112
Figure 3A
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
113
12.
  
Communities of the North 
Fringe of Bristol Urba
n Area
Filton, Patchway, Bradley Stoke, Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay
12.1
  
The North Fringe of Bristol is a c
omplex urban area, with major transport infrastructure, 
residential suburbs and supporting town and local centres, major industrial and 
commercial interests, a large retail area and significant educational and health complexes. 
Its strengths are:
		
❙
  
a strong diverse econom
y represented by significant sectors of international 
importance
		
❙
 
access to the motorway ne
twork and main line rail services
		
❙
 
a vibrant and expanding U
niversity
		
❙
  
Filton, Patchway, Brad
ley Stoke, Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay each has a 
strong sense of community and separate identity which distinguishes them from Bristol
		
❙
  
good access to green spac
e and the wider countryside including the valued Frome 
Valley walkway; and
		
❙
  
historic assets include t
hose associated with the early aerospace industry around 
Filton, Frenchay village with its distinctive Quaker and industrial heritage and the Dower 
House at Stoke Park.
12.2
  
The rapid development which t
his area has experienced in recent years, is now resulting 
in some significant issues. Factual evidence, together with the results of community 
consultation exercises has told us:
		
❙
  
significantly more people w
ork in the North Fringe of Bristol than live there, resulting 
in a high level of daily commuting in and out of the area and consequent traffic 
congestion at peak times
		
❙
 
provision of local amenitie
s has not kept pace with the rapid growth
		
❙
  
traffic congestion creat
es problems of reliability and frequency for public transport.  
 
In addition major roads, rail corridors and large campus style employment 
developments, act as significant barriers to better walking, cycling, social and visual 
linkages. An Air Quality Management Area has been declared at Cribbs Causeway 
adjacent to Junction 17 of the M5 to ensure that levels of pollution do not exceed 
national targets 
		
❙
  
the North Fringe of Bristol la
cks a clear identity and sense of place, and the character 
and distinction of many existing communities is under threat.
12.3
  
Consultation has therefo
re assisted the Council in drafting the following vision, policy 
and partnership priorities which aim to support the strengths and begin to overcome the 
problems above.  South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
114
Figure 4 – The communities of the North Fringe of Bristol urban area
(for illustrative purposes only)
 
 
 
 
Vision 
The North Fringe of Bristol urban area will continue to be a major economic driver in 
the South West region and the West of England sub region. It will continue to maintain 
its role as a major focus for employment, commercial and retail activity, education and 
learning. The distinctive identities and heritage of the existing communities will also have 
been strengthened and preserved. Up to 2027 and beyond, new neighbourhoods will 
provide opportunities for people to live near to where they work and be well integrated 
with existing communities.  All residents and workers will have better access to local 
amenities and high quality public transport, walking and cycling links. Community 
identity and neighbourhood distinctiveness will be improved by the development of new 
public spaces and high quality landscaping. The green network will be enhanced through 
opportunities to provide new and improved green spaces, within the existing urban area 
and which connect to the wider countryside. This network will include new corridors 
along the Henbury Trym, and Stoke Park to Three Brooks Nature Reserve via the East of 
Harry Stoke new neighbourhood.
19 
15/20 
16 
17 
Easter 
Compton 
Severnside 
Hallen 
Almondsbury 
Bradley 
Stoke 
Stoke 
Gifford 
 
 
Harry Stoke 
Filton 
Frenchay 
Winterbourne 
Frampton 
Cotterell 
A4174 
A4174 
A4018 
A4174 
Patchway 
Hambrook 
1 
0m               1km                               2km                                3km 
Cribbs  
Causeway 
BRISTOL 
Downend 
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
115
Figure 5 – The North Fringe of Bristol urban area
(for illustrative purposes only)
19 
15/20 
16 
SH 
UWE 
MOD 
17 
Easter 
Compton 
Severnside 
Hallen 
Almondsbury 
Bradley 
Stoke 
Patchway 
Filton 
Frenchay 
Bromley 
Heath 
Winterbourne 
Frampton 
Cotterell 
A4174 
A4174 
A4018 
A4174 
Bristol 
Parkway 
Patchway 
Filton 
Abbey 
Wood 
Charlton 
Hayes 
Harry 
Stoke 
Cheswick 
 
Aztec 
West 
Almondsbury 
Business Park 
Rolls 
Royce 
Airbus 
Vantage 
Park 
Parkway 
North 
Willow Brook 
Centre 
W 
 
Hambrook 
1 
FH 
C Forest Path 
 
LEoCL 
 
AXA 
Filton College 
Church Lane 
Conservation 
Area 
0m                           1km                               2km                                3km 
Stoke 
Park 
CC 
Avon Cycleway 
Stoke 
Gifford 
Bristol 
Business 
Park 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
N
 
Conservation Areas 
Cribbs Causeway Retail Area including 
The Mall
 
Enhancement of Patchway Local Centre 
District Centres 
Proposed District Centre 
Regeneration Opportunity Site 
Southmead Hospital 
Frenchay Hospital 
University of the West of England 
Watercourse 
 
South Gloucestershire/ 
Bristol City Boundary 
New Neighbourhoods: 
Cribbs/Patchway and 
East of Harry Stoke 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) in 
the Green Belt and in the New 
Neighbourhood 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt (only 
areas south of the M4 & M5 displayed) 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Main Built Up Area 
Business Employment Areas 
Committed Sites, South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan 
MOD Abbey Wood 
Wildlife Park  
Motorway 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Railway Station 
Proposed North Fringe Hengrove 
Rapid Transit (from 2017) 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
National Cycle Network (NCN4) 
 SH 
FH 
UWE 
 
 
 
W 
MOD 
CC 
 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Area 
Conservation Area 
Thornbury Town Centre 
Heritage Asset 
Community & Transport 
Connections 
 
 
 
Thornbury Housing Opportunity Area of Search 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Turnberrie s – Community Meeting Place 
The Chantry – Community Meeting Place 
Armstong Hall & Thornbury Museum  
Thornbury Hospital and Health Centre 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
Indicative Development 
Buffer 
 
Conservation Areas 
Cribbs Causeway Retail Area including 
The Mall
 
Enhancement of Patchway Local Centre 
District Centres 
Proposed District Centre 
Regeneration Opportunity Site 
Southmead Hospital 
Frenchay Hospital 
University of the West of England 
Watercourse 
 
South Gloucestershire/ 
Bristol City Boundary 
New Neighbourhoods: 
Cribbs/Patchway and 
East of Harry Stoke 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) in 
the Green Belt and in the New 
Neighbourhood 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt (only 
areas south of the M4 & M5 displayed) 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Main Built Up Area 
Business Employment Areas 
Committed Sites, South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan 
MOD Abbey Wood 
Wildlife Park  
Motorway 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Railway Station 
Proposed North Fringe Hengrove 
Rapid Transit (from 2017) 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
National Cycle Network (NCN4) 
 
SH 
FH 
UWE 
 
 
 
W 
MOD 
CC 
 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Area 
Conservation Area 
Thornbury Town Centre 
Heritage Asset 
Community & Transport 
Connections 
 
 
 
Thornbury Housing Opportunity Area of Search 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Turnberrie s – Community Meeting Place 
The Chantry – Community Meeting Place 
Armstong Hall & Thornbury Museum  
Thornbury Hospital and Health Centre 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
Indicative Development 
Buffer South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
116
12.4
 
The following policy will deliver this vision through managing development and where 
appropriate, partn
ership working. 
POLICY CS25 – COMMUNITIES OF THE NORTH FRINGE OF BRISTOL URBAN AREA
Development plan documents and development proposals will take account of the vision 
and partnership priorities for the communities of the North Fringe of Bristol urban area, 
and will:
1.
  
provide housing and asso
ciated local facilities which are integrated with existing 
communities and in accordance with the Strategy for Development, Housing Policy 
CS15 and Strategic Site Policies CS26, CS27 and CS28
2.
  
make provision for and co
ntribute towards funding the North Fringe to Hengrove Rapid 
Transit route and an orbital bus service linking The Mall with Emersons Green and 
other strategic transport infrastructure, in accordance with Policies CS6 and CS7
3.
  
support the redevelopm
ent of the Rolls Royce East Site for new employment uses and 
the provision of additional small-scale employment opportunities that enhance the 
variety and integration of uses in new residential neighbourhoods or existing centres
4.
  
enhance the vitality of Ab
bey Wood Retail Park by providing a broader range of uses, 
including an element of retail, that capitalise on its location adjacent to a main line rail 
station, and creation of a new people orientated public space
5.
  
support the investiga
tion, planning and potential redevelopment of the Sainsbury’s 
and B&Q retail sites at Stoke Gifford to provide a new ‘district centre’ to serve the 
North Fringe South Area
6.
  
provide high quality pu
blic realm and spaces, and new local amenities at existing local 
centres, the UWE, and Cribbs Causeway area 
7.
  
support the redevelopm
ent of the existing hospital site at Frenchay for residential and 
ancillary infrastructure and services, including new health facilities
8.
  
to support the provision o
f sports stadia with associated facilities which would be 
available for community use
9.
  
provide new and enhanced e
xisting wildlife and amenity routes, particularly along 
the Henbury Trym to Haw Wood and connections to the wider countryside, and from 
Three Brooks Nature Reserve, along the M32 Corridor via the East of Harry Stoke New 
Neighbourhood to Stoke Park
10.
 
provide new and extend ex
isting Heat Distribution Networks to assist the transition to 
a low carbon future in accordance with Policy CS4; and
11.
  
demonstrate through t
he preparation of appropriate Flood Risk Assessments, surface 
water management plans and drainage strategies, how flood risk will be managed. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
117
 
Development plan documents and development proposals should also accord with the 
following Key Principles:
12.
 
respect the characte
r and identity of existing communities, while promoting the 
distinctiveness of the Bristol North Fringe as a whole
13.
 
where new neighbourho
ods are located at key transit points into the North Bristol 
Fringe or can be seen from major arterial routes, high quality distinctive, landmark 
architecture and landscaping will be achieved
14.
 
promote high quality l
andscaping that assists in developing neighbourhood 
distinctiveness and increases the number of street trees, particularly along main 
highways
15.
 
provide convenient an
d safe routes across the locality for pedestrians and cyclists as 
part of an integrated transport network, with safe crossings to break the barriers of 
major roads and rail corridors, contributing to the improvement of air quality
16.
 
provide new purpose bui
lt accommodation for housing students and older people; and
17.
  
improve the legibili
ty, urban structure and public realm of the North Fringe by 
rationalising car parking around major employment sites, thereby releasing land for 
development. 
12.5
  
The vision, Policy CS25 and a num
ber of partnership working objectives will continue 
the strategy of re-balancing land uses by delivering a series of new residential 
neighbourhoods, providing more people with the opportunity to live near to where 
they work, and maintaining a diverse mix of employment uses. New residential 
neighbourhoods, the remodelling of Abbey Wood Retail Park away from bulky goods 
retailing and the redevelopment of parts of the University of the West of England Campus 
provide an opportunity to improve the range of local services and facilities on offer, create 
new distinctive public spaces and associated places to meet and socialise and improve 
both the extent and attractiveness of walking, cycling, and public transport connections. 
A more consistent approach to landscaping and particular attention to developing high 
quality architecture at key ‘gateways’ into the area, will assist the generation of a stronger 
‘sense of place’ for the Bristol North Fringe as a whole and assist in reinforcing the 
character and identity of the existing communities. The existing and future land use mix 
in the North Fringe also presents the prospect of developing heat distribution networks in 
order to assist the transition towards a low carbon future.
  
Partnership Priorities
12.
6
 
The Council will work with it
s partners to ensure:
		
❙
  
the Aerospace Industr
y will continue to be a world leading sector and major employer 
and the needs of other key economic drivers in the locality, including UWE, MoD, The 
Mall and other major employers will continue to be safeguarded and supported;South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
118
		
❙
  
the new Bristol Zoo Wildlife Park contributes fully to the tourism and employment 
potential of the area
		
❙
  
enhancement of train
ing and employment prospects for residents of the Filton and 
Patchway priority neighbourhoods as and when development opportunities may arise 
in and around the locality
		
❙
  
the delivery of the Unive
rsity Technology College (UTC) for 14 to 19 year olds to be 
located on land adjoining Abbeywood Community School
		
❙
  
opportunities for sport
s facilities will be considered favourably where provision would 
not compromise residential and employment uses and where proposals would meet 
the criteria in Policy LC6 of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan until this policy is 
replaced in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD or a replacement local plan
		
❙
  
the potential of the lan
d occupied by Sainsbury’s and B&Q in Stoke Gifford is 
investigated for redevelopment as a new district centre to serve the North Fringe South 
Area
		
❙
  
new housing and community f
acilities, including health and GP services are brought 
forward at the former Frenchay hospital site
		
❙
  
new foot, cycle and trans
port links are made to the Lockleaze residential area, which 
contribute to the realisation of the regeneration vision.
  
Phasing / Development P
rogramme
12.7
 
The focus for development u
p to 2016 will be: 
  
❙
  
the existing Local Plan s
ites at Charlton Hayes, Harry Stoke, Cheswick Village and 
Land East of Coldharbour Lane
		
❙
 
a new Wildlife Park to be de
veloped adjacent Jct17 of the M5
		
❙
  
the planning and commen
cement of a further new neighbourhood at Cribbs/Patchway
		
❙
  
expansion and re-model
ling of the UWE campus and Abbey Wood Retail Park will also 
be supported and
		
❙
 
planning of East of Harry St
oke New Neighbourhood.
  
Beyond 2015/2016 a new nei
ghbourhood will be developed east of Harry Stoke. 
Delivery
12.8
  
The major development pro
posals set out in Policy CS25 are being promoted by private 
sector providers and are expected to come forward during the plan period.
12.9
  
The Council, with the West o
f England Partnership and in conjunction with the private 
sector will seek the funding and resources to prepare and develop design documents in 
accordance with its SCI for the Bristol North Fringe South Area (comprising East of Harry 
Stoke New Neighbourhood Area of Search, UWE, Abbey Wood Retail Park and Local Plan 
residential allocations at Cheswick Village, Harry Stoke and Land East of Coldharbour 
Lane), and the Cribbs/Patchway New Neighbourhood (including Charlton Hayes) to 
ensure that development proposals are coordinated. Development and co-ordination of 
regeneration initiatives in the priority neighbourhoods and the Lockleaze regeneration 
area are being led by South Gloucestershire Council and Bristol City Council respectively.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
119
12.10
  
Developer proposals for major development will be required to carry out pre-application 
consultation in accord
ance with the Council’s concept statement process as set out in the 
Council’s Statement of Community Involvement. 
12.11
  
The North Fringe to Hengro
ve Rapid Transit scheme has secured programme entry 
approval from the Department for Transport and is programmed for delivery by 2017.  
Developer contributions from developments that will benefit from the scheme will be 
required as part of the local contribution to the funding package. 
 South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
120
Cribbs / Patchway New Neighbourhood
12.12
  
Policy CS5 (Location of Development) identifies land in the Cribbs Causeway, Patchway 
and Filton area as having t
he potential to accommodate approximately 5,700 new 
dwellings and associated facilities. This policy and supporting diagram set out the key 
principles of development for new neighbourhoods in this area.
POLICY CS26 – CRIBBS / PATCHWAY NEW NEIGHBOURHOOD
A major mixed use development is planned on 480ha of land at Cribbs Causeway, 
Patchway and Filton, as defined in Figure 6.  Within the new neighbourhood through 
the preparation and adoption of a Supplementary Planning Document, provision will be 
made for approximately 5,700 dwellings in new mixed use communities, around 50 ha of 
employment land, and greater diversity of commercial uses including additional retail, 
together with supporting infrastructure and facilities. 
Development will be comprehensively planned and phased to ensure full integration 
between the different uses and provision of ancillary facilities and supporting 
infrastructure, both within and beyond the area.  This area will be a major focus for 
redevelopment and regeneration, and will deliver:
1.
  
social and physical re
generation through the substantial improvement of community 
infrastructure, public open space, access and movement, and the provision of a high 
quality built environment and public realm that is comprehensive and integrated (areas 
1-4 on Figure 6)
2.
  
the continued invest
ment and focus of the area as a centre of excellence for the 
aerospace sector (character area 3 on Figure 6), including upgrading the quality of the 
local environment and range of services and facilities
3.
  
An integrated and compr
ehensive approach to access and transport, including 
significant improvement to pedestrian, cycle and public transport networks, 
improvements to road networks across and beyond the area including the Strategic 
Road Network, and the safeguarding of land for a new railway station(s)
4.
  
a co-ordinated appro
ach to carbon reduction, and new renewable and low-carbon 
energy generation and distribution networks
5.
  
the continued operati
on of the Great Western Air Ambulance Charity and Police Air 
Operations
6.
  
protection, enhance
ment and provision of cultural and heritage facilities related to 
the long term legacy of engineering and aviation at Filton, including the Bristol Aero 
Collection and the Concorde Museum
7.
  
sporting and commerci
al facilities including scope for hotels, conferencing and 
spectator sports
8.
  
proportionate provi
sion of and/ or contributions to supporting infrastructure and 
facilities.
It is essential that an area-wide adopted SPD is the policy delivery mechanism to ensure 
development is comprehensively planned and delivered in accordance with the vision, 
Policy CS25 and  partnership priorities for the North Fringe communities, and high quality 
urban design principles as set out in Policy CS1. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
121
 
Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that they are in accordance 
with the SPD. They should positively facilitate and not prejudice the development of 
surrounding areas of the New Neighbourhood, and meet the overall vision for the 
transformation of the area. 
The new residential neighbourhood(s) and commercial areas will provide for:
9.
  
a range of housing types an
d tenures in accordance with Policies CS17 and CS18
10.
  
a secondary school, pri
mary schools and full day nursery facilities sufficient to 
meet the needs of the new communities
11.
    
library, doctors surge
ry, community meeting space(s), indoor sport, children’s and 
youth facilities
12.
 
local retail, food and d
rink outlets (within character areas 1-3 on key diagram);
13.
  
well planned and integra
ted Green Infrastructure, sport and recreation provision, 
particularly alongside the Henbury Trym, in accordance with Policies CS2 and CS24
14.
  
the Cribbs/Patchway N
ew Neighbourhood Transport Package (see Policy CS7); 
including safeguarded land for a new rail passenger station(s)
15.
 
a waste transfer and rec
ycling facility
16.
 
neighbourhood-wide
 wireless internet network
17.
  
the potential provis
ion of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers
18.
 
Extra Care Housing dwe
llings in no more than 3 separate schemes; and
19.
 
high quality employm
ent opportunities.
This list is not exhaustive and development should also meet other policies of the Local 
Plan and the provision of necessary utilities as appropriate. Further details are also set 
out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
12.13 
  
The New Neighbourhood compri
ses land bounded by the railway line, the M5 motorway, 
the existing residential community of Patchway and emerging community of Charlton 
Hayes, and the A38. 
12.14
  
The area will be a major focus fo
r redevelopment, and physical, social and economic 
regeneration. Comprehensively planned development will bring with it the opportunity to 
create new homes and jobs, secure further investment to support the long-term future 
of the aerospace sector, upgrading of the quality of the local environment, a range of 
services and facilities and improved strategic infrastructure. 
12.15
  
The area currently suffer
s from congestion and a car-dominated environment. The 
transformation of the area will be contingent upon the creation of a high quality public 
realm that prioritises pedestrians, cyclist and public transport over private cars. 
Development will provide the opportunity to re-introduce passenger services on the 
Hallen Line/ Henbury Loop and re-open or provide new stations. The North Fringe to 
Hengrove Rapid Transit will form a new public transport link through the area serving 
nearby concentrations of employment and commercial uses, and the greater Bristol area 
to the south. The opportunity for innovative transport solutions within and around the area 
will be encouraged.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
122
12.16
  
Development will also bring the opportunity to provide a significant amount of multi-
functional green infra
structure across the area to ensuring landscape features are 
protected and sustainable travel options are promoted. This includes, but is not 
limited to: the protection and enhancement of Haw Wood and ridgeline adjacent to 
the M5 motorway, the creation of a recreational route alongside the Henbury Trym, the 
enhancement of Charlton Common, and the potential extension of Highwood Road 
linear park. These and other elements will provide a range of open spaces and corridors, 
providing legible permeable routes to key destinations. 
12.17
  
A range of flexible, multi-
functional social and community facilities to serve the existing 
and new population will be provided, including but not limited to a new secondary school, 
primary schools/nurseries, a new library, and the delivery of the Concorde museum 
incorporating community learning facilities. Opportunities for the flexible use of facilities 
will be investigated to assist their delivery. 
12.18
  
The proposed mix of uses a
cross the area will generate significant potential for renewable 
and low-carbon energy generation and networks, which developments will be expected 
to provide, facilitate or future proof for incorporation into the network should it become 
feasible at a later date. 
Delivery
12.19
  
The development will be del
ivered by the private sector through the development 
management process. Given the size of the area and varied nature of the proposals, it 
is important that development comes forward in a comprehensively planned and co-
ordinated way that clearly sets out how new infrastructure and community facilities will 
be delivered in step with development. It is critical therefore to ensure a comprehensive 
and cohesive plan-led approach is taken to development at CPNN where a sequential 
approach to delivery – led by the Core Strategy, expanded upon through a single SPD 
and then implemented through the development management process is followed. This 
will ensure the strategic elements required for CPNN e.g. the transport package, green 
infrastructure and community facilities are provided in a way that accords with Policy 
CS26 and ensures costs are appropriately shared across all development areas of 
CPNN. This must be led by the Core Strategy establishing the policy framework principles 
supported by SPD, that will co-ordinate subsequent planning principles for the delivery 
of the areas in accordance with the Council’s SCI and provide the further details needed 
to express the Council’s place making objectives. Developers will need to demonstrate 
how their proposals both fully accord with the masterplan and how they will positively 
facilitate the development of surrounding areas of the New Neighbourhood. Community 
Involvement and pre-application discussions will be in accordance with the South 
Gloucestershire Council Statement of Community Involvement. 
12.20
  
The North Fringe to Hengro
ve Rapid Transit will be delivered by the West of England 
Partnership in conjunction with South Gloucestershire Council. Funding is subject to a 
major scheme bid to DfT and local contribution.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
123
Figure 6 – Cribbs/Patchway New Neighbourhood Framework Diagram 
(for illustrative purposes only)
National Wildlife 
Conservation Park 
J17 
PA
TCHWAY 
Local Centre 
ACCESS 
ACCESS 
Haw Wood 
BRENT
RY
 
HENBU
RY
 
W 
Local Parade 
Local Parade 
ACCESS 
ACCESS 
1 
2 
4 
3 
Cribbs Causeway and 
the Mall 
Shopping Centre 
M 
Charlton Hayes 
South Gloucestershire Local Plan 
Site allocated for Mixed Use 
Development (Site 4) 
 
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
ACCESS 
W 
M 
© Copyright South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA100023410, 2013 
Green Belt 
Existing Facilities 
Committed Housing Site, South Gloucestershire Local 
Plan  
Enhancement of Patchway Local Centre 
New Neighbourhood Development Area 
Indicative Character Areas: 
1. New Charlton – Mixed use 130 ha (approx) 
2. Haw Wood – Housing 85 ha (approx) 
3. Filton Aerospace Cluster –  
    Employment / Aerospace Excellence 50 ha (approx) 
4. Cribbs Causeway – Mixed use 130 ha (approx) 
 
Green Belt & Significant GI within the New Neighbourhood 
Area 
Proposed primary access points to Policy Area 
Watercourse 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI)  
Haw Wood (Significant GI outside of the New 
Neighbourhood) 
    
Green Infrastructure Connections  
(indicative) 
Potential local connections  
(indicative) 
Community Connections 
Road 
Railway and Safeguarded Station Sites 
Community Forest Path 
National Cycle Network (NCN 4) 
Avon Cycleway 
Wildlife Park 
Potential Site of Heritage Museum 
(as at October 2013) 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
ACCESS 
W 
M 
© Copyright South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA100023410, 2013 
Green Belt 
Existing Facilities 
Committed Housing Site, South Gloucestershire Local 
Plan  
Enhancement of Patchway Local Centre 
New Neighbourhood Development Area 
Indicative Character Areas: 
1. New Charlton – Mixed use 130 ha (approx) 
2. Haw Wood – Housing 85 ha (approx) 
3. Filton Aerospace Cluster –  
    Employment / Aerospace Excellence 50 ha (approx) 
4. Cribbs Causeway – Mixed use 130 ha (approx) 
 
Green Belt & Significant GI within the New Neighbourhood 
Area 
Proposed primary access points to Policy Area 
Watercourse 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI)  
Haw Wood (Significant GI outside of the New 
Neighbourhood) 
    
Green Infrastructure Connections  
(indicative) 
Potential local connections  
(indicative) 
Community Connections 
Road 
Railway and Safeguarded Station Sites 
Community Forest Path 
National Cycle Network (NCN 4) 
Avon Cycleway 
Wildlife Park 
Potential Site of Heritage Museum 
(as at October 2013) 
South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
124
East of Harry Stoke New Neighbourhood
12.21
  
Policy CS5 (Location of Development) makes provision for a major mixed-use    
development comprisin
g 2000 dwellings and associated infrastructure west of Junction 1 
of the M32 and extending east from SGLP site 13 (Harry Stoke). This new neighbourhood 
will further re-balance an area currently dominated by commercial and educational uses, 
strengthen the sense of place and play a key role in delivering new transport infrastructure 
and connections and high quality open space. This policy and supporting diagram set 
out the key principles of development for this new neighbourhood.
POLICY CS27 – EAST OF HARRY STOKE NEW NEIGHBOURHOOD
A major mixed use development is planned on land to the East of Harry Stoke extending 
south from Winterbourne Road to the A4174 Avon Ring Road, as defined on the Proposals 
Map.  Within the New Neighbourhood provision will be made for approximately 2,000 
dwellings in a new mixed use community.  This will be supported by the preparation and 
adoption of a Supplementary Planning Document.  
Development will be comprehensively planned and phased to ensure full integration 
between different uses, provision of ancillary facilities and supporting infrastructure 
including the Stoke Gifford Transport Link, both within and beyond the area.  
It is essential that an area-wide adopted SPD is the policy delivery mechanism to 
ensure development is comprehensively planned and delivered in order to integrate 
with SGLP site 13 (Harry Stoke) and the Stoke Gifford Transport Link as set out in Policy 
CS7.  Development will be undertaken in accordance with the vision, Policy CS25 and 
partnership priorities of the Bristol North Fringe communities, and high quality urban 
design principles as set out in Policy CS1.
Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that they are in accordance with 
the SPD. They should positively facilitate and not prejudice the development of the New 
Neighbourhood, and meet the overall vision for the area. This area will be a major focus 
for development and will deliver:
1.
 
a range of residential t
ypes and tenures in accordance with Policies CS17 and CS18
2.
 
primary school(s) for a
pproximately 3 forms of entry and full day nursery
3.
  
a multi-use building c
omprising doctors surgery, library, community meeting space, 
children’s and youth facilities
4.
 
local retail, food and d
rink outlets
5.
  
well planned and integra
ted Green Infrastructure including a strategic green corridor 
for amenity, recreation, woodland and wildlife use along the eastern edge of the site, 
sustainable urban drainage and allotments in accordance with Policies CS2 and CS24
6.
 
sports pitches and ch
anging facilities
7.
 
the potential provis
ion of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers
8.
 
the East of Harry Stoke New N
eighbourhood Transport Package (see Policy CS7)
9.
  
junctions, public tran
sport stops, pedestrian crossing points and street trees/
landscaping in order to integrate the transport link with the new neighbourhood.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
125
 
10.
 
an Extra Care housing sch
eme; and
11.
    
contributions will a
lso be required for the provision of secondary school places in 
the locality.
Special attention will be required to layout, building form, scale and roofscape, 
architectural treatment, and landscaping along ridgelines and slopes visible from the 
wider area.
This list is not exhaustive and development should also meet other policies of the Local 
Development Framework and the provision of necessary utilities as appropriate. Further 
details are also set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
12.22
  
The site comprises land tha
t stretches north to south along the M4 / M32 corridor into 
Bristol. At its northern end Mulgrove Farm and buildings sit at the top of a hill with views 
northeast towards Winterbourne. This area is divided from the main site by a main line 
railway, which runs east-west in a cutting. South of the railway line, the land generally 
falls southeast towards level fields. This area is intersected by Hambrook Lane and the 
Ham Brook which run east/west, and is bounded to the west by Maules Lane, (an historic 
hedgerow/tree lined ridge) and the existing SGLP housing allocation 13 (Harry Stoke). 
The eastern edge of the site is contained by the M32 and to the south by the A4174 Ring 
Road. The allocation continues south of the Ring Road taking in a variety of land uses 
including a golf driving range, cricket pitch and farmland. This southernmost area is 
dominated by a wooded escarpment that rises along its western edge. 
12.23
  
The area south of the ring road w
ill remain as Green Belt as it is not considered suitable 
for residential development due to highway access constraints and the visual amenity 
and character of the area.  However, given existing sports facilities in the area, it has been 
identified as providing a potential opportunity to consolidate the outdoor sports pitch 
requirement from the new neighbourhood, possibly as part of a larger strategic facility for 
the wider area.  
12.24
  
The Stoke Gifford Tran
sport Link forms part of the Bristol North Fringe Rapid Transit route 
proposals as set out at Policy CS7. 
12.25
  
The area currently forms pa
rt of a ‘green corridor’ running deep into the Bristol urban 
area along the M32 corridor. The new neighbourhood will look outward to a retained and 
enhanced ‘green setting’ where high quality landscaping will perform amenity, sustainable 
drainage, wildlife, woodland and recreational functions.
12.26
  
Given the size and locatio
n of the site it will be required to provide a range of local 
facilities and amenities to serve the new population, and cycle and pedestrian 
connections to nearby communities, commercial, educational and recreational land uses. 
Linkages with UWE will also be encouraged. These could include co-operation in the 
supply of energy and the provision and management of sports and community facilities.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
126
Delivery
12.27
  
The development will be del
ivered by the private sector through the development 
management process. Community involvement and pre-application discussions will 
be in accordance with the South Gloucestershire Council Statement of Community 
Involvement. Development will be guided by the production of an illustrative masterplan 
and detailed SPD as necessary, including phasing with required infrastructure. Design 
Codes will also be required as part of this process. Delivery of the Stoke Gifford Transport 
Link is a primary objective of the Council. The Council is now taking this project forward 
as part of the North Fringe – Hengrove Package major scheme bid to the Department 
for Transport. A local contribution will be necessary, primarily from the private sector. The 
Council is also investigating other funding sources. 
Figure 7 - East Of Harry Stoke New Neighbourhood Framework Diagram
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. 
 
All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
(for illustrative 
purposes only)
Nwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
127
The University of the West of England
12.28
  
The University of the West of England is an educational establishment of national 
standing, contribut
ing significantly to the local economy. It currently operates out of 4 
campuses at Frenchay, Glenside, Bower Ashton & St.Matthias. In 2008, the University 
acquired approximately 28ha of land, immediately adjoining its Frenchay Campus, with 
the aim of consolidating activities from other campuses onto the one enlarged site and 
of re-modelling where possible to provide an improved environment for the students and 
visitors and so realise its vision, to become “an internationally acknowledged centre for 
knowledge exchange, drawing upon its excellent teaching, scholarship and research in 
order to prepare students for the various needs and challenges of work and society.”
POLICY CS28 – THE UNIVERSITY OF THE WEST OF ENGLAND
In the period up to 2027 the University of the West of England, Frenchay Campus will 
be further developed for academic and research purposes, including the provision of 
student housing, and as a focal point for wider community, exhibition & conference, 
sporting and cultural facilities.
 
 
In order to provide for satisfactory integration with surrounding areas, development will 
be planned on a comprehensive basis in accordance with the vision, Policy CS25 and 
partnership priorities for the communities of the North Fringe of Bristol, high quality 
design principles as set out in Policy CS1 and an agreed Concept Statement for the 
Campus.
In particular the Council will support development proposals that provide for:
1.
 
the creation of a vibran
t creative learning and research environment
2.
  
the consolidation of s
atellite campuses onto the Frenchay site and the creation of a 
focal public space within the new campus
3.
  
improved public tran
sport connections to and through the site and stopping points, 
including the provision of the Cheswick bus link, a potential rapid transit route (as 
part of the Bristol North Fringe to Hengrove Rapid Transit route), and an improved bus 
interchange 
4.
  
additional foot and cy
cle routes through the site, to facilitate access to neighbouring 
residential, commercial and retail areas, including Southmead Hospital 
5.
  
enhanced community acces
s to existing and proposed social, cultural, sporting and 
recreational facilities on site, including a proposed Centre for the Performing Arts
6.
 
high Quality public re
alm
7.
  
an enhanced and well inte
grated Green Infrastructure and surface water drainage 
network; and 
8.
  
substantial reduct
ions in carbon dioxide emissions across the estate. This could 
include a renewable or low carbon Energy Centre and distribution network that would 
provide heat and power to the site and potentially neighbouring land-uses. 
Proposals will include a green travel plan (including measures that assist control of off-
site parking in nearby residential neighbourhoods).South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
128
12.29
  
The consolidation of the University estate onto an expanded and re-modelled Frenchay 
Campus represents an imp
ortant opportunity for the University to upgrade its facilities 
to meet modern academic and student expectations. It also provides an opportunity to 
re-model a key site to continue to build on the work of reducing reliance on the private 
car and local parking problems by realising improved public transport, walking and 
cycling connections through the site and access to new social, cultural and recreational 
opportunities on the site, for local residential and business communities. The Council is 
therefore wholly supportive of the University’s plans and aspirations where they include 
proposals that meet wider objectives of the Bristol North Fringe as set out in the vision, 
Policy CS25 and partnership priorities to improve the connectivity, sustainability and 
health and wellbeing of the wider community.
Delivery
12.30
  
The development managem
ent process will assist in delivering this policy in partnership 
with the University of the West of England. Decisions will be guided by agreement of a 
Concept Statement and subsequent outline planning application and supporting master 
plan(s). A rapid transit link through or adjacent the site is subject to a major scheme bid to 
the Department for Transport and a local contribution.
Figure 8 – The University of the West of England: Expanded Frenchay Campus
(for illustrative purposes only)
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
129
13.
  
Communities of the East Fringe 
of Bristol Urban Area
Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, Warmley, 
Cadbury Heath, Oldland Common, Longwell Green and Hanham
13.1
  
The East Fringe of Bristol is a div
erse urban area which includes the communities of 
Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, Warmley, 
Cadbury Heath, Oldland Common, Longwell Green and Hanham.  These lie between 
Bristol City to the west and the open countryside to the east. Its strengths are:
		
❙
  
these are established co
mmunities with strong identities, most of which have grown up 
around historic settlements although Emersons Green has been completed in the last 
10 years
		
❙
  
the adjacent open countr
yside with its prominent hillsides, footpaths, commons, 
Warmley Forest Park and Overscourt Wood is highly valued by communities and helps 
to visually define the extent of the urban area
		
❙
  
highly valued assets suc
h as Kingswood and Page Parks, the Avon Valley, Cotswolds 
AONB, Bristol to Bath Railway Path, Avon Valley Railway and the long distance footpath 
and cycleway network
		
❙
  
major new development is pro
posed in the north of the area which will provide 
significant new housing and employment opportunities, well integrated with existing 
communities
		
❙
  
the area has a distinctive a
nd important non-conformist and industrial heritage
		
❙
  
a series of established town c
entres serve the urban and surrounding rural areas
		
❙
  
the area is also served by two l
eisure centres and the retail park at Longwell Green.
13.2
  
However, as a result of rece
nt trends the area also has a number of issues. Factual 
evidence, together with community consultation undertaken at the Issues and Options 
stage has told us:
		
❙
  
there are pockets of relat
ive deprivation in Kingswood, Staple Hill and Cadbury Heath;
		
❙
  
employment land has been lost t
o residential development so that now the area 
significantly under-provides for the local workforce and 18,000 people commute daily 
to central Bristol and 6,300 commute to the North Fringe of Bristol
		
❙
  
traffic congestion is a majo
r problem leading to air quality issues along some routes.  
Air Quality Management Areas in Staple Hill and Kingswood were declared in April 
2010
		
❙
  
congestion affects the r
eliability of bus services due to long journey times, despite the 
frequency of service on radial routes. Orbital routes are poorly served by buses.  The 
reliability of bus services is also affected by the length of the routes that serve this area
		
❙
  
there is a shortage of both gre
en space and sports pitches in the East Fringe of 
Bristol while existing green assets, both within the urban area and in the surrounding 
countryside, need strategic visions and significant enhancement to realise their 
potentialSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
130
		
❙
  
the traditional centres in Downend, Staple Hill, Kingswood and Hanham have suffered 
from competition from the re
tail park at Longwell Green and the new Emersons Green 
town centre, as well as from issues relating to congestion, parking, air quality and the 
quality of the public realm. 
13.3
  
The following vision for futur
e of the area has been drafted as a result of community 
engagement.  
Vision
In the period to 2027and beyond, the distinctive identity and heritage of the linked 
communities in the East Fringe of Bristol will be preserved and enhanced.  The 
vibrancy and vitality of the traditional town centres at Downend, Staple Hill, Kingswood, 
and Hanham will be strengthened. The area will benefit from improved employment 
opportunities including the Science Park.  Public transport services, especially to the 
North Fringe and central Bristol from the north of the area, will be more reliable, punctual 
and frequent. 
Well designed housing developments, including the major development at Emersons 
Green, will be integrated with and connected to existing communities. This will 
achieve a stronger town centre at Emersons Green and support balanced and quality 
neighbourhoods throughout the urban area. 
The landscape setting of the area and of surrounding villages will be preserved and 
opportunities will be taken to make the urban area greener.  Green spaces, walking and 
cycling routes will lead through and out of the area into the open countryside.  These 
routes will include key links to the commons, Warmley Forest Park and an enhanced 
forest park based around Overscourt Wood.  
 
 www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
131
Figure 9 – The communities of the East Fringe of Bristol urban area
(for illustrative purposes only)
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
NSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
132
Figure 10 – The East Fringe of Bristol urban area 
(for illustrative purposes only)
 
Longwell Green Retail Park 
Town Centre 
Science Park (Employment) 
Heritage Asset 
Frenchay Hospital 
Cossham Hospital 
Motorway 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Station (Tourist 
Attraction) 
South Gloucestershire 
Boundary 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Areas 
Committed Housing Site, South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan 
Conservation Areas 
 
 
 
 
CH 
North Fringe to Hengrove Package 
(MetroBus) 
Future Potential MetroBus extension 
(indicative alignment) 
Proposed Emersons Green 
Park and Ride 
Long Distance Footpath 
Main Cycleways 
Watercourse 
The Cotswolds AONB 
Views to the AONB from the urban area 
P+
P+
 
FH 
1
1
FH
Bromley
Heath
A4174
M4
M4
M32
A4174
A4174
A4174
A4174
A4174
A4
A431
A431
A431
Staple
Hill
Kingswood
Hanham
Cad
bu
ry
Heath
Longwell
Green
Warmley
Oldland
Common
Overc
ou
rt
Wood
Mangotsfield
Emersons
Green
Downend
0m 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
    
500
m 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
   1km    
  
 
  
 
2km
Emerald
Park
Science
Park
Emers
on
s Gr
ee
n
East
A420
A420
A432
A432
A432
River Avon
River Avon
River Frome
P
ag
e
Park
Park
Whitfield
T
ab
er
na
cle
Bitton
Soundwell
River Avon Trail
River Avon Trail
Siston C
ou
rt
Bristol Bath Railway Path
The Dramway
Community Forest Path
The Dramway
Community Forest Path
The Dramway
Siston
Common
Monarch
’
s Way
Bitton
Avon Valley Railway
Bristol Bath Railway Path
Frome Valley Walkway
N
Upton
Cheyney
Siston
Pucklechurch
Hambrook
Ring Road Path
Avon Cycleway
Avon Cycleway
Ring Road Path
P+
P+
Shortwood
We
bb
s
Hea
th 
Drift Mine
Br
and
y Bottom Co
lli
ery
Brassworks
CH
Longwell Green Retail Park 
Town Centre 
Science Park (Employment) 
Heritage Asset 
Frenchay Hospital 
Cossham Hospital 
Motorway 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Station (Tourist 
Attraction) 
South Gloucestershire 
Boundary 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Areas 
Committed Housing Site, South 
Gloucestershire Local Plan 
Conservation Areas 
 
 
 
 
CH 
North Fringe to Hengrove Package 
(MetroBus) 
Future Potential MetroBus extension 
(indicative alignment) 
Proposed Emersons Green 
Park and Ride 
Long Distance Footpath 
Main Cycleways 
Watercourse 
The Cotswolds AONB 
Views to the AONB from the urban area 
P+
P+
 
FH 
1
1
FH
Bromley
Heath
A4174
M4
M
4
M
32
A4174
A4174
A4174
A4174
A4174
A
4
A431
A431
A
431
Staple
Hill
Kingswood
Hanham
Cad
bu
ry
Heath
Longwell
Green
Warmley
Oldland
Common
Overc
ou
rt
Wood
Mangotsfield
Emersons
Green
Downend
0m 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
    
500
m 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
   1km    
  
 
  
 
2km
Emerald
Park
Science
Park
Emers
on
s Gr
ee
n
East
A
420
A420
A432
A43
2
A
432
River Avon
River Avon
River Frome
P
ag
e
Park
Park
Whitfield
T
ab
er
na
cle
Bitton
Soundwell
River Avon Trail
River Avon Trail
Siston C
ou
rt
Bristol Bath Railway Path
The Dramway
Community Forest Path
The Dramway
Community Forest Path
The Dramway
Siston
Common
Monarch
’
s Way
Bitton
Avon Valley Railway
Bristol Bath Railway Path
Frome Valley Walkway
N
Upton
Cheyney
Siston
Pucklechurch
Hambrook
Ring Road Path
Avon Cycleway
Avon Cycleway
Ring Road Path
P+
P+
Shortwood
We
bb
s
Hea
th 
Drift Mine
Br
and
y Bottom Co
lli
ery
Brassworks
CH
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. 
 
All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
Nwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
133
13.4
  
The following policy will deliver this vision through managing development and where 
appropriate, par
tnership working. 
POLICY CS29 – COMMUNITIES OF THE EAST FRINGE OF BRISTOL URBAN AREA 
Development plan documents and development proposals will take account of the vision 
for the communities of the East Fringe of Bristol urban area and the partnership priorities, 
and will:
1.
  
deliver the major new hous
ing and employment development, including the Science 
Park, with associated local facilities at Emersons Green, in a way that ensures this new 
development integrates effectively with existing communities and in accordance with 
the Strategy for Development, Housing Policy CS15, South Gloucestershire Local Plan 
Policy M2 and the adopted Emersons Green Development Brief
2.
  
improve the viabilit
y and vitality of Emersons Green, Downend, Staple Hill, Kingswood 
and Hanham centres, to enhance their role as service centres for the urban and 
surrounding rural areas and provide for additional comparison floorspace as 
appropriate  
3.
  
manage change on econo
mic development sites so as to maximise job opportunities 
within the local area
4.
  
protect the open green hi
llsides to the east which encompass the Pucklechurch Ridge, 
Shortwood Hill and Oldland Ridge, as well as Hanham Hills to the south, which provide 
important backdrop views from the urban areas making a significant contribution to 
the character and quality of the East Fringe of Bristol
5.
  
protect and enhance exi
sting formal and informal green assets, and take opportunities 
to create new links including green streets and public spaces to form a network of 
green spaces for biodiversity, recreation and play, to address the current under-
provision in the urban area
6.
  
provide for access to th
e open countryside through a network of footpaths and 
bridleways as well as strategic green corridors, such as the Avon and Siston valleys, 
the long distance footpaths, and via the commons and Warmley Forest Park to an 
enhanced Community Forest park centred around Overscourt Wood  
7.
  
seek opportunities to pro
tect and enhance sport and recreation provision to correct 
the current under-provision in this area 
8.
  
recognise, protect and e
nhance the heritage assets of the area, including the 
distinctive industrial and non-conformist heritage and the Avon Valley Railway
9.
  
make provision for and s
eek contributions towards the North Fringe to Hengrove Rapid 
Transit route, the Temple Meads to Emersons Green route, an orbital bus service 
linking The Mall with Emersons Green, and other strategic transport infrastructure, in 
accordance with Policy CS7South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
134
 
10.
 
protect and enhance bus se
rvices to central Bristol and nearby settlements
11.
    
seek opportunities to prov
ide safe and convenient routes across the locality for 
pedestrians and cyclists, including enhancement to the Railway Path as a strategic 
cycle/walking link to Bristol and the open countryside
12.
   
demonstrate through t
he preparation of appropriate Flood Risk Assessments, 
surface water management plans and drainage strategies, how flood risk will be 
managed.
13.5
  
The primary aim of this policy is t
o deliver the significant new development at Emersons 
Green in the north of the area to provide much needed high quality new employment 
opportunities, as well as new neighbourhoods and associated facilities.  In the rest of 
the East Fringe of Bristol the focus will be on managing smaller scale development so 
that it contributes to improving the opportunities and environmental quality of the area.  
The ongoing re-use of brownfield land will take place, where appropriate, allowing for 
the intensification of residential, employment and mixed use development.  However, 
such development must be achieved without compromising the key aims to respect, 
preserve and enhance green assets, and the distinct character and heritage of the 
neighbourhoods, as well as provide for new and enhanced community services and 
facilities, walking and cycling links and public transport. 
  
Partnership Priorities
13.6
 
The Council will also work w
ith its partners to ensure that:
		
❙
  
training and employment op
portunities are enhanced for residents of the priority 
neighbourhoods at Kingswood, Staple Hill and Cadbury Heath as and when 
development opportunities may arise in and around the locality
		
❙
  
the long term preservatio
n of the built heritage of the area is secured and, in particular, 
Warmley Brassworks, Whitfield Tabernacle and Middle Engine Pit which are nationally 
significant monuments currently identified as being at risk
		
❙
  
the provision of a new Junctio
n 18a on the M4 to the east of Junction 19 is supported 
in the long term
		
❙
  
we establish a shared under
standing of the impacts and level of recreational and 
leisure activities, residential moorings and associated development along the River 
Avon.  Whilst recognising the need to minimise flood risk, suitable and proportionate 
action will be taken to address development and to seek to ensure that moorings have 
a positive impact on the surrounding environment, in order to protect the character and 
quality of the area which make it so popular.
  
  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
135
  
Phasing / Development programme
13.7
  
The focus for development w
ill be the existing SGLP sites at Emersons Green East which 
will be delivered from 2011/2012 and the ongoing development of sites with planning 
permission within the existing urban area.  
 
Delivery
13.8
  
Developers promoting ma
jor development proposals will be required to carry out pre-
application consultation in accordance with the Council’s concept statement process 
as set out in the Statement of Community Involvement.  Concept Statements and 
subsequent planning applications will be expected to make provision for and take 
account of the policy objectives and principles set out in the above policy.
13.9
  
The Policies, Sites and Plac
es Development Plan Document will define the town centre 
boundaries and identify key projects and principles for sites relating to the town centres at 
Staple Hill, Kingswood and Hanham.
13.10
  
Improved bus routes and s
ervices will be delivered as part of major scheme bids to 
the Department for Transport. Further details of the package(s) are contained within 
Policy CS7 and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. This funding is also reliant on developer 
contributions.
13.11
  
The Council will work in pa
rtnership with English Heritage to support local conservation 
groups to prepare and implement strategies to secure the long term preservation of 
Warmley Brassworks, Whitfield Tabernacle, Wesleyan Methodist Chapel and burial 
ground, Blackhorse Road, Kingswood and Middle Engine Pit, Shortwood.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
136
14. Yate and Chipping Sodbury
14.1
  
Yate and the adjoining settlement of Chipping Sodbury are located north of the M4, 
approximately 10 miles no
rth east of Bristol.  The Yate and Chipping Sodbury built up area 
also includes parts of Dodington Parish to the south and Westerleigh Parish to the west.  
The key strengths of both towns are:
  
❙
 
the strong sense of ident
ity and cohesion within the existing communities 
  
❙
  
accessibility - Yate has a r
ailway station and there are bus services to rural areas and 
nearby urban centres
		
❙
 
access to a good range of ser
vices and facilities, and most are centrally located
		
❙
 
Chipping Sodbury has a livel
y evening and vibrant daytime economy 
		
❙
  
good walking and cyclin
g routes within the towns, which link to the countryside, such 
as the Frome Valley walkway. Open spaces within and adjoining the towns help to 
define their character
		
❙
  
Chipping Sodbury’s Cons
ervation Area, heritage sites in Yate, and the landscape 
setting provide high quality environments
		
❙
 
good levels of educational a
ttainment and low rates of crime
		
❙
  
they perform independ
ently of the nearby cities, due to the range of services and 
facilities available.
14.2
  
There are a series of underlyin
g issues that are experienced by residents and visitors to 
the towns.  Factual evidence, together with the results of a number of consultations has 
highlighted the following issues: 
		
❙
  
the population profile of th
e towns is changing, with an increase in elderly residents 
and a drop in the number of children of school age
		
❙
  
there are pockets of relat
ive deprivation in the south and west of Yate, with issues 
relating to skills and training
		
❙
  
employment opportunities ar
e primarily located in a number of trading estates and the 
shopping centres, with a higher than average percentage of semi-routine jobs and a 
lower than average percentage of higher managerial and professional jobs
		
❙
 
a significant number of the wor
king population commute elsewhere for work
		
❙
  
at certain times there are t
raffic congestion issues, these are mainly in Yate and they 
affect air quality
		
❙
  
Yate has no significant, ce
ntrally located evening or cultural activities, such as a 
cinema, ten pin bowling alley, restaurants, theatre or meeting places and there is a 
desire to strengthen the diversity of shops and facilities
		
❙
  
public transport opport
unities have not yet been realised, and congestion affects bus 
journey times
		
❙
  
there is a shortage of allotm
ents and outdoor sport facilities (particularly grass sports 
pitches).
14.3
  
Through community consultatio
n it has been accepted that, subject to the provision of 
the suitable infrastructure, in particular sewerage improvements, it is now an appropriate 
time to plan for the next phase of Yate and Chipping Sodbury’s growth.  Future growth 
 www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
137
must address the issues, reflect and enhance the two towns’ distinct yet complementary 
character and roles, provide opportunities to increase self-containment and protect and 
enhance the identities of the towns.
14.4
  
The following vision for the f
uture of the area has been drafted as a result of community 
engagement.  
Vision
In the period to 2027 and beyond, Yate and Chipping Sodbury will build upon their 
distinct yet complementary heritage, character and roles to develop a coherent sense 
of place, and provide a richer mix of social, cultural and economic opportunities. The 
towns will develop as a popular destination and a more attractive service centre for 
their surrounding villages and farming communities. Chipping Sodbury town centre 
will realise its retail and tourism potential. Yate’s evening economy will develop and the 
range of town centre uses increased. Public transport services will be more attractive 
and accessible to users. The open spaces, playing fields, footpaths and cycleways, 
which contribute to each town’s unique identity will be strengthened and enhanced with 
improved linkages throughout the towns and beyond into the surrounding countryside. 
A new neighbourhood to the north of Yate, will accommodate around 3,000 new homes 
(2,700 up to 2027), employment and community uses. This will enable the towns to 
meet locally generated housing requirements, provide a broader employment base 
and provide opportunities for modern flexible working practices, enhancing their 
sustainability.
 
 South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
138
Figure 11 – Yate and Chipping Sodbury
(for illustrative purposes only)
 
 
Settlement Areas 
Employment Area 
Conservation Areas 
Town Centre 
New Foodstore/ 
Housing Opportunity Area 
Regeneration Opportunity Site 
(Employment led, see Policy CS12)  
 
 
 
North Yate New Neighbourhood 
Green Belt Area 
Cotswolds AONB 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides  
 
Quarry 
Proposed Nibley Park & Ride Site 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Railway Station 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
P+
P+
Yate 
Station 
 
Chipping Sodbury 
Common 
A432 
A432 
The Common 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Quarry 
Yate 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Wapley 
Bushes 
Kingsgate 
Park 
Lilliput 
Park 
Yate Outdoor 
Sports Centre 
Westerleigh 
Iron 
Acton 
Engine 
Common 
0m              250m                    500m                                                1km 
Stub 
Ridings 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Golf Course 
Monarch s Way 
Jubilee Way 
Avon Cycleway 
P+
P+
 
Old 
Sodbury 
Wickwar 
 
Settlement Areas 
Employment Area 
Conservation Areas 
Town Centre 
New Foodstore/ 
Housing Opportunity Area 
Regeneration Opportunity Site 
(Employment led, see Policy CS12)  
 
 
 
North Yate New Neighbourhood 
Green Belt Area 
Cotswolds AONB 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides  
 
Quarry 
Proposed Nibley Park & Ride Site 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Railway and Railway Station 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
P+
P+
Yate 
Station 
 
Chipping Sodbury 
Common 
A432 
A432 
The Common 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Quarry 
Yate 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Wapley 
Bushes 
Kingsgate 
Park 
Lilliput 
Park 
Yate Outdoor 
Sports Centre 
Westerleigh 
Iron 
Acton 
Engine 
Common 
0m              250m                    500m                                                1km 
Stub 
Ridings 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Golf Course 
Monarch
s Way 
Jubilee Way 
Avon Cycleway 
P+
P+
 
Old 
Sodbury 
Wickwar 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
Nwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
139
14.5
  
The following policy will deliver this vision through managing development and, where 
appropriate, par
tnership working. 
POLICY CS30 – YATE AND CHIPPING SODBURY
Development plan documents and development proposals will take account of the vision 
and partnership priorities for Yate and Chipping Sodbury, and will:
1.
  
provide for the develop
ment of housing, employment and associated local facilities 
in accordance with the Strategy for Development, Housing Policy CS15, Employment 
Policy CS11 and the north Yate New Neighbourhood Policy CS31
2.
  
redevelop the Stover Ro
ad Industrial Estate/North Road/Badminton Road employment 
areas to improve the range and increase the number of jobs and to create a more 
attractive western approach to Yate, incorporating improvements to the railway station 
and enhancement of the ecological and recreational value of the Frome Valley corridor 
3.
  
make provision for and s
eek contributions towards the Yate/Chipping Sodbury 
Transport Package (see Policy CS7) including improvements of the Yate rail services, 
station facilities, car park and passenger interchange, and delivery of a multi-modal 
interchange at Nibley (including a Park & Ride), improvement of bus services within 
the towns and to key destinations
4.
  
diversify the range of t
own centre uses in Yate Town Centre to encourage a more 
active and vibrant evening economy, and provide further retail floorspace in 
accordance with Policy CS14 to support and enhance the Centre’s vitality and viability 
5.
  
preserve, enhance and i
nterpret Chipping Sodbury’s distinct architectural heritage 
to encourage and develop its role as a tourist destination and emphasise its niche 
retailing opportunities
6.
  
provide a new medium size f
ood store (of approximately 2,000 sqm net sales area) 
at Barnhill Quarry with enhanced pedestrian and cyclist routes to the town centre 
(including a new bridge) and alongside the River Frome corridor
7.
  
deliver cycling rout
es to the communities of the Bristol North and East Fringes as part 
of the Cycle City Project and the Yate & Chipping Sodbury Transport Package
8.
  
increase allotment p
rovision, and enhance sport and recreation provision throughout 
the towns
9.
  
demonstrate throug
h the preparation of appropriate Flood Risk Assessments, surface 
water management plans and drainage strategies, how flood risk will be managed.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
140
Development plan documents and development proposals should also accord with the 
following Key Principles:
10.
  
diversify the range of job
s available and make more efficient use of existing and 
planned new employment land;
11.
   
provide opportunitie
s for modern working practices within residential developments 
to enable people to work from their homes;
12.
  
enhance cultural and co
mmunity opportunities, in line with the aspirations of the 
Town Councils, particularly where these opportunities are well related to the town 
centres;
13.
  
reinforce the distin
ctive architectural character and landscape settings of both 
towns, preserve and enhance the special character of the historic assets of 
Chipping Sodbury and Yate and their settings, including the Conservation Area; 
14.
  
enhance the network of ope
n spaces and create new/improved existing pedestrian 
and cycling connections across the towns, to connect with:
  
❙
 
the town centres 
  
❙
 
railway station 
  
❙
 
community facilities
   
and protect and enhance l
inks with
  
❙
 
the countryside,
  
❙
 
the long distance foot
path and cycleway networks, and 
  
❙
 
the communities of the Nort
h and East Fringes of Bristol.
15.
  
realise the potentia
l of the Broad Lane Depot (safeguarded employment site) to 
re-balance jobs available in the area through the re-modelling of the site, while 
ensuring the separate identity of Engine Common is protected; 
16.
  
take opportunities to est
ablish a Heat Distribution network delivered through the 
redevelopment of the Stover Road Industrial Estate/North Road/Badminton Road 
employment areas and development of a new neighbourhood at north Yate, to 
assist the transition to a low carbon future;
17.
   
realise opportunities t
hat prioritise the treatment and management of locally 
produced waste through the provision of local scale waste facility/ies within the 
local area, in accordance with the Joint Waste Core Strategy.
14.6
  
The vision, Policy CS30 and a num
ber of partnership priorities propose to deliver a 
new mixed-use neighbourhood and re-modelled employment areas, providing more 
people with the opportunity to live near to their place of work, and re-balance the mix 
of employment opportunities away from distribution uses and also encourage start-up 
enterprises.  The north Yate new neighbourhood provides an opportunity to improve the 
range of types of jobs on offer and will provide opportunities for people to work from their 
home. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
141
  
Partnership priorities
14.7
 
The Council will also wor
k with its partners to ensure that:
		
❙
  
the market towns of Yate a
nd Chipping Sodbury continue to provide a range of facilities 
and services that are used by their own communities and those of the surrounding 
hinterland and villages that rely upon these important centres
		
❙
  
the highly valued netwo
rk of open spaces that contribute to the identity of these market 
towns will be protected, where necessary enhanced, and recreational pressures 
managed and mitigated. These include the Commons, the Local Nature Reserves, the 
Stub Ridings, Yate Outdoor Sports Complex, the River Frome Valley,  the limestone 
ridgeline (from Chipping Sodbury to Yate Rocks and across to Lower Wood Nature 
Reserve) and the nearby Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
		
❙
  
the Commons will be manag
ed to enhance their ecological value, through 
implementation of their management plans.  Sites of nature conservation interest will 
be protected and enhanced 
		
❙
  
high quality opportunitie
s for learning and training for all ages will be strongly 
supported  
		
❙
  
the health, skills and tra
ining issues identified within the west and south Yate priority 
neighbourhood action plan are addressed.
  
Phasing / Development p
rogramme
14.8
  
The focus of development to 2
016 will be the redevelopment and re-modelling of 
previously developed land and the development north of Chipping Sodbury at Barnhill 
comprising of a new food store and limited housing. 
14.9
  
The employment base will be d
iversified through the redevelopment of the Stover Road 
Industrial Estate/North Road/Badminton Road employment areas and other existing 
employment areas (such as Broad Lane Depot and other appropriate safeguarded 
employment sites). The Joint Waste Core Strategy has identified an area of search for a 
residual waste treatment facility within the existing industrial estates to the west of Yate. 
This area is referred to in the Joint Waste Core Strategy as ‘Strategic Area A’ and covers 
the Badminton Road Trading Estate, Great Western Business Park, Westerleigh Business 
Park, Beeches Industrial Estate, Stover Road and North Road Industrial Estates. The 
delivery of this facility is not expected before 2020, and will need to avoid prejudicing or 
being prejudiced by the redevelopment proposals for the Stover Road Industrial Estate/
North Road/Badminton Road employment area as identified on the Proposals Map.
14.10
  
All developments will ne
ed to ensure that appropriate supporting infrastructure is in place 
and in particular that there is sufficient sewerage capacity within all parts of the system 
affected by the development, including any cumulative effects when considered with other 
developments.    
14.11
  
New development will con
tribute to the improvement of public transport, foot and cycle 
linkages within and around the towns.
14.12
  
Beyond 2016, subject to t
he provision of appropriate strategic sewerage infrastructure, 
land at north Yate has been identified as having the potential to provide up to 3,000 new South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
142
homes, of which 2,700 have the potential to be completed up to 2027.  Provision will be 
made within the new neighbourhood for employment opportunities which contribute to 
the diversification of jobs in the area and for home working opportunities.
Delivery
14.13
  
Developers promoting ma
jor development proposals will be required to carry out pre-
application consultation in accordance with the Council’s concept statement process 
as set out in the Statement of Community Involvement.  Concept Statements and 
subsequent planning applications will be expected to make provision for and take 
account of the policy objectives and principles set out in the above policy and the 
supporting partnership priorities. Where a number of individual sites are involved, and 
in accordance with Policy CS12, as is the case with the regeneration of the Stover 
Road Industrial Estate/North Road/Badminton Road employment areas at the western 
approach to Yate, the Council will seek to co-ordinate delivery through the preparation of 
delivery frameworks. These will be produced to set the context for site specific Concept 
Statements and will inform the extent, development and design principles and phasing, in 
accordance with the Council’s SCI. Where relevant detailed boundaries and policies will 
be confirmed in the Policies, Sites and Places DPD.
14.14
  
The Policies, Sites and Plac
es Development Plan Document will define the town centre 
boundaries and identify key principles for sites relating to the town centres of Yate and 
Chipping Sodbury.
14.15
  
Funding for the Yate/So
dbury Transport Package will be predominantly reliant on 
developer contributions, further details of the Package are contained within Policy CS7 
and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  Cycling routes to the communities of the North and 
East Fringes of Bristol will be delivered as part of the Cycle City Project and the Yate & 
Chipping Sodbury Transport Package. 
 www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
143
North Yate New Neighbourhood
14.16
  
Policy CS5 (Location of Development) makes provision for the new neighbourhood at 
North Brimsham, Yate
.  In the plan period up to 2026, all the infrastructure required to 
support this major mixed use development comprising 3,000 dwellings in total will be 
required to be delivered.  In recognition of the scale and level of development in the 
town, it is expected that 2,700 of the 3000 dwellings in total will be provided by 2027. This 
policy and supporting diagram set out the key principles of development for this new 
neighbourhood.  
 
POLICY CS31 – NORTH YATE NEW NEIGHBOURHOOD
A major mixed use development is planned on land in North Yate as defined on the 
Proposals Map. Within the new neighbourhood provision will be made for 2,700 dwellings 
within the plan period and up to 3,000 dwellings in total (at an average density of 45 
dwellings per hectare) together with employment opportunities, social and community 
facilities, associated infrastructure and utilities. 
The Council will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) as the preferred 
policy mechanism to secure a framework for comprehensive development for the North 
Yate New Neighbourhood unless the development partners deliver a co-ordinated 
masterplan and agree financial and land value cost of on-site provision that together 
integrate the design and the delivery of the required infrastructure across all sites within 
the North Yate New Neighbourhood Area. 
Development will be comprehensively planned, and delivery co-ordinated and phased 
through the SPD (unless the alternative mechanism is agreed) to ensure full integration 
between the different land ownerships, land uses and the provision of all services, 
facilities, associated infrastructure and utilities, both within and beyond the housing 
allocation in accordance with this Policy, the Vision for Yate and Chipping Sodbury, Policy 
CS30, the partnership priorities for Yate & Chipping Sodbury communities, and the high 
quality urban design principles set out in Policy CS1.
Development will be contingent upon the provision of appropriate sewerage 
infrastructure.  No more than 750 dwellings will be allowed prior to the completion of the 
strategic sewerage infrastructure. 
Residential development will provide for a range of types and tenures in accordance with 
Policies CS17 and CS18.
The new neighbourhood will incorporate up to 9ha of employment land.  Opportunities 
for modern working practices within residential dwellings to enable people to work from 
their homes must also be delivered. 
A through road linking Randolph Avenue to the B4060 (Peg Hill) will be delivered as part 
of this new neighbourhood. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
144
Development will not impact on the special separate identity of Yate Rocks and a 
strategic green infrastructure corridor on the eastern edge of the new development will 
be retained and enhanced.
 
Development will also provide the following infrastructure:
1.
   
Two Primary Schools for a
pproximately two forms of entry each and a full day 
nursery
2.
    
a multi-use local cent
re comprising community meeting space, provision of a home 
working hub facility, doctors surgery,  and facilities for children and young people
3.
  
local retail, food and d
rink outlets
4.
  
off-site contribut
ion to extend Yate Library
5.
  
the potential provis
ion of pitches for Gypsies and Travellers
6.
  
an Extra Care Scheme
7.
    
Green Infrastructur
e, sport and recreation provision (including the provision of 
allotments), in accordance with Policies CS2 and CS24
8.
    
enhancement of sport and r
ecreation facilities, particularly on-site and at Yate 
Outdoor Sports Complex
9.
  
contribution to wast
e disposal and recycling
10.
 
contribution to the Ya
te and Chipping Sodbury Transport Package (see Policy CS7)
11.
   
measures to slow traffi
c and retain the ‘green’ character of Tanhouse Lane
12.
 
neighbourhood-wide
 wireless internet network
13.
   
contribution to the pr
ovision of public arts, performance and cultural space to be 
located in the town centre
14.
   
contributions will b
e sought for the provision of secondary school places in the 
locality.
 
This list is not exhaustive and development should also meet other policies of the Local 
Plan and the provision of necessary utilities as appropriate.  Further details are also set 
out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
14.17
  
The site comprises greenfi
eld land that is located to the north of the current settlement 
edge of Yate, it is mainly flat and crossed by a number of mature hedgerows and 
trees.  High voltage power lines and associated pylons cross part of the site.  The new 
neighbourhood will adjoin the northern edge of the existing Brimsham estate; the other 
edges are defined by the railway line to the west and Tanhouse Lane to the north.  The 
eastern edge of the site is defined by a rising slope to a limestone ridge; further to the 
east is the settlement of Yate Rocks.
14.18
  
In order to ensure that tra
ffic is dispersed as far as possible onto the local highway 
network, access to the site is proposed at three points, at Randolph Avenue, Leechpool 
Way and off the B4060, Peg Hill.  Pedestrian and cyclist links will be created that connect 
into the surrounding network, providing links with Yate and Chipping Sodbury Town 
Centres.  No vehicular access will be permitted onto Tanhouse Lane; measures will be 
used to slow traffic to encourage recreational use of Tanhouse Lane by pedestrians, 
cyclists and horse riders. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
145
14.19
  
Given the size and location of the site it will be required to provide a range of local 
facilities and amenitie
s to serve the new population. This site will need to provide up to 9 
ha of employment land.
14.20
  
A range of multi-function
al Green Infrastructure assets and linkages will be protected 
and delivered to ensure landscape features are protected and access opportunities 
are realised.  These include, but are not limited to: protecting the limestone ridgeline 
from development, providing a range of open spaces and corridors, providing legible 
permeable routes to key destinations, and safeguarding the flood risk areas for their multi-
functional benefits. 
14.21
 
A strategic Green Infra
structure corridor will be retained along the eastern edge of the 
 
   
development, to protec
t the landscape setting and special separate identity of Yate Rocks 
and to protect occupiers of homes in the new neighbourhood from activities at Chipping 
Sodbury Quarry, as well as safeguarding the operation of the quarry and preventing 
mineral sterilisation (See Policy 1 of the Minerals and Waste Local Plan (2002). The 
Minerals Resource Area is also illustratively displayed on Figure 12).
14.22
  
Areas of proven flood risk wi
ll be managed to realise their potential multi-functional 
benefits, including their visual, wildlife, climate change and informal recreation functions. 
14.23
  
New open space provisio
n (including equipped play space) should be consolidated 
on high quality multi-functional space(s), based on local models of provision such as 
Kingsgate Park and Brimsham Fields.
14.24
  
Home working opportun
ities must be delivered by, for example, providing meeting 
space within the local centre, including work space in the design of new homes and 
ensuring appropriate connecting/communication technology (e.g. high speed internet and 
additional electrical sockets) is in place.
Delivery
14.25
  
The development will be del
ivered by the private sector through the development 
management process.  Community Involvement and pre-application discussions will 
be in accordance with the Statement of Community Involvement.  Development will be 
guided by the production of an illustrative masterplan and detailed SPD as necessary, in 
accordance with the Council’s SCI. Design codes will be required as part of this process.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
146
Figure 12 – North Yate New Neighbourhood Framework Diagram
(for illustrative purposes only)
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014
ACCESS 
ACCESS 
ACCESS 
Yate Outdoor 
Sports Centre 
School 
Local 
Centre 
Avon Cycleway 
Jubilee Way 
N
Existing Facilities 
New Neighbourhood Development 
Area 
Proposed access points to Policy 
Area 
Watercourse 
Green Infrastructure (GI) Corridor 
Strategic GI Corridor within the 
New Neighbourhood, see policy 
CS31 and para 14.21.  
Green Infrastructure Connections 
(indicative) 
Significant Green Infrastructure 
outside the New Neighbourhood 
Area* 
Local Neighbourhood Access 
Road (indicative) 
Mineral Resource Area (Mineral & 
Waste Local Plan (2002), Policy 1) 
Pylons 
Powerlines to be undergrounded 
Road 
Railway 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
 
*These existing GI assets do not 
form part of the new  
neighbourhood
  
 
ACCESS 
Existing Facilities 
New Neighbourhood 
Development Area 
Proposed access points to 
Policy Area 
Watercourse 
Green Infrastructure Corridor 
Green Infrastructure 
Connections (indicative) 
Significant Green 
Infrastructure outside the of 
the New Neighbourhood Area* 
ACCESS 
Local Neighbourhood 
Access Road (indicative) 
Pylons 
Powerlines to be 
undergrounded 
Road 
Railway 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
*These existing GI assets do 
not form part of the new  
neighbourhood
  
www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
147
15. Thornbury
15.1
 
Thornbury is an attractive and affluent market town.  The town’s strengths include its:
		
❙
 
attractive historical e
nvironment and market town character
		
❙
 
excellent standard of scho
oling
		
❙
 
low crime rates; and
		
❙
 
proximity to attractiv
e countryside and areas of public open space.
15.2
  
In recent years however Th
ornbury has begun to experience some underlying problems.  
Factual evidence, together with the results of a number of previous consultation exercises, 
has told us:
		
❙
 
town centre shop unit vacan
cy rates have doubled from 1999 to 2009
		
❙
  
local people feel that there ha
s been some decline in the overall health and vibrancy of 
the town centre
		
❙
 
the average age of the popu
lation is increasing
		
❙
 
there has been a decrease in h
ousehold size and population
		
❙
 
surplus spaces exist in all T
hornbury primary schools; and
		
❙
  
the Castle School (which is one o
f the top performing secondary schools in the 
country and a major attraction for families looking to live in Thornbury) requires some 
investment in its physical fabric.  In addition, the building in which the sixth form is 
currently located is no longer adequate to meet the demands of a modern curriculum 
and is split from the main school site.  
15.3
  
The results of previous con
sultation work conducted in 2008 and 2009 indicated that 
there is support for some sensitively planned and appropriately located new housing 
development at Thornbury, which may help to fill surplus spaces in the primary schools 
as well as increasing the potential number of visitors to the town centre.  Community 
consultation has also identified the need to strengthen community health facilities and the 
Castle School have indicated that they would like to consolidate onto a single site.  
15.4
  
The potential developme
nt of a new nuclear power station at Oldbury would have a 
significant impact on Thornbury.  However as the principles or details of the project 
are yet to be confirmed, the strategy for Thornbury does not deal with the implications 
that might arise from the development.  Further information about proposed major 
infrastructure projects is given in Chapter 18.
15.5
  
Community engagement and p
artnership working have helped the Council to draft the 
following vision for Thornbury which aims to help overcome the problems described 
above:South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
148
Vision
 
In the period to 2027 and beyond, Thornbury will be a thriving and socially cohesive 
historic market town with a diverse range of employment opportunities and modern 
healthcare facilities.  The vibrant town centre will provide a range of facilities for the 
needs of its residents, visitors and workers, as well as its surrounding villages and 
farming communities.
These aims will be supported by an appropriate amount of high quality housing growth 
which will help to strengthen and develop the town centre, local schools and community 
facilities and activities. This growth will provide for the needs of young families and 
the elderly.  The town centre will build on its rich historic character and setting and will 
promote itself as an attraction, a centre for the arts and an exciting place to shop. 
Figure 13 - Thornbury
(for illustrative purposes only)
Thornbury 
Castle 
Castle 
School 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Conygre 
Covert 
The Mundy 
Playing Fields 
Allot 
Gdns 
Thornbury 
Bristol Road 
Gillingstool 
Leisure 
Centre 
Superstore 
Rock Street 
High Street 
Gloucester Road 
Thornbury 
Golf Course 
Cleve 
Wood 
Jubilee Way 
Finore 
Woods 
0m                        250m                    500m                                         1km 
Jubilee Way 
 
Avon Cycleway 
 
 
Thornbury Housing Opportunity Areas 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Turnberrie’s – Community Meeting Place 
The Chantry – Community Meeting Place 
Armstrong Hall & Thornbury Museum  
Thornbury Hospital and Health Centre 
 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
Indicative Development 
Buffer 
 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Area 
Conservation Area 
Thornbury Town Centre 
Heritage Asset 
Community & Transport 
Connections 
 
 
Butt Lane 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
St Mary’s 
Church 
Parkmill 
Covert 
Crossways 
Wood 
Severn Way Link 
 
Medieval 
Fishponds  
Thornbury 
Castle 
Castle 
School 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Playing 
Field 
Conygre 
Covert 
The Mundy 
Playing Fields 
Allot 
Gdns 
Thornbury 
Bristol Road 
Gillingstool 
Leisure 
Centre 
Superstore 
Rock Street 
High Street 
Gloucester Road 
Thornbury 
Golf Course 
Cleve 
Wood 
Jubilee Way 
Finore 
Woods 
0m                        250m                    500m                                         1km 
Jubilee Way 
 
Avon Cycleway 
 
 
Thornbury Housing Opportunity Areas 
Green Belt Area 
Significant Green Infrastructure (GI) 
Significant GI in the Green Belt 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Turnberrie’s – Community Meeting Place 
The Chantry – Community Meeting Place 
Armstrong Hall & Thornbury Museum  
Thornbury Hospital and Health Centre 
 
Major Road 
Other Road 
Long Distance Footpath 
Avon Cycleway 
Watercourse 
Indicative Development 
Buffer 
 
Main Built Up Area 
Employment Area 
Conservation Area 
Thornbury Town Centre 
Heritage Asset 
Community & Transport 
Connections 
 
 
Butt Lane 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
St Mary’s 
Church 
Parkmill 
Covert 
Crossways 
Wood 
Severn Way Link 
 
Medieval 
Fishponds  
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
149
15.6
  
Policy CS32 will deliver this vision through managing development and where appropriate, 
partnership working.
 
POLICY CS32 – THORNBURY
Development plan documents and development proposals will take account of the vision 
and partnership priorities for Thornbury, and will:
1.
  
secure better use of Thor
nbury’s network of open spaces, including the Mundy 
Playing Fields, Streamside Walk, Severn Way Link and Jubilee Way footpaths, through 
improved signage and legibility and better accessibility for the disabled and the elderly 
2.
  
ensure that the current c
haracter and setting of Thornbury’s open spaces, which 
contribute strongly to the attractiveness of Thornbury, is maintained and enhanced
3.
  
provide increased an
d diversified employment opportunities, particularly within the 
town centre, through improvements to existing sites, premises and communications 
infrastructure
4.
  
support opportunitie
s to retain and enhance the arts, cultural and community 
provision, especially at the Armstrong Hall
5.
  
conserve and enhance th
e special character and significance of Thornbury’s historic 
assets and their settings in order to support its attraction as a tourist destination
6.
  
support the provisio
n of Extra Care Housing in Thornbury and the improvement of 
healthcare facilities through the re-provision of hospital services and a Health Centre 
to meet the requirements of the local population
7.
  
promote the developme
nt of high quality housing and associated local infrastructure 
in accordance with the Strategy for Development and Policy CS33
8.
  
support the continue
d excellence, viability and quality of all the educational provision 
and seek to increase pre-school nursery provision in Thornbury
9.
  
maximise opportunitie
s for sustainable travel by improving the legibility and publicity 
of bus routes through the town and enhancing opportunities for walking and cycling 
to, from and within the town and town centre; and
10.
 
demonstrate throug
h the preparation of appropriate Flood Risk Assessments, surface 
water management plans and drainage strategies, how flood risk will be managed.
  South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
150
  
Partnership priorities
15.7
 
The Council will work with its p
artners to ensure: 
 
 
  
❙
  
thornbury will be a more vib
rant market town, through increasing opportunities to 
diversify the range of commercial and retailing businesses within the town centre to 
support its niche retailing offer, and to promote high quality, locally produced food and 
produce
  
❙
  
the updating of existin
g employment space with appropriate new communication 
technologies (e.g. high speed broadband) which will support working from home 
and therefore the town’s self-containment, local businesses and the improvement of 
existing business premises
		❙
  
the encouragement of dev
elopment proposals which can genuinely demonstrate that 
they will make a meaningful contribution to supporting a vibrant town centre, and that 
will enhance the community fabric of the town and the aspirations for the town centre
		❙
  
the availability, rang
e and affordability of housing in Thornbury is increased, enabling 
an increased number of families to live in the town.  Opportunities for older residents to 
downsize to high quality smaller dwellings will be maximised which may increase the 
availability of existing family housing within the town.  
Delivery
15.8
  
Development will be delive
red in conjunction with the Council’s partners through the 
development management process.  The Policies, Sites and Places Development Plan 
Document will define the town centre boundaries and identify key principles for sites 
relating to the town centre.
15.9
  
Planning applications fo
r all major development proposals will be required to carry out 
pre-application consultation in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community 
Involvement.
POLICY CS33 – HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
The preferred location for a housing opportunity area is to the north of Thornbury near 
to the Castle School (as indicated in Figure 13), where potential exists for up to 500 
dwellings to be delivered within the plan period.  
Development will be planned comprehensively in accordance with the vision, Policy 
CS32, and high quality urban design principles as set out in Policy CS1.  In addition 
proposals will need to demonstrate that the development would not adversely impact 
upon the historic environment of Thornbury and its setting.  Where adverse impacts 
cannot be avoided these impacts should be minimised by the use of sensitive high 
quality design and mitigation including appropriate enhancements to the historic 
environment of Thornbury and its setting.
The housing capacity of the area north of Thornbury and near the Castle School will be 
confirmed through the satisfactory completion of:www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
151
 
1.
  
an Historical Enviro
nment Character Assessment which will also inform the layout 
and scale of development to help mitigate any possible impact on heritage values and 
assets; and
2.
  
technical work to demons
trate that development would not increase the likelihood or 
severity of flooding either at Thornbury or further downstream at Oldbury.  
The design of the development, informed by extended habitat and protected species 
surveys, will incorporate appropriate buffer zones around features of ecological 
importance.  The design will address the need for connectivity between the Medieval 
fishponds and Park Mill Covert to the west along the stream corridor.
Development will need to address the following:
3.
  
contributions to edu
cation provision where local education provision is inadequate to 
meet the needs arising from the future occupiers.  Appropriate provision in scale and 
kind will be sought.  Uses which may be required to meet wider community and Green 
Infrastructure needs, including a high level of footpath/bridleway permeability through 
the development and into the surrounding countryside.
4.
  
improved transport l
inks via Park Road from new development to the town centre to 
ensure its integration into the existing community.  Any new vehicular access onto 
Butt Lane/Oldbury Lane will need to address any other related highway improvements 
arising from the development, including improved pedestrian and cycle routes to and 
from the town centre.
5.
 
a range of house types and te
nures in accordance with Policies CS17 and CS18.  
This list is not exhaustive and development should also meet other policies of the Local 
Plan and the provision of necessary utilities as appropriate.  Further details are also set 
out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
A further site is identified on land off Morton Way North and is capable of providing an 
additional 300 dwellings.  This is required to enable the Council to provide sufficient 
housing land in order to meet its 5 year housing land target and an additional 20% buffer 
of housing land in accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework.
15.10
  
Two of the primary aims of Polic
ies CS32 and CS33 are to increase the vibrancy of 
Thornbury’s town centre and the viability of its primary schools and other community 
facilities.  Encouraging an increased number of younger families to live in Thornbury, and 
therefore increasing the number of children attending the town’s primary schools, will help 
to achieve these objectives.  
15.11  
 
Castle School is currently loc
ated at two sites, with the main school site being located at 
Park Road and the sixth form centre being on Gloucester Road.  The school will seek to 
consolidate its buildings and playing fields onto one site and will also seek opportunities 
to update and/or replace its existing buildings and facilities. Any housing development 
must therefore not prejudice the future aspirations and re-building of Castle School.  To 
enable the delivery of a new Castle School sixth form centre and consolidated school site 
obligations related in scale and kind to any future housing development will be sought.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
152
15.12 
  
An increase in population should help to arrest the decline since the early 1990s and 
will bring more visitor
s to the town’s shops, services and facilities.  The location north of 
Thornbury near to the Castle School has therefore been selected as the most appropriate 
location to fulfil these objectives as it is not within the Conservation Area or Green Belt 
and will enable new development to integrate well into the existing fabric of the town, 
while helping to sustain and improve local services and community facilities.  However, 
proposals will need to demonstrate that the development would not adversely impact 
upon the historic environment of Thornbury and its setting in accordance with provisions 
set out in Policy CS33. 
15.13
  
Thornbury’s self-con
tainment will be encouraged through improving the installation 
of modern technology and/or re-modelling of existing employment floorspace/land to 
increase attractiveness to prospective tenants, therefore increasing local employment 
opportunities.  
15.14
  
Thornbury benefits fro
m a rich historical and cultural heritage.  In order to improve trade 
and vibrancy in the town centre it is vital that the town takes advantage of this and 
markets itself as a tourist destination.  Therefore proposals which improve cultural and 
community facilities, trade of local food and drink and linkages to Thornbury’s attractive 
Green Infrastructure will be encouraged where these would help to increase the town 
centre’s health.  
 
 
Partnership priorities
1
5.15
 
The Council will also wor
k with its partners to ensure:
		
❙
  
when vacated in the longe
r term, in view of its proximity to the town centre, the sixth 
form site on Gloucester Road should be strongly considered for development that 
meets the needs of older residents;  
		
❙
  
sustainable traffic con
trol solutions will be implemented to ensure that there will not be 
increased adverse highway impact as a result of the school consolidation;
		
❙
  
a mix of housing types is pr
ovided, with a particular emphasis on family housing and 
high quality dwellings suitable for those current residents of Thornbury wishing to 
downsize, together with affordable housing; and
		
❙
  
development is sensitiv
ely designed to conserve and enhance local ecology and 
historic character, including the architectural and historic qualities and setting of 
Thornbury Castle and other listed buildings, the mediaeval fishponds and the character 
and appearance of the Conservation Area.  
Delivery
 
 
15.16
  
The development describ
ed in Policy CS33 will be delivered by the private sector through 
the development management process.  Development will be guided by the production 
of an illustrative masterplan and planning application(s) that will make provision for 
and take account of the objectives and principles set out in Policies CS32 and CS33.  
Planning applications for all major development proposals will be required to carry out 
pre-application consultation in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community 
Involvement.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
153
16. Rural areas
16.1
  
The rural areas comprise the open countryside, the coastal/estuary areas and settlements 
outside the North and Eas
t Fringes of the Bristol urban area, excluding Thornbury, Yate 
and Chipping Sodbury and Severnside.  The key strengths of these areas are:
  
❙
  
highly valued, distinct
 and attractive landscapes, including those protected for their 
national significance
  
❙
 
rural settlements with div
erse and characteristic features
  
❙
  
provides a valuable sett
ing to the main urban area contributing to a unique sense of 
place and identity 
  
❙
  
provides a recreation and t
ourist asset for the residents of the urban areas and nearby 
towns and visitors to the district 
  
❙
 
rich and varied habitats for a wide r
ange of biodiversity and
  
❙
  
provides a resource for man
aging flood risk and contributes to addressing the 
challenges of climate change adaptation.
16.2
  
However, as a result of rece
nt trends many rural communities are experiencing a number 
of issues.  Factual evidence, together with community consultation undertaken at the 
Issues and Options stage has told us about the following issues:
		
❙
 
development pressures on t
he edge of the urban area and within villages;
		
❙
 
lack of affordable housi
ng
		
❙
 
significant number of commut
ing trips for shopping, employment and education;
  
❙
 
poor public transport and a
ccessibility
  
❙
  
access to and from the moto
rway network causes additional traffic on country roads 
and in villages, resulting in safety, noise and pollution issues
		
❙
 
visual intrusion, noise a
nd pollution from motorways; and
		
❙
 
decline in local services a
nd facilities.
16.3
  
Communities will be empowere
d to shape the future of their own local areas through 
opportunities presented by Neighbourhood Planning. 
16.4
  
The following vision for the f
uture of the rural areas has been drafted as a result of 
community engagement. 
 
Vision
In the period to 2027 and beyond the rural areas will continue to be an important asset 
contributing to the economy, biodiversity and heritage of the district; providing public 
access to the countryside and recreation opportunities; and supporting local food 
production.  The diversity and unique character of individual settlements and the open 
countryside will be conserved and enhanced and recognised as providing a valuable 
setting to the main urban area contributing to a unique sense of place and identity. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
154
Through engagement with rural communities and where environmentally appropriate, 
new limited development will be provided which meets local needs.  Innovative transport 
solutions will link rural communities with centres of employment, services and facilities.  
The rural areas will make a positive contribution to the generation of renewable energy 
and healthier lifestyles.
 
16.5
  
The following policy will deli
ver the vision by managing development and where 
appropriate, partnership working. 
POLICY CS34 -  RURAL AREAS
Development plan documents and development proposals will take account of the vision 
for the rural areas and partnership priorities, accord with Neighbourhood Plan initiatives 
and will: 
1.
    
protect, conserve and e
nhance the rural areas’ distinctive character, beauty, 
wildlife, landscape, biodiversity and heritage
2.
    
protect the best and most ve
rsatile agricultural land and opportunities for local food 
production and cultivation to provide for nearby urban areas and settlements
3.
    
protect the unique and val
uable setting provided by the rural areas to the urban 
areas and other settlements in South Gloucestershire, which contributes to the 
district’s distinctive sense of place and identity
4.
     
protect the designated G
reen Belt and the Cotswolds AONB from inappropriate 
development
5.
    
maintain the settleme
nt boundaries defined on the Policies Map around rural 
settlements until they are reviewed either through Neighbourhood Plans, the 
Policies, Sites and Places DPD or a replacement Local Plan following engagement 
with local communities and other stakeholders/partners
6.
    
provide affordable hou
sing through Policy CS19 (Rural Exception Sites), Policy 
CS18 (Affordable Housing) Neighbourhood Planning and give consideration to 
allocating Affordable Housing Only Sites, with any allocations to be identified in the 
Policies, Sites and Places DPD
7.
    
protect rural employme
nt sites, services and facilities and support farm 
diversification in order to provide local employment, sustain rural and village life 
and reduce the need to travel
8.
    
encourage contribut
ions to appropriate new communication technologies (e.g. 
high speed broadband) which will support working from home and other rural 
enterpriseswww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
155
 
9.
    
support renewable ene
rgy proposals where they conform to Policy CS3 
(Renewable, Low Carbon & Decentralised Energy Generation)
10.
   
seek contributions to
 providing Green Infrastructure, including woodland, public 
transport, walking, cycling and bridleway links to and from the rural area, in 
recognition of the rural area as a valuable recreation and tourist asset and in order 
to promote healthier life styles
11.
  
deliver with partners, a
nd seek contributions to, the Rural Transport Package on 
 
   
improved accessibil
ity and transport provision detailed in Policy CS7 (Strategic 
Transport Infrastructure)
12.
   
demonstrate through t
he preparation of appropriate Flood Risk Assessments, 
surface water plans and drainage strategies, how flood risk will be managed
13.
   
recognise the role that rura
l areas can make to projects and initiatives that address 
and adapt to the challenges of climate change.
16.6
  
The Core Strategy sets ou
t an integrated approach to balancing the conservation and 
enhancement of the countryside and rural settlements with sustaining and promoting 
thriving local rural communities and the rural economy.
16.7
  
Within the open countrysi
de and within villages and other settlements without defined 
settlement boundaries, development will be strictly controlled in line with other relevant 
policies. 
16.8
  
The best and most versati
le agricultural land will be protected from unacceptable 
development.  This is particularly important in view of the increasing need to produce 
food locally due to the anticipated impact of climate change.  Lower grade land may also 
be valuable for the cultivation of non food crops, including biomass.
16.9
  
It is important for the rural ar
eas to thrive by creating and maintaining sustainable, mixed 
and inclusive communities. Limited housing development will be allowed in accordance 
with Policy CS5 (Location of Development) within those villages or parts of villages which 
have settlement boundaries defined on the Policies Map. The approach to the distribution 
of development in the rural areas will be reviewed, in conjunction with community 
and stakeholder engagement.  Any amendments to the approach will be identified in 
Neighbourhood Plans, the Policies, Sites and Places DPD, or a replacement Local Plan.  
Affordable housing will be delivered through Policy CS18 (Affordable Housing) and Policy 
CS19 (Rural Housing Exception Sites) and Neighbourhood Planning. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
156
16.10
  
The viability of the rural economy also needs to be ensured by providing and protecting 
sufficient land and pre
mises for a range of employment opportunities of a scale 
appropriate to the settlement/locality, supporting farm diversification and development 
for tourism where the scale and environmental impact is consistent with the rural location 
and by protecting existing services and facilities.  National policy, the policies in Chapter 
9 (Maintaining Economic Prosperity) of this document and other LDF documents will be 
applicable.
16.11
  
It is important to recognis
e the role that rural enterprises play in supporting the economy. 
Where appropriate, consideration will be given through the concept statement process 
(as set out in the Council’s Statement of Community Involvement) to the long term future 
planning of existing significant rural enterprises located outside village development 
boundaries, provided there are no overriding conflicts with established policy. 
16.12
  
The design of new developme
nt must respect and enhance the varied and distinctive 
character and settings of the rural areas.
16.13
  
A package of rural transp
ort initiatives is proposed to improve linkages both within the 
rural areas, and to key places of employment, shopping, leisure, education and other 
facilities and services.  Elements of this package require further investigation, for example 
the provision of additional multi-modal interchanges, including Park and Share provision, 
demand responsive transport initiatives and the reopening of Charfield Station.
16.14
  
The potential developm
ent of a new nuclear power station at Oldbury and associated 
transmission grid would have a significant impact on the rural areas.  However as the 
principle or details of the project are yet to be confirmed, the strategy for the rural areas 
does not deal with the implications that might arise from the development.  Further 
information about proposed major infrastructure projects is given in Chapter 18.
  
Partnership priorities
1
6.15
 
The Council will:
  
❙
  
encourage rural communitie
s: to undertake local housing needs surveys, prepare 
parish plans and support Neighbourhood Planning, in order to set out the future needs 
and aspirations for their communities and to help inform the review of the approach to 
the distribution of development in the rural areas, the preparation of future DPDs and 
assist in the determination of planning applications  
  
❙
  
work with partners to enc
ourage the provision of appropriate new communication 
technologies, such as high speed broadband, to the rural areas 
  
❙
  
work with partners and co
mmunities to enhance rural accessibility by the development 
of viable, innovative, demand responsive and community transport initiatives and 
improvements to public transport
  
❙
  
work with partners to esta
blish a shared understanding of the impacts and level of 
recreational and leisure activities, residential moorings and associated development 
along the River Avon.  Whilst recognising the need to minimise flood risk, suitable and 
proportionate action will be taken to address development and to seek to ensure that 
moorings have a positive impact on the surrounding environment, in order to protect 
the character and quality of the area which make it so popular.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
157
  
Phasing/Development programme
16.16
  
Development in rural areas w
ill be achieved by empowering local communities to 
shape the future of their own areas through opportunities presented by Neighbourhood 
Planning. Limited development will be permitted within those villages with defined 
settlement boundaries.  This approach to the distribution of development in the rural areas 
will be reviewed and any amendments to this approach will be identified in 
  
Neighbourhood Plans, the P
olicies, Sites and Places DPD, or a replacement Local Plan.
 
Delivery
16.17
  
Development will be deliv
ered by Neighbourhood Planning, the private sector and where 
appropriate Registered Social Landlords and other partners through the development 
management process.
16.18
  
Transport improveme
nts will be delivered through the Rural Transport Package and 
partnership working.
16.19
  
Parishes will be encoura
ged to prepare parish plans and undertake Neighbourhood 
Planning.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
158
17. Severnside
17.1
  
The Avonmouth-Severnside area is a regionally significant employment location with 
considerable furthe
r economic potential.  The Severnside part of this area lies in the 
coastal zone between the Avonmouth industrial area (in the administrative area of 
Bristol City Council) and the village of Severn Beach, comprising an employment area 
of approximately 650 hectares which benefits from planning permissions granted to 
ICI in 1957 and 1958.  It is currently a mix of industrial and former industrial areas and 
greenfield sites not yet developed. The M49 motorway bisects the area. Bristol Port lies 
at the southern end of the Avonmouth-Severnside area. The capacity of this Port is to be 
enlarged with a deep sea container terminal. 
17.2
  
Although the area has extant p
lanning permissions there are a number of constraints 
which affect its development potential, including:
		
❙
  
national and internat
ional nature conservation designations relating to the Severn 
Estuary 
		
❙
  
the risk of flooding from th
e River Severn due to breaching or overtopping of the 
existing flood defences, coupled with a rising tide level, as well as groundwater 
flooding
		
❙
  
the limited capacity of th
e existing highway network and infrastructure in the area; and
		
❙
  
high archaeological inte
rest in the Severn Levels.
17.3
  
The principal landown
ers intend to implement the extant permissions and develop 
warehousing and distribution centres. There is also interest in waste recovery and energy 
generation. SITA intends to develop a waste to energy facility, and Scottish Power has 
indicated its intention to promote a Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) Power Station 
on the former Grow How site at Saltmarsh. This proposal would be a major infrastructure 
project to be considered by the Major Infrastructure Planning Unit of the Planning 
Inspectorate. 
17.4
  
After a long period of limite
d change at Severnside sites are being brought to the market. 
The Council is concerned that the continuing development of individual land parcels 
could cumulatively impact on addressing the key constraints identified above and in 
particular:
		
❙
  
would have a significant e
ffect on the ecology and conservation assets of the Severn 
Estuary and cause significant and irreparable damage to estuarine and floodplain 
ecology
		
❙
  
reduce flooding capacit
y without improvement to flood defences and increase the risk 
of flooding to third parties
		
❙
  
damage the network of rhi
nes which provide the local drainage network and which are 
of ecological interest
		
❙
 
worsen traffic conges
tion on the local road and motorway network; and,
		
❙
 
result in the irretrievab
le loss of valuable archaeological assets.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
159
   
It is therefore the Council’s intention to work with the Local Enterprise Partnership, key 
landowners, statut
ory bodies and Bristol City Council to address these constraints. 
17.5
  
Taking account of consu
ltation responses and to address the problems above, while 
recognising the extant planning permissions, the following vision and policy has been 
drafted for the Severnside area.  
Vision
Severnside will remain a strategically important location for employment uses.  
Employers, landowners and developers will work with the Council, other agencies 
and Bristol City Council to unlock its economic potential and improve local transport 
infrastructure. The Severn Estuary and adjoining floodplain is internationally important for 
a wide range of ecology and these ecological interests will be protected and a network 
of new nature reserves implemented.  The archaeological heritage and interest of the 
Severn Levels will also be protected and conserved. A longer term durable and robust 
strategy for addressing flood risk due to climate change will be adopted.  The area’s 
potential for power generation will be managed.
 
17.6
  
The following policy will del
iver this vision through managing development and where 
appropriate, partnership working.
POLICY CS35 – SEVERNSIDE 
Land at Severnside will be safeguarded and developed for distribution and other 
extensive employment uses, including energy generation, broadly in line with the extant 
planning permissions dating from 1957 and 1958.
Notwithstanding the differing planning status of individual land parcels, the Council will 
continue to work with landowners, Bristol City Council, the Local Enterprise Partnership 
and statutory agencies to provide a strategic development approach which will help 
to deliver development while mitigating  site constraints, including flood risk, coastal 
protection, biodiversity, archaeology and transportation. 
Opportunities to enhance the sustainability of the area through, for example development 
of an energy grid, will also be explored and delivered where feasible.   South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
160
 Figure 13A Severnside 
17.7
  
Although land at Severns
ide, as shown in Figure 13A, benefits from extant  planning 
permissions, the situation is not uniform across this area, as some parts are previously 
developed and others have been the subject of more recent permissions.  The position 
is therefore complex and the South Gloucestershire Local Plan sought to restrict further 
development until an overall strategy was in place to address the constraints referred to 
above and the potential cumulative effects of development. This has proved impracticable 
as some landowners have brought their sites forward for development under the extant 
planning permissions.
 
17.8
  
The Council, jointly with B
ristol City Council and other bodies, has commissioned several 
studies to understand the development constraints affecting the Avonmouth-Severnside 
area and to understand how the economic potential of the area could be unlocked to 
realise the ambition for substantial economic development over the next 30-40 years. In 
mid 2011 the West of England LEP acknowledged the economic development opportunity 
offered by the area by identifying it as an Enterprise Area. The Councils have produced 
Pilning 
M4 
Severn 
Beach 
Avonmouth 
Easter 
Compton 
N
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
161
their vision for the area to 2050, together with an emerging strategy that identifies the key 
infrastructure and other supporting interventions that are needed to realise this vision.
17.9
  
A project management ap
proach is now being taken by the Council and Bristol City 
Council, in conjunction with the LEP , to develop the strategy and secure funding for the 
necessary infrastructure improvements. The following paragraphs provide more details on 
the development constraints.    
 
 
Ecology
17.10
  
In recognition of its nationa
lly and internationally important wildlife, the Severn Estuary is 
subject to a series of nature conservation designations.  It is a Site of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI), a Special Protection Area (SPA), and a Ramsar site (named after the 
Ramsar Convention on the Conservation of Wetlands of Importance).  It is also a Special 
Area of Conservation (SAC) under the European Directive on the Conservation of 
Natural Habitats and Wild Fauna and Flora (‘the Habitats Directive 1992’), implemented 
in Britain by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 (Habitats 
Regulations).  The protection afforded to the estuary also extends to any land used by 
European waterfowl.  This presents a challenge in reconciling development at Severnside 
with continued use of the coastal floodplain by the species and assemblages of the 
Severn Estuary in such a way that it satisfies the Habitats Regulations and meets the 
conservation objectives of the site.  
17.11
  
Under Regulation 63 of the Co
nservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 
the Council has a duty to review all unimplemented or partially implemented planning 
permissions likely to have a significant effect on the international nature conservation 
designations covering the Severn Estuary.  This review of consent (Habitats Regulations 
Assessment) has been carried out as part of a wider coastal floodplain wetland habitat 
project (including land gifted under the scheme) in partnership with Bristol City Council 
and Natural England. This review predicts that the impacts of future development-related 
habitat losses and associated disturbance events at Severnside could give rise to 
potentially significant effects upon the integrity of the SPA and Ramsar site.
17.12
  
In order to address these p
otentially significant effects, the review includes a mitigation 
strategy which has been developed to identify land for habitat creation/enhancement. 
A number of sites have been identified within Severnside and Avonmouth, and in the 
general vicinity, for future wetland habitat creation to off-set the habitat losses that have 
been predicted.
  
  
Flooding
17.13
  
Severnside is at high risk o
f flooding.  This will be exacerbated by higher tidal levels 
and more intense rainfall as a result of climate change.  Flood capacity within the area 
will also decrease with further development, exacerbating future flooding impacts. A 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been completed and it is recognised that a strategic 
approach to managing flood risk at Severnside is required, which includes securing the 
necessary strategic flooding infrastructure.  The strategy and funding for this infrastructure 
is being taken forward by the Councils and the LEP . Until this infrastructure is in place, the 
Council would strongly encourage the following:South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
162
		
❙
	
  
Site specific Flood Risk Assessments should be prepared and should take into 
account the likely cumulat
ive impacts of further development in the area and the effect 
on third parties.
		
❙
  
Any development propos
als should demonstrate active engagement with the 
Lower Severn Internal Drainage Board, Marine Management Organisation and the 
Environment Agency. 
  
Archaeology
17.14
  
The Severn Levels is an area o
f high archaeological potential because of the exceptional 
level of preservation of archaeological and palaeo-environmental remains surviving within 
the waterlogged silt deposits and peat layers.  In addition the waterlogged conditions 
have resulted in the exceptional survival of earthwork remains of medieval and post 
medieval field and drainage systems.  Development within this area can result not only 
in destruction of remains within the immediate development area, but also indirectly can 
increase water levels on adjacent land affecting the survival of waterlogged deposits.
17.15
  
Where development is pro
posed within the Levels, geotechnical surveys including 
borehole and geophysical surveys can provide valuable insight into the archaeological 
potential of the site without significant extra expense, provided discussion with 
archaeologists takes place when the specifications for the surveys are being agreed.  
The Council would strongly encourage programmes of archaeological mitigation to 
be agreed and implemented prior to development taking place, in order to ensure that 
archaeological works do not delay development.  These should include surveys of 
surviving earthworks, where these cannot be preserved in situ, as well as excavation and 
recording of surviving archaeological remains.  
  
Transport
17.16
  
The Highways Agency Avo
nmouth/Severnside traffic model predicts the traffic impact for 
development scenarios without a new M49 junction in place.  This clearly demonstrates 
that the limited capacity of the existing local road network will be overwhelmed by traffic 
demand arising from new development and there will be traffic congestion both within 
the Avonmouth/Severnside area and on the road links leading up to it.  This congestion 
will deter new businesses from setting up in the area, unless capacity is increased and 
access to major routes improved.  There will also be adverse environmental impacts 
arising from the increase in traffic loadings.
17.17
  
It is recognised that the c
onstruction of a new M49 junction is essential to realising 
the economic potential of the Severnside area, and it has been identified as a priority 
improvement to the Strategic Road Network by the LEP . Funding for this junction is being 
actively pursued. 
17.18
  
While the Council will see
k to direct HGV movement to the main routes to and through 
the area, employee related trips are more likely to use the local road network.  The use of 
the motorway network for short commuter trips is also likely to increase.  Use of the M5 
junctions 17 and 16 and the adjoining minor road network by Severnside development 
traffic would be of particular concern to the Council.  A green travel approach will be 
encouraged for employee related trips to minimise car based travel. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
163
17.19
  
In summary, comprehensive development at Severnside/Avonmouth will require the 
following three major road s
chemes, together with local road improvements:
		
❙
 
  
The M49 Junction
     
The principle of a junction on the M
49, serving the large scale employment 
development at Severnside and Avonmouth (in the Bristol administrative area).
  
❙
  
The
 
 Spine Road
    
It is anticipated that th
e spine road will become the realigned A403.  A large section of 
the spine road has already been constructed, however, the precise alignment of the 
final sections to the south is not yet known.  Cross-boundary working with Bristol City 
Council will need to ensure a suitable and sustainable linkage with the existing road 
network is provided. 
		
❙
 
 
Link Road to the M49 Juncti
on
     
The alignment of the link r
oad from the M49 junction to the spine road serving the 
Severnside area cannot be defined precisely until the location of the junction and the 
spine road alignment have been finally determined. 
Figure 14 – Diagrammatic Plan of the location of the M49 Junction and alignments of 
the Spine Road and Link Road
!
Spine Road
A
dop
t
ed
 highway
Complet
ed
, 
no
t 
ad
opted
R
oad
 Sc
he
me
 t
o 
be
 completed
Bristol/S
ou
th Gl
ou
cestershire 
B
ou
n
da
ry
KE
Y
Railway line
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
164
17.20
  
If these major road improvements are not delivered in combination with significant 
public transport impro
vements, then it is highly likely that the local road network serving 
Severnside would be unable to hold the anticipated level of traffic associated with further 
development.  Further development should therefore come forward with a comprehensive 
transport delivery strategy which include significant improvements to bus and rail services 
between Severnside, Avonmouth and Bristol.  
  
Partnership Priorities
17.
21
  
The coastal floodplain of th
e Severn Estuary used by wildfowl and waders straddles the 
boundary between Severnside and Avonmouth in the administrative area of Bristol City 
Council. The Council will work with:
		
❙
  
Bristol City Council and Natur
al England to: 
    
-
 
 
 
carry out a Habitats Regulat
ions Assessment on any new applications under 
Regulation 61 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 
		
❙
  
Bristol City Council, Brist
ol Port Company, RSPB, British Trust for Ornithology, Natural 
England and Avon Wildlife Trust regarding allocating land for Local Nature Reserves.
		
❙
  
Bristol City Council, the We
st of England Local Enterprise Partnership, Landowners, 
Natural England, Environment Agency, Marine Management Organisation and the 
Highways Agency to agree a strategy for development and secure funding for the 
strategic infrastructure.
Delivery
17.22
  
The purpose of the policy is, i
n partnership with Bristol City Council and the West of 
England Local Enterprise Partnership, to reach an agreement between landowners 
over the development/redevelopment of the Severnside area and the funding routes for 
delivering the strategic infrastructure. The delivery of brownfield land redevelopment will in 
addition be subject to the development management process.  
17.23
  
Grants and other fundin
g, including S106 contributions, will be sought for infrastructure 
improvements and the establishing and managing of wetland habitat and Local Nature 
Reserves.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
165
18.
 
Major infrastructure projects
Introduction 
18.1
  
Major Infrastructure Projects are large-scale projects of national importance such as new 
trunk roads, airports
, ports, power stations (including nuclear), electricity transmission 
lines, waste water treatment works and chemical works.
18.2
  
For the purpose of the Core S
trategy, Major Infrastructure Projects (MIPs) include those 
defined as Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIP) in the Planning Act 2008.  
Where associated or ancillary development is related to the construction or operation of 
a NSIP , these proposals will also fall under the policies set out in this chapter, as well as 
other relevant policies in the plan.
18.3
  
This chapter of the Core S
trategy deals with both Major Infrastructure Projects (MIPs) 
where South Gloucestershire Council is the determining planning authority, and NSIPs 
(such as the proposed Oldbury Nuclear New Build power station (NNB), where the 
Secretary of State makes the decision) as well as other applications to other agencies 
(such as to the Marine Management Organisation for a wharf) where the Council is a 
statutory consultee. 
18.4
  
Whether in its role as decisio
n maker, or as consultee for applications to other bodies 
the Council will seek to secure delivery on its key priorities as set out in the Sustainable 
Community Strategy (see Chapter 3 of the Core Strategy), and including ‘delivering 
well designed and sustainable development that integrates with and benefits existing 
communities’ (page 6 of Sustainable Community Strategy).
18.5
  
Policy CS36 is an overarch
ing policy relating to all Major Infrastructure Projects whether 
determined by the Secretary of State, this Council or any other agency.  Policy CS37 
applies to nuclear related development, including that associated with the proposed new 
power station, decommissioning of the existing or other proposals relating to nuclear 
waste. 
 POLICY CS36 - PROPOSALS FOR MAJOR INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
In its role either as determining authority for associated development, or as consultee 
for applications to other bodies, and within the provisions of national policy, the Council 
will, taking into consideration the nature, scale, extent and potential impact of any 
development proposals coming forward, seek to ensure that development makes a 
positive contribution to the implementation of its vision, strategic objectives and strategy 
for development as set out in Chapter 4 and where appropriate other relevant local plans 
and supporting documents.  South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
166
 
The Council will therefore seek compliance, as appropriate or relevant, with the following:
1.
  
the development and its a
ssociated / ancillary infrastructure, including any proposals 
for accommodation, education and training, employment, supply chain, transport, 
community, environmental and green infrastructure contribute to an overall balance of 
positive outcomes for local communities and the environment; and
2.
  
provision of  an assess
ment of how the consideration of alternatives has informed the 
proposals; and
3.
  
provision of a compreh
ensive assessment of environmental, social, transport and 
economic impacts (positive, negative and cumulative) of the proposal during the 
construction, operation and where necessary, the decommissioning and restoration 
stages, and the delivery of measures where appropriate to avoid, minimise, mitigate 
and/ or compensate for harm caused; and
4.
  
provision of contrib
utions to the Local Authority or other appropriate and agreed 
organisation to offset any adverse impacts and harm caused by the project through 
effective engagement with local communities and the Council at the pre-application 
stage. The objective will be to identify measures, projects and services to enhance the 
long term well-being and sustainability of the communities affected; and
5.  
 
in recognition of any burde
n and disturbance borne by the community in hosting a 
major national or regional infrastructure project, the Council may require appropriate 
packages of community benefits to be provided by the developer to offset and 
compensate the community for the burden imposed by hosting the project; and 
6.
  
local economic and comm
unity benefits are where feasible maximised, through 
agreement of strategies for procurement, employment, education, training and 
recruitment with the Council at an early stage of project development; and
7. 
  
meeting the requirem
ents of the legislative provisions of the Habitats Regulations 
2010; and 
8.
  
the provision of flood pr
otection measures to manage flood risk and, where feasible, 
deliver improvements in the locality. The provision of an assessment of anticipated 
impacts of the proposal on the surrounding marine and terrestrial environment and 
delivery of measures to manage and minimise any harm caused.  
In order to have sufficient information to be able to assess the effects of the proposals, 
the Council may request the preparation of management or delivery plans identifying 
the measures to be taken to maximise benefits and to mitigate and/or compensate for 
impacts where this is justified by national or local policy.  These plans should identify the 
timetables for delivery and the systems and resources that will be used to implement the 
proposed measures.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
167
  
Planning for major infrastructure projects
18.6 
  
Local authorities or other s
tatutory bodies would be the decision maker for any elements 
of associated or related development not included within the main DCO application, and 
national policy will be a material consideration as appropriate.
18.7
  
The Planning Inspect
orate (PINs) will examine applications for new nationally significant 
infrastructure development, using the criteria on national need, benefits and impacts as 
set out in relevant policy. For energy infrastructure this will include the relevant National 
Policy Statements for Energy Infrastructure (EN-1- 6), and, in accordance with the NPS, 
PINs may also consider other matters that are important and relevant to its decisions, 
including the Local Plan and Local Transport Plan. The local authority role is largely 
discretionary under the Act, however they will be invited to assess the adequacy of 
consultation and local impacts and report on these to PINs in a Local Impact Report. 
Similarly applications may be made to other organisations such as for a jetty the Marine 
Management Organisation, where the Local Authority is also a statutory consultee.
18.8
  
There are currently four pr
oposed Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects at the pre-
application stage which are either located within South Gloucestershire or are likely to 
affect South Gloucestershire within the Core Strategy period:
		
❙
  
a new nuclear power station near t
o Oldbury-on-Severn proposed by Horizon Nuclear 
Power, as identified in the National Policy Statement for Nuclear Power Generation 
(EN-6)
		
❙
  
National Grid Transmiss
ion Lines connecting Hinkley in Somerset with the Seabank 
Power Station at Avonmouth proposed by National Grid
		
❙
  
Avon Power Station: Prop
osed Gas Turbine (CCGT) Power Station at Severnside, 
proposed by Scottish Power
		
❙
  
Seabank 3:  SSE proposes t
wo new combined cycle gas turbines (CCGT) with a 
combined capacity of up to 1,400MW integrating with existing gas and electricity 
transmission infrastructure. These are proposed to be located within South 
Gloucestershire adjacent to the boundary with Bristol City Council and close to the 
existing Seabank power station. 
   
Other NSIPs/MIPs may co
me forward during the lifetime of the Core Strategy, including 
improvements to National Grid transmission lines connecting with the proposed new 
nuclear power station at Oldbury-on-Severn.
18.9
  
The cumulative impacts of ho
sting one or more national facilities in the area are of 
substantial importance and the impact on existing and future generations is likely to be 
significant. 
18.10
  
If the Council is to effect
ively respond and successfully engage with developers on 
behalf of our communities in respect of MIP proposals, this is likely to require significant 
resources beyond the capacity of the Council. 
18.11 
  
In order to address this, S
outh Gloucestershire Council will encourage developers to 
enter into Planning Performance Agreements and Service Level Agreements, appropriate 
to each project. These will define the working relationships, roles and responsibilities of South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
168
each of the parties to the agreement, and agree how this will be resourced.  Should pre-
application advice be required in advance of agreement of a PPA, the Council’s approved 
pre-application charges may apply.
18.12
  
It is important that the Loca
l Plan sets out a policy framework to enable the Council to 
assess and respond to MIP proposals coming forward, including for example: 
		
❙
  
providing advice to inf
orm project promoters during the development of their proposals 
for consultation and project development;
		
❙
  
responding to formal co
nsultations during project development and on applications 
to other determining bodies such as PINs and the Marine Management Organisation 
(MMO); 
		
❙
  
suggesting appropri
ate requirements for inclusion in the DCO and obligations (such as 
S106 and CIL); 
		
❙
  
determining applicat
ions for associated, ancillary or related development outside the 
Development Consent Order; and 
		
❙
  
assessing the adequa
cy of consultation, and
		
❙
   
assessing the impacts o
f the project both positive and negative in the Local Impact 
Report that PINs will invite this Council to submit after the application for any DCO is 
submitted,, and
		
❙
  
making representation
s as part of the formal examination of the DCO by PINs, and
		
❙
   
in determining any app
rovals subsequent to consent (including planning ‘conditions’), 
and in discharging functions as the enforcing authority.
18.13
  
The Core Strategy, oth
er development plan documents (DPDs) and neighbourhood 
plans (NDPs), may also provide relevant policy framework considerations. In addition, 
documents such as the Local Transport Plan, the Sustainable Community Strategy, the 
Economic Development Strategy and other relevant documents, may also be material 
considerations.
 
  
Consultation on major i
nfrastructure projects 
18.14
  
The 2008 Planning Act int
roduced a new duty on promoters to ensure that proposals for 
Major Infrastructure Projects are properly prepared and consulted on before they submit 
an application for development consent. 
18.15
  
As part of this pre-applic
ation process, the potential applicant must consult the relevant 
local authority about their proposals and have regard to any views they express. 
18.16
  
In addition to this, in orde
r to ensure that the development proposals take full account 
of local community views and the impact of any development in the area, the potential 
applicant must prepare and publicise a ‘Statement of Community Consultation’.  In 
preparing this, they must consult with and have regard to the views of any relevant local 
authority on the content of the statement. 
18.17
  
Under the process, early e
ngagement with communities is encouraged and opportunities 
are available for individuals and groups to have their views considered, including:www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
169
  
1.
  
during project developmen
t to give members of the public the opportunity to influence 
project development and provide feedback on options
  
2.
  
when applications are bein
g prepared for submission to PINs – at this stage 
developers are required to consult with local communities about their proposals and 
have regard to views expressed
  
3.
  
during PINs’ examination of ap
plications – when individuals and groups who have 
registered their interest can submit evidence in writing
  
4.
  
taking part in the open floo
r hearings chaired by PINs during their examination of 
proposals. 
    
This process is intend
ed to provide better and clearer opportunities for the public and 
local communities to get involved from an early stage in decisions that affect them and 
their area.
18.18
  
Applications submitted to t
he local planning authority for any elements of associated or 
related development not included within the main Development Consent Order (DCO) 
application, would be subject to the normal planning application consultation procedures.
18.19
  
The view of the Council is tha
t appropriate community benefits should be provided for 
such Major Infrastructure Projects, as set out in this chapter.  Any community benefits 
should also be subject to public consultation.
  
 
  
Mitigation and compens
ation
18.20 
 
Developments such as NSI
Ps and their associated infrastructure are of a scale that will 
be likely to have considerable impacts and opportunities.  In addition, the Council would 
want to understand better the inter-relationships and cumulative impacts of projects 
such as a new Nuclear Power Station at Oldbury with other major projects in the area 
such as the proposed new nuclear station at Hinkley, a potential extension to Seabank 
adjacent to the South Gloucestershire boundary, a potential new gas fired power station 
at Severnside, the new container terminal at Avonmouth and an expanding Bristol Port.
18.21
  
The scale and impact of MIPs ma
y require an appropriate and comprehensive package of 
developer contributions to mitigate and compensate for any new and increased levels of 
impact and harm. These contributions will be negotiated as part of the planning process, 
including through section 106 agreements and the Community Infrastructure Levy when 
implemented.
18.22
  
In addition the Council may re
quire packages of community benefits to be provided 
by the developer to offset and compensate the community for the burden imposed by 
hosting the project. Any such fund will be used to off-set the burden on the locality, and 
would identify potential legacy uses, including transport, social, economic and community 
infrastructure which would benefit the community in the long term. 
18.23
  
Community benefits which go b
eyond the requirements of the Planning Acts may be 
sought through the provisions of the Local Government Acts, or other legislation, or 
alternatively through voluntary agreement with the project provider, or in accordance with 
an industry protocol.
18.24
  
Policies CS36 and CS37 set ou
t how the Council intends to work with applicants, local South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
170
communities and statutory consultees to agree a strategy for minimising negative 
impacts of the proposals and maximising the benefits, in line with the Council’s vision and 
priorities, as set out in its Community Strategy, Council Plan, Local Transport Plans and 
policies in this Core Strategy and other DPDs/SPDs and NDPs.
Delivery
18.25
  
Where appropriate, SP
Ds may be brought forward to set out a more detailed policy 
framework for Major Infrastructure Projects. Where applications for NSIPs are submitted 
to PINs* the Council will seek to ensure delivery of Policies CS36 and CS37 through 
negotiations with the developer, the preparation of a Local Impact Report and 
submissions to any Examination in Public. A recommendation will then be made by PINs 
to the Secretary of State who will consider and determine the application for development 
consent. Where applications for associated and/or related development are submitted to 
this Council, this will be delivered through the development management process. Where 
applications are made to any other body this Council will seek delivery of Policies CS36 
and CS37 in its role as consultee.
18.26
  
Monitoring of the deliver
y of the project will be required to assess its effects as it is 
implemented, and to assess the extent to which they avoid, minimise, mitigate and/or 
compensate for negative impacts and align with the objectives, plans and strategies of 
the Council.  This will include the monitoring of obligations to demonstrate that funding 
has been spent on the mitigation and compensation measures agreed with the MIP 
promoter.
18.27
  
The Council may request del
ivery plans where appropriate to ensure action results in 
tangible and timely impact mitigation, investment and improvement for local places and 
communities as part of any related conditions, requirements and/or obligations.  
 
*Under the Localism Act 2011 PINs has replaced the Infrastructure Planning Commission and decisions on applications for 
development consent will be determined by the Secretary of State.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
171
Nuclear power stations in the Oldbury on Severn area
  
Planning context
18.28
  
Over the plan period, develo
pment proposals are expected to come forward in respect of 
the decommissioning of the existing nuclear power station at Oldbury and the proposed 
new nuclear power station on land adjacent to the existing station. 
18.29
  
It is also possible that pr
oposals may come forward in relation to nuclear waste arising 
either from the existing station or from elsewhere. (see paragraphs 18.42 and 18.43)
18.30
  
In its National Policy Stateme
nt for Nuclear Power Generation (NPS) (EN-6), the 
government has included a site near to Oldbury-on-Severn as potentially suitable for a 
new nuclear power station by 2025.  However it acknowledges that nomination does not 
prevent the SoS determining that the adverse impacts are greater than the benefits and 
that consent on a site could be refused.
18.31
  
Whilst acknowledging t
hat the proposed new build nuclear project has the potential to 
bring benefits to the community, the Council considers that there are currently a number 
of fundamental issues relating specifically to Oldbury that are unresolved, and these are 
set out in policies CS36 and CS37.   
18.32
  
If a proposal for Oldbury i
s brought forward, it will be the subject of a DCO application 
considered by PINs.  Any associated or related development not included within this 
DCO application or within any application for consent to another statutory body will be 
considered by South Gloucestershire Council through the normal planning application 
procedure.  
18.33
  
The Council in its role as a statut
ory consultee and /or determining authority will evaluate 
the adequacy of consultation undertaken by the developer as well as the impacts of any 
emerging proposals from the developer and make the case for appropriate planning 
mitigation, compensation and legitimate community benefit.  
18.34
  
The planning, constru
ction and implementation of this project will be likely to have a major 
impact and legacy on the district and its communities for many decades.  Paragraphs 
18.20 to 18.43 sets out the Council’s approach to impact mitigation and community 
benefits. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
172
  
POLICY CS37 - NUCLEAR RELATED DEVELOPMENT
In its role either as determining authority for associated development, or as consultee for 
applications to other bodies, and within the provisions of national policy, the Council will 
when assessing and responding to emerging proposals for nuclear related development 
including that associated with or ancillary to the existing or proposed Oldbury Power 
Stations, will seek to ensure compliance, where appropriate or relevant, with the 
following:
1.
  
any relevant developm
ent plan documents and neighbourhood plans should shape the 
approach to the development of proposals for nuclear related development and any 
associated development or infrastructure; and
2.
  
in order to minimise impa
ct and maximise re-use of existing facilities and materials, 
opportunities have been taken where feasible to integrate the requirements of a new 
build power station at Oldbury with the proposed decommissioning of the existing 
power stations; and
3.
  
highways and transpo
rt proposals for Oldbury NNB form part of a robust transport and 
logistics plan that has regard to Policies CS36 and CS37 and minimises  
adverse transport impacts to an acceptable level, including those arising during the 
  
construction, opera
tion and decommissioning and restoration stages.  Proposals 
should where feasible make a positive contribution to transportation policy objectives 
in the locality, and should include multi-modal solutions and investment that 
encourages travel by public transport, walking and cycling; and 
4.
  
the requirements of th
e temporary workers should be met in a way that minimises 
impact on the local housing market to an acceptable level, including the ability 
of those on low incomes to access the private rented sector, affordable housing 
and other housing services, or result in unacceptable adverse economic, social or 
environmental impacts; and 
6. 
  
the siting and design of as
sociated development should be informed by a 
consideration of legacy uses, so that investment in elements such as infrastructure, 
buildings, ecological and landscape works brings long term benefits.  Where 
appropriate delivery plans should be agreed for legacy uses during the pre-application 
process that will inform the approach to the design and layout of the associated 
development sites, as well as the framing of a S106 and/or other agreements and CIL 
payments; and
7. 
  
the scheme layout and des
ign and the scale of green infrastructure proposed 
should avoid, minimise mitigate or compensate for visual, landscape and ecological 
impacts on the local and wider area, as well as on cultural and historic aspects of 
the landscape, both in the short and longer term.  Proposals will be expected to be 
commensurate with the scale of the development, and the extent of its impact; andwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
173
 
8.
  
the provision of procur
ement, employment, education, training and recruitment 
strategies and delivery plans should be agreed by the Council at an early stage 
of project development, with an objective to maximise employment, business and 
training opportunities for the local communities both in the short and longer term; and
9.
   
where community infrast
ructure is provided for construction workers, for example park 
and ride facilities, shops, healthcare and sports and leisure facilities, where feasible 
this should be sited and designed so that it can be made available for community use 
during the construction phase and ultimately, where appropriate, serve a community 
legacy use. Where there would be additional impacts or demands on existing facilities 
the Council will seek appropriate contributions for off-site facilities; and
10.
 
proposals should inclu
de appropriate measures for promoting social cohesion and 
community safety; and
11.
   
the burden and disturba
nce borne by the community in hosting a major national or 
regional nuclear related infrastructure project should be recognised; and appropriate 
packages of community benefits will be sought to offset and compensate the 
community for the burden and disturbance imposed by hosting the project.
12.
 
any proposal (outside a D
CO) to treat, store or dispose of Very Low level, Low Level 
or Intermediate Level Waste or to treat or to store spent fuel arising from the existing 
nuclear power station or any future nuclear development or from elsewhere  within or 
outside the Council area, in an existing or proposed facility on or off the nuclear site 
would need to:
 
-
 
be strongly justified
 
-
 
demonstrate that the p
lanning impacts are acceptable; and
 
-
  
demonstrate that the e
nvironmental, social and economic benefits outweigh any 
negative impacts.
It is possible that as the project develops, due to unforeseen consequences resulting 
from the construction and operation of Oldbury, the Council may require additional 
information from, or works to be carried out by the developer and may, as a result, seek 
to re-negotiate any mitigation or compensation package in order to off-set any additional 
impacts or burdens borne by the community affected.  The developer should build in 
review mechanisms to monitor the full range of impacts, and to review the adequacy of 
mitigation or compensation measures and to make adjustments as necessary.  
  
Proposed nuclear new bu
ild at Oldbury
18.35
  
The nominated site area (a
s shown on the Policies Map) is located on the eastern bank 
of the Severn Estuary, with tidal mudflats and the power station lagoon to the west, and 
the historic, flat and open pastoral landscape of the Severn Levels to the east. It adjoins 
the north eastern boundary of the existing nuclear power station at Oldbury and covers 
an area of 150 hectares. The project promoter Horizon Nuclear Power plans to deliver a 
total of around 6,000 MW of capacity across its two sites at Wylfa in Anglesey and near 
Oldbury-on-Severn in South Gloucestershire. Whilst Wylfa has been selected as the lead South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
174
site, work to support future Development Consent and Site Licence applications is being 
progressed with the aim of achieving first generation of low carbon electricity at Oldbury 
by 2025.
18.36
  
If granted development co
nsent by the Secretary of State, a new power station could 
comprise nuclear reactors, cooling infrastructure, interim waste storage facilities and other 
buildings and facilities necessary for a nuclear power station. Associated development 
is likely to include both permanent and temporary works including modifications to the 
electricity transmission infrastructure, access roads and/or highway improvements, 
implementation of a flood defence strategy for the site and the surrounding area, a 
marine offloading facility and other facilities for the delivery of construction materials and 
abnormal loads, as well as park and ride and accommodation and other facilities for 
construction workers.
18.37
  
Initial estimates from t
he scheme promoter, Horizon Nuclear Power, indicate that the 
proposals could represent an investment of around £8bn, creating around 800 direct 
permanent jobs.  When completed, the power station would generate up to 3,300MW of 
low carbon energy.
18.38
  
Approximately 5,000 wo
rkers are expected on site at the peak of construction. It is 
proposed to construct either two or three reactors at the site, depending on the final 
choice of technology through a staggered construction programme expected to last 6 
years, the length of which is dependent on which reactor design is chosen for the site. 
18.39
  
A Shadow Planning Perf
ormance Agreement has been agreed between the Council and 
Horizon Nuclear Power at Oldbury. While the PPA does not bind either party to any future 
decisions or recommendations it does set out the arrangements to which the parties are 
working, ensures a project managed and efficient approach to the work required and 
fosters mutual trust, while at the same time ensuring the independence and impartiality of 
both parties as well as transparency of process. The agreed PPA Vision sets out what the 
project should achieve, including:
		
❙
  
a contribution to the natio
nal need for secure low carbon electricity and replacement 
of decommissioning nuclear capacity in accordance with applicable and current 
Government policy
		
❙
  
completion of the Developmen
t Proposal and the supply of electricity by 2025, so far 
as reasonably possible 
		
❙
  
a proper assessment an
d scrutiny of the environmental, social and economic impacts 
(both positive and negative)
		
❙
  
a contribution of socio-e
conomic benefits to the local community, both during 
construction and in operation 
		
❙
  
a positive contribution t
o sustainability and design quality, as well as an acceptable 
minimisation of environmental impact 
		
❙
 
compliance with operatio
nal, safety and security requirements 
		
❙
 
delivery of appropriat
e mitigation, compensation and community benefits; and
 
  
❙
  
alignment where appro
priate with the local communities aspirations for the social, 
economic, transport and environmental future of their area as set out in spatial 
planning and other relevant policies applicable to the Development Site. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
175
18.40
  
The ability to negotiate community benefit packages, as distinct from normal S106 and 
other requirement
s, will be sought by South Gloucestershire Council if the local area is 
to host a national infrastructure facility with all its associated impacts for a period of up to 
160 years. As a result of the burden and disturbance borne by the community in hosting 
such a project it is important that the Council on behalf of its residents achieves an 
appropriate level of community gain. 
 
The existing power station at Oldbury 
18.41
  
Generation of electricity at t
he existing nuclear power station at Oldbury ceased on 29 
February 2012. The Council considers in order to minimise impact on the locality, it will be 
important where possible and practical to re-use the existing power station facilities and/
or land, to ensure the integration of the nuclear new build (NNB) with the existing station 
as far as is possible. This may require a re-consideration of the proposed intermediate 
and/ end states for the existing power station site.  Proposals and programmes or works 
associated with the decommissioning of the existing station will be assessed against the 
policies in this plan. 
  
Nuclear waste 
18.4
2
  
The interim storage of ra
dioactive waste and spent fuel on site forms an integral part 
of any nuclear power station and associated facilities.  To provide long term temporary 
storage for such materials on a new build site would be expected to form part of any 
DCO application.  It is planned that each power station site will have its own store for 
Intermediate Level Waste and this is clear in the NPS.
18.43
  
Should shared storag
e be identified as a possibility during the plan period or proposals 
for the treatment, storage or disposal of Low Level or Very Low Level Waste from nuclear 
sites be proposed at other waste disposal sites in South Gloucestershire, the Council 
would expect such proposals to demonstrate that the benefits of any proposals outweigh 
the impacts.
 
 
Mitigation and compensation
 
18.44
  
The scale and impact of the pr
oposed Oldbury NNB project will require an appropriate 
and comprehensive package of developer contributions to mitigate and compensate 
for any new and increased levels of impact and harm associated with this major project. 
These contributions will be negotiated as part of the planning process, including through 
section 106 agreements and the Community Infrastructure Levy when implemented.
18.45
  
In addition the Council wil
l require appropriate packages of community benefits to be 
provided by the developer to offset and compensate the community for the burden 
imposed by hosting the project. This fund will be used to off-set the burden on the 
locality, and will identify potential legacy uses, including transportation infrastructure – 
such as park and ride facilities, as well as other environmental improvements and social, 
economic and community infrastructure which would benefit the community in the long 
term. South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
176
Delivery
18.46
 
See paragraphs 18.25 – 18
.27.
  
Severn Tidal Power
18.
47
  
The Severn Estuary is on
e of the UK’s largest estuaries with potential tidal energy 
resource of between 4.4%-5% of all UK energy.  
18.48
  
The government has rec
ently concluded that it does not at present see a strategic case 
to bring forward a tidal energy scheme in the Severn Estuary.  The Severn Tidal Power 
feasibility study showed that a tidal power scheme in the Estuary could cost in excess 
of £30bn, making it high cost and high risk in comparison to other ways of generating 
electricity.  The government considers therefore that it would be very costly to deliver and 
very challenging to attract the necessary investment from the private sector alone.
18.49
  
The report did however r
ecommend that a Severn tidal project should not be ruled out as 
a longer term option if market conditions change, recognising the significant UK resource 
that the Severn Estuary presents, and its potential for making an important contribution 
to the UK’s renewable energy targets and wider climate change and energy goals in the 
future.
18.50
  
South Gloucestershi
re Council supports the government’s conclusions and considers 
that the significant environmental impacts on the conservation objectives and integrity of 
the Severn Estuary European (Natura 2000 and Ramsar) site, its marine environment and 
natural habitats, as well as the landscape and visual impacts, outweighs at this point any 
advantages in terms of renewable energy generation based on tidal power technology 
currently available. It is recognised that future schemes will need to be considered with 
regard to their energy generation potential in relation to their environmental impact.  www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
177
19.
 
Implementation and monitoring
19.1
  
Monitoring and review are key components of the new planning system. Local plans 
need to be continually r
eviewed and revised, to be able to assess the success of the 
development plan documents and to ensure they are updated to reflect changing 
circumstances nationally, regionally and locally.
19.2
  
Implementation of the policies c
ontained in the Core Strategy will require action by a 
range of public, private and voluntary sector bodies working in partnership.  In particular, 
parish and town councils, voluntary and community groups, local businesses and public 
sector agencies that work actively in our communities.  The Council works with a wide 
range of partners, both statutory and non-statutory.  The partnerships that are formed will 
vary both geographically and thematically throughout the period of the Core Strategy. 
19.3
  
The Core Strategy’s role i
s to provide a clear and robust framework for development in 
order that investment and action can be co-ordinated and geared to efficient and effective 
delivery.
Table 4 – Implementation Framework
Policy
Potential Implementation Mechanisms Lead Agencies
CS1 
Design
•
  
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
design & access statem
ents
•
  
area design framework
s, masterplans, design 
codes, site specific briefs and design guidance. 
•
 
Building for Life 
•
 
supplementary plannin
g guidance
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Landowners 
•
 
Communities 
CS2 
Green 
Inf
rastructure
• determination of planning applications
• 
 
Green Infrastructure S
trategy/supplementary 
planning document
• Neighbourhood Planning
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Partners
•
 
Communities 
CS3 
Renewa
ble & 
Low Carbon 
Energy
•
  
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Council strategies
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities
CS4 
Distric
t Heat 
Networks
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Council strategies
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
CommunitiesSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
178
CS5
Location of 
Development
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities
CS6
Infrastru
cture 
& Developer 
Contributions
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
development plan docume
nt on CIL formulae
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities 
CS7
Strategic
 
Transport 
Infrastructure
•
 
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport  
•
 
Schemes
•
 
Joint Local Transport P
lan
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
compulsory purchase order
s
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
 
•
  
Public transport ope
rators 
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Network Rail
CS8
Improving
 
Accessibility
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
  
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD/ supplementary 
planning document
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities
CS9
Environmen
t 
and Heritage
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities 
CS10
Minerals
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Mineral operators
•
 
developers   
CS11
Distr
ibution 
of Economic 
Development 
Land
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Communities  
CS12
Safeguarded
 
Areas for 
Economic 
Development
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Communities 
CS13
Non-
Safegu
arded 
Sites 
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities 
CS14
Town Cent
res & 
Retail
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Town centre operators
•
 
Developers  
•
 
Communities 
1
the West of England authorities work jointly to deliver the Local Transport Plan and major transport schemes through the Joint 
Transport Executive Committee.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
179
CS15
Distribution of 
Housing
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities 
CS16
Housing De
nsity
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities 
CS17
Housing 
Div
ersity
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities 
CS18
Affordab
le 
Housing
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
S106 contributions
•
  
Affordable Housing a
nd Extra Care Housing 
Supplementary Planning Document
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities 
CS19
Rural H
ousing 
Exception Sites
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
Affordable Housing a
nd Extra Care Housing 
Supplementary Planning Document
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Landowners 
•
 
Parish councils 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities
CS20
Extra Car
e 
Housing
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Polic
ies DPD
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities 
CS21
Gypsy & 
Tra
veller 
Accommodation
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Landowners 
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council
•
 
Communities South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
180
CS22
Travelling 
Showpeople
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Landowners
•
 
Communities 
CS23
Community
 
Infrastructure & 
Cultural Activity
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
partner investment p
rogrammes
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Partners 
•
 
Communities 
CS24 
Green 
In
frastructure, 
Sport & 
Recreation 
Standards
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
  
Green Infrastructure S
trategy/supplementary 
planning document
•
 
S106 contributions
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities 
CS25 
North
 Fringe
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Design documents
•
 
Concept Statements
•
  
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport 
Schemes
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Bristol City Council
•
  
Public transport ope
rators
•
  
Other private sector 
p
roviders
•
 
Communities 
CS26
Cribbs/
Pa
tchway New 
Neighbourhood
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Concept Statement
•
  
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport 
Schemes
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Supplementary Planni
ng Document
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Communities 
CS27 
East of H
arry 
Stoke New 
Neighbourhood
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
master plan and design c
odes
•
  
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport 
Schemes
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Supplementary Planni
ng Document
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Communities 
CS28
UWE
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Concept Statement and m
aster plan
•
  
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport 
Schemes
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
 
UWE
•
 
Communities 
1
the West of England authorities work jointly to deliver the Local Transport Plan and major transport schemes through the Joint 
Transport Executive Committee.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
181
CS29
East Fringe
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
  
Bid for Investment in Lo
cal Major Transport 
Schemes
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
heritage strategies
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
  
Public transport operators
•
 
English Heritage
•
  
Local conservation g
roups 
•
 
Communities  
CS30
Yate & Chip
ping 
Sodbury
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Yate/Chipping Sodb
ury Transport Package
•
 
Cycle City Project
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
  
West of England author
ities
1
•
  
Public transport operators
•
 
Network Rail
•
 
Communities
CS31
North Yat
e New
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
master plan & design cod
es
•
 
SPD
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers
CS32
Thornbury
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Businesses 
•
 
Communities 
CS33
Thornbury
 
Housing 
Opportunity
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Masterplan framework
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Developers 
CS34
Rural
 Areas
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
Rural Transport Pack
age 
•
 
parish plans
•
 
Neighbourhood Plannin
g
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
  
Affordable housing pr
oviders 
approved by the Council 
•
  
Public transport ope
rators
•
 
Parish councils
•
 
Communities 
CS35
Severns
ide
•
 
Strategic Framewor
k Plan & Agreement
•
 
Concept Statements
•
 
determination of pla
nning applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Habitats Regulations
 Assessment Grant
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Landowners 
•
 
Developers 
•
 
Bristol City Council
•
 
Natural England
•
 
Environment Agency
•
 
Highways Agency
•
  
Marine Managemen
t 
Organisation
•
  
Lower Severn Interna
l 
Drainage Board
•
 
Network Rail
1
the West of England authorities work jointly to deliver the Local Transport Plan and major transport schemes through the Joint 
Transport Executive Committee.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
182
CS36 
Proposals 
for Major 
Infrastructure 
Projects
•
 
Determination of deve
lopment consent order
•
  
Determination of Mar
ine Management Organisation 
application
•
  
Determination of ass
ociated /related planning 
applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Community Benefit Fun
d
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Secretary of State
•
  
Major Infrastructu
re Planning 
Unit
•
  
Marine Managemen
t 
Organisation
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Statutory Agencies
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities
CS37 
Oldbur
y Power 
Station
•
 
Determination of deve
lopment consent order
•
  
Determination of Mar
ine Management Organisation 
application
•
  
Determination of ass
ociated /related planning 
applications
•
 
S106 contributions/
CIL
•
 
Community Benefit Fun
d
•
 
Policies, Sites and Pl
aces DPD
•
 
Secretary of State
•
  
Major Infrastructu
re Planning 
Unit
•
  
Marine Managemen
t 
Organisation
•
  
South Gloucester
shire 
Council
•
 
Statutory Agencies
•
 
Developers
•
 
Communities
 
Monitoring
19.4
  
The Authority’s Monitoring Report (AMR) will be the principal mechanism for monitoring 
the Core Strategy and o
ther documents in the Local Plan, bringing together all the 
necessary information in one place subject to any changes arising from future reforms 
to the planning system.  It will be published annually and will provide a commentary on 
progress with the delivery of the major projects and developments set out in the Core 
Strategy, as well as include an assessment of:
  
❙
   
whether policies and relat
ed targets or milestones in DPDs have been met or if 
progress is being made towards meeting them or, where they are not being met or not 
on track to being achieved, the reasons why
		
❙
  
what impact the policies are h
aving in respect of national and local policy targets and 
any other targets identified in DPDs
		
❙
  
whether the policies in the D
PDs need adjusting or replacing because they are not 
working as intended
		
❙
 
whether the policies need c
hanging to reflect changes in national policy; and
		
❙
 
whether policies or propo
sals need changing, and the actions needed to achieve this.
19.5
  
Table 5 sets outs how the Cor
e Strategy will be monitored for the policies in Part 1 of the 
Core Strategy. The policies in Part 2 set out the framework for delivering the Strategy for 
Development across the district.  Each of the policies is followed by an explanation of how 
it will be delivered. These explanations are supported by the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
and, in the case of the new neighbourhoods and housing opportunity area, by a Delivery 
Statement. These have been produced as separate documents. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
183
Table 5 – Monitoring 
a). Responding to climate change and high quality design and
❙
  
Promoting high quality d
esign that responds to its context, the distinctive assets of the district 
and creates ‘sense of place’ and civic pride. 
❙
  
Using design to create att
ractive, cohesive, safe and inclusive communities with better 
integration between housing, jobs, services, public transport and facilities, so that people 
lead healthier lives and have the opportunity to reduce their CO2 footprint and adapt to the 
impacts of climate change. 
❙
  
Protecting and enhan
cing valued open spaces and green links to create a network of 
connected and multi-functional, attractive and accessible spaces for people and wildlife, and 
to provide climate change adaptation and mitigation functions.
❙
  
Providing opportunit
ies for flora and fauna to adapt to climate change. 
❙
  
Ensuring that environm
ents for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of 
sustainable communities. 
❙
  
Promoting energy effi
cient development and new sources of decentralised, renewable and 
low carbon sources of energy.
❙
  
Understanding and red
ucing susceptibility to flood risk. 
❙
  
Managing the impacts of urb
an intensification.
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS1    High Quality Design
CS2    Green Infrastructure
CS3    
 
Renewable and 
Low Carb
on Energy 
Generation
CS4    
 
Renewable and Low 
Carb
on District Heat 
Networks
Housing Quality – Building for Life Assessments
Number of applications refused on design grounds 
(Proposed New Indicator)
Proportion of appeals won where policy CS1 was a material consideration 
(Proposed New Indicator)
Strategic GI network indicator – To be set in the Green Infrastructure SPD
Number of open spaces managed to Green Flag Award standard
Area of SSSI lost as a result of built development 
Statutory Greenbelt change
Renewable energy generation by installed capacity and type 
Per capita CO2 emissions in the district
Percentage of major developments providing a renewable or low carbon heat 
generation network or CHP , or connecting to an existing facility
(Proposed New Indicator)
 South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
184
b). Managing future development
❙
  
Concentrating the maj
ority of new development to take advantage of existing services and 
facilities and higher levels of accessibility. 
❙
  
Locating development wh
ere it will provide the opportunity to minimise the need to travel and 
allow safe and convenient access to services by walking, cycling and public transport. 
❙
 
Recognising and protec
ting the identity and heritage of existing communities.
❙
  
Promoting greater self
-containment and enhancing the service centre role of the market 
towns of Thornbury, Yate and Chipping Sodbury. 
❙
 
Supporting local hous
ing needs and services in villages. 
❙
 
Protecting the Green B
elt and the countryside from inappropriate development. 
❙
  
Providing a range of inf
rastructure, together with integration and access, in step with new 
development.
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS5
 
Location of Development
CS6
  
Infrastructure a
nd 
Developer Contribuions
None set as these policies are covered in more detail by the Part 2 policies, 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and the Development Statement.
 
 
c). Tackling congestion and improving accessibility
❙
  
Reducing congestion and a
ir pollution by improving accessibility by means other than the 
private car. 
❙
  
Widely improving and enh
ancing opportunities for walking, cycling and using public 
transport, and particularly to significant destinations, such as educational establishments, 
hospitals and employment areas. 
❙
  
Completing delivery of the G
reater Bristol Bus Network and delivering the North Fringe to 
Hengrove package, the link from Temple Meads - Emersons Green and the Greater Bristol 
Metro Project.
 
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS7
  
Strategic Transport 
Infrastructure
CS8
 
Improving Accessibili
ty
Congestion – reduction in the average journey time per mile in the morning 
peak on the Avon Ring Road  
Amount of new residential development within 30 minutes (public transport 
time) of a GP, hospital, primary school, secondary school, major retail 
centres and areas of employment
Number of bus passenger journeys
Index rate of cycle trips (at a representative number of cycling points) 
S106 contributions to green commuting 
Travel to school: Proportion of school pupils who travel to school via modes 
other than by car
Travel to work:  Proportion of workers who travel to their place of work via 
modes other than by private car (Proposed New Indicator*)
NB Progress with delivery of the major transport infrastructure projects will be reported in the AMR as commentary.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
185
d). Managing the environment and heritage
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the character and distinctiveness of the district’s heritage assets 
and maximising their contribution to quality of place.
❙
  
Conserving and enhan
cing the district’s distinctive landscapes, natural environmental 
resources and biodiversity. 
❙
  
Safeguarding minera
l resources for the longer term while ensuring an adequate and steady 
supply to meet identified needs. 
❙
  
Safeguarding the qual
ity of natural resources and ensuring prudent use. 
❙
  
Protecting land, air
, aqueous environments, buildings and people from pollution. 
 
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS9
  
Managing the 
Environment and 
Heritag
e
CS10
 
Minerals
Proportion o
f appeals dismissed where Conservation Area and/or listed 
buildings and/or AONB was a material consideration   
Number of trees given Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs)
Improved local biodiversity – active management of local sites
Change in areas of biodiversity importance  
Change in priority habitats and species, by type  
Amount of best and most versatile agricultural land lost to built development 
(Proposed New Indicator)  
Proportion of planning permissions for large residential and employment 
developments incorporating SuDS 
(Proposed New Indicator)  
Number of ‘poor’ air quality days when pollution exceeds National Air Quality 
Objectives   
Annual average nitrogen dioxide levels 
Number of planning permissions granted contrary to Environment Agency 
advice on flooding or water quality grounds 
Production of primary land won aggregates 
Size of landbank for crushed rock 
Area of land affected by permissions for major built development in the 
Mineral Resource Areas
 South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
186
e). Maintaining economic prosperity
❙
   
Ensuring that South Glouc
estershire plays its role in making the West of England economy 
one of the most prosperous, innovative and vibrant in Europe, by providing a sufficient range 
of employment land for existing and new businesses of all sizes. 
❙
    
Providing for the key se
ctors of advanced engineering, including aerospace and defence; 
finance and business services; higher and further education; retail; environmental 
technologies and hi-tech industries. 
❙
   
Taking opportunities to p
rovide more balanced employment across the district so that every 
community has access to a range of employment opportunities locally. 
❙
   
Ensuring provision of app
ropriate communication technologies.
❙
   
Enhancing town centr
e vitality and viability.
 
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS11
  
Distribution of Economic 
Development Land
CS12
  
Safeguarded Areas fo
r 
Economic Development
CS13
  
Non-Safeguarded 
Econom
ic Development 
Sites
CS14
 
Town Centres and Retai
l
Estimate of the total number of jobs (employees in employment) by sector 
and geographical policy area 
(Proposed new Indicator)
Number of jobs arising from implemented planning permissions by 
geographical policy area
New employment development (floorspace & jobs) compared to the number 
of new residential developments in the North Fringe Policy Area  
(Proposed New indicator) 
Number of new business start ups
Small business in the district showing business growth
Worklessness: 
a)
 
Unemployment ILO mea
sure (official district level estimate);
b)
 
Unemployment JSA Clai
mant Count (sub-district level estimate)
(Proposed New indicator)
Total amount of additional employment floorspace completed by type (use 
class) and geographical policy area
Employment land available by type
Losses of employment land to residential development within 
safeguarded areas 
Changes in employment use classes within safeguarded employment areas 
by geographical policy area
(Proposed New Indicator
Losses of economic development uses to residential 
development outside of the safeguarded areas by area. 
Total amount of floorspace for  ‘town centre uses’
Amount of completed retail development and proportion in 
town/district/local centres 
Total primary retail frontage in town centres and proportion in A1 Use 
Percentage of vacant A1 units in the town/district centres
Mix of occupied ‘A uses’ in town / district centres 
Percentage of households within 500m of a food store selling 
basic food provisions 
New employment development in the three Enterprise Areas
(Proposed New Indicator)www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
187
f). Providing housing and community infrastructure
❙
   
Providing a range of hou
sing to meet the needs of the whole community. 
❙
  
Providing decent and a
ffordable housing in accessible locations and for local needs in rural 
areas. 
❙
  
Improving health and well-
being by provision and access to a range of social, cultural, 
community, recreational facilities and green space in step with development, whilst realising 
opportunities to redress any deficit. 
❙
  
Ensuring that environm
ents for play are delivered as an integral part of the design of 
sustainable communities.
Core Strategy Policies
Measures
CS15
 
Distribution of Housing
CS16
 
Housing Density
CS17
 
Housing Diversity
CS18
 
Affordable Housing
CS19
 
Housing Exception Sites
C
S20
 
Extra Care Housing
CS21
  
Gypsy and Traveller 
Ac
commodation
CS22
 
Travelling Showpeo
ple
CS23
  
Community and Cultural
 
Activity
CS24
  
Green Infrastruc
ture, 
Sport and Recreation 
Standards
Net additional dwellings provided by area  
Net additional dwellings in future years; and Managed Housing 
Delivery 
New and converted dwellings on previously developed land
Percentage of new dwellings completed (on fully completed sites of 10+ 
dwellings) at: i) < 30 dwellings per ha, ii) 30 - 50 dwellings per ha, iii) > 50 
dwellings per ha
Proportions of 1, 2, 3 and 4 bed dwellings and flats built by tenure
Percentage of affordable housing negotiated and delivered on 
qualifying sites  
Gross affordable housing completions 
Affordable housing completions by tenure
Number of dwellings completed on Rural Housing exception sites 
(Proposed New Indicator)
Number of Extra Care housing units completed 
Net additional Gypsy and Traveller pitches 
Vacancy rate for South Gloucestershire’s authorised Gypsy/Traveller Sites 
Amount of completed community facilities
(Proposed New Indicator)
Amount of completed leisure development and the percentage 
within town centres 
Provision of new Green Infrastructure – To be set in the Green 
Infrastructure Supplementary Planning DocumentSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
188
Appendix 1 – Local plans and strategies
 
 
South Gloucestershire Council
 
A Vision for the North Fringe 2010 and Beyond, April 2002
Biodiversity Action Plan
Children & Young Peoples Plan 
Climate Change Strategy & Action Plan, 2006
Conservation Area SPGs and SPDs
Cultural Strategy 
Cycling and Walking Strategies (Local Transport Plan)
Design Checklist Supplementary Planning Document, 2007
Economic Development Strategy 2008-2015
Heritage Strategy 
Housing Strategy 2008-2013 
Joint Accommodation & Care Strategy
Landscape Character Assessment Supplementary Planning Document
Library Delivery Plan 
Locally Listed Buildings Supplementary Planning Document, 2008
Minerals and Waste Local Plan
Our Area: Our Health – The Annual Report of the Director of Public Health
Physical Activity and Sports Plan 2007-2009
Play Policy and Strategy 2006 
Schools Commissioning Strategy 
South Gloucestershire Local Plan
Sustainable Community Strategy
The Council Plan
 
West of England
Forest of Avon ‘Forest Plan’
Greater Bristol Strategic Transport Study (2006)
Joint Local Transport Plan
The Green Infrastructure Study for the West of England
The vision for the West of England in 2026 and delivery priorities
Avon Biodiversity Action Plan
 
Other
Bristol Health Services Plan
Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan
Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (South Glos NHS)
Parish plans & village design statements
Police, Fire, Ambulance Service Delivery Plans
Regional Cultural Infrastructure Development Strategy (People, Places & Spaces) 
Strategy for the Severn Estuary
SW Regional Cultural Strategy (A Better Place to be…) 
Thornbury Town Centre Strategy
Yate Community Planwww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
189
Appendix 2 – Replaced Local Plan policies
 
 
 
On 27 September 2007 the government agreed that all the policies in the South Gloucestershire Minerals and 
Waste Local Plan (adopted May 2002) could be “saved” (except for Policies 2, 5 7, 12, 15, 19, 25 and 30) until 
replaced by policies in documents prepared as part of the South Gloucestershire Local Development Framework 
(now referred to as the ‘Local Plan’).
The government agreed on 6 January 2009 that all the policies of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan (adopted 
2006) could be “saved” (except for Policies L6, L19, T10, T11, T13 and H8) pending the production of the ‘Local 
Plan’. Table A1 contains a list of policies from the adopted South Gloucestershire Minerals and Waste Local Plan 
and the adopted South Gloucestershire Local Plan which will no longer be “saved” on the adoption of the Core 
Strategy, as the principles contained within them will be fully covered by the Core Strategy.  
 
Those Local Plan policies previously “saved” but not listed in Table A1 will remain saved until superseded by the 
adoption of future local plan documents. 
Table A1 
Schedule of Replaced South Gloucestershire Council Local Plan Policies
South Gloucestershire Minerals and Waste Local Plan:
Policy
  
Title
31
   
Meeting Future Require
ments: Crushed Rock
35
 
  
Meeting Future Require
ments: Clay
South Gloucestershire Local Plan:
 
Policy 
  
Title
D1 
 
  
Achieving Good Quali
ty Design in New Development
L3
 
  
Coastal Zone
L17 & L18
 
Water Environment
EP1
  
Environmental Pollu
tion
EP5
  
Renewable Energy Ins
tallations
EP7
  
Unstable Land
GB1
  
Development within t
he Green Belt
T1
   
Rail Passenger Servi
ces and Facilities
T2
 
  
Retention of Rail Trac
k Beds and Associated Land for Future Public Transport/Rail Freight Use
T14
 
 
Filton Airfield
E2
 
  
Severnside
E4
   
Safeguarded Employmen
t Areas
E5
   
Filton Airfield Safeg
uarding
H2
   
Proposals for Reside
ntial Development...within Existing Urban Areas and Defined Settlement Boundaries
H6
 
  
Affordable Housin
g
H7
   
Affordable Housing –
 Rural “Exceptions” Schemes
H12
  
Sites for Gypsies
H13
  
Sites for Travelling Sh
owpeople
LC8
  
Open Space and Children
’s Play in Conjunction with New Residential Development
LC11
  
Allotments 
LC13
  
Public Art
S1
 
  
Service Infrastruc
ture in New DevelopmentSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
190
Appendix 3 – Green infrastructure assets 
(including blue infrastructure assets)
 
Local focus (Non-Strategic)
Strategic focus (Strategic GI Network)
Local/Site Scale Neighbourhood Scale District Scale
Regional &  
Sub-Regional Scale
Private gardens
Green roofs and walls.
SuDS (Sustainable 
Drainage Systems)
Watercourses and ponds
Hedgerows
Footpath and cycleway 
network
Landscape features and 
screens
Trees
Amenity greenspace.
Childrens’ and Young 
Peoples’ play space
Allotments and orchards
Footpath and cycleway 
network
Parks, play areas, playing 
fields, village greens and 
amenity green spaces
Sites of archaeology and 
cultural heritage
Woodlands and nature 
reserves
Cemeteries and 
Churchyards
Watercourses, floodplains, 
ponds, rhines and flood 
attenuation areas
Countryside under agri-
environmental stewardship
Local Nature Reserves 
(LNRs)
River corridors & their 
floodplains (Boyd and 
Ladden Brook)
Locally Designated sites, 
SNCIs and RIGS
Larger parks and amenity 
greenspace
Strategic Footpath and 
cycleway network
Historic Parks and 
Gardens
Visually important 
landscapes and features 
(such as hillsides and 
ridgelines), historic 
landscapes
Open access land
The commons
Nature Reserves (Lower 
Wood Nature Reserve)
Ancient Woodland
Landscape Character 
Areas (not displayed on 
the diagram)
Internationally & Nationally 
designated sites (e.g. 
Cotswolds AONB, SPA/
SAC – The Severn Estuary, 
SSSIs
South West Nature Map 
(Strategic Nature Areas)
National Trail (Cotswold 
Way) and long distance 
footpaths (The Dramway, 
Community Forest Path, 
Frome Valley Walkway, 
Jubilee Way, Rive Avon 
Trail, Monarch’s Ways, 
Severn Way & Thornbury 
Link).
National Cycle Network & 
Avon Cycleway (including 
the Bristol & Bath Railway 
Path)
Major River Corridors/
Estuary (Avon, Frome and 
Severn Estuary) & their 
floodplainswww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
191
Appendix 4 – Extract from the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA 2009)
 
Type and Mix of Affordable Housing
 
Table A2 - Housing Need by Tenure (Annual average 2009-2021)
2009-2021
South Glos
Total net need - social rent
727
Total net need -Intermediate
176
Percentage spilt social rent / Intermediate 
80/20%
Total net housing need
903
 
Table A3 - Required Unit Mix of new housing for Social Rent
2009-2021
South Glos
1 bed
23%
2 bed flat
7%
2 bed house
38%
3 bed house
22%
4 + bed house
10%
Table A4 - Required Unit Mix of Intermediate Housing
2009-2021
South Glos
1 bed flat
44%
2 bed flat
17%
2 bed house
19%
3 bed house
19%
4 bed house
1%
Note- On large strategic sites the Council will seek to achieve this mix. 
On smaller sites where site size may constrain the full range of provision, greater consideration will be given to the 
existing mix of housing and to any specific local need factors South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
192
Appendix 5 – Green infrastructure, sport 
and recreation standards
 
Category of Open 
Space
Definition
Quantity 
Standard
- Minimum 
figures
Accessibility 
Standard
Quality  
Standards
Informal 
recreational open 
space
Include parks/public 
gardens, amenity 
green space and 
green corridors – these 
provide for informal 
recreation and access. 
1.4 ha/1000 
population
12.5 minutes walk / 600 
metres
Quality 
standards 
have been 
established 
in the Open 
Space Audit. 
These will be 
incorporated 
into the Green 
Infrastructure
Supplementary
Planning
 
Document
Natural and Semi-
Natural green 
space
Areas of green space 
where the primary 
purpose is one of 
wildlife and biodiversity 
conservation and value.
1.5ha/1000 
population 
15 minutes walk / 720 
metres
Outdoor Sports 
facilities
Includes all outdoor 
sports facilities whether 
naturally or artificially 
surfaced, e.g. playing 
pitches, bowling greens 
and tennis courts. 
Including full sized 
Multi Use Games Areas 
(MUGAs).
1.6ha/1000 
population
20 minutes walk / 1000 
metres – Playing Pitches
22 minutes drive time 
– Synthetic Pitches, 
Athletics Tracks and 
Golf Courses
Provision for 
Children and 
Young People
All equipped children’s 
play areas, including 
provision for young 
people (skate parks, 
shelters etc.)
0.25ha/1000 
population equipped 
playspace
10 minutes walk / 480 
metres – Children’s play 
space.
15 minutes walk / 720 
metres – Young peoples 
provision
Allotments
An area of allotment 
plots used for the 
purpose of producing, 
fruit, vegetable or 
flowers for personal use.
0.2ha/1000 
population
15 minutes walk / 720 
metre
Cemeteries and 
Churchyards
N/A
N/A
TOTAL
4.7ha/1000 
population total.
On the basis that 
provision for children 
and young people 
can be located 
within informal 
recreational open 
space.
15 minutes walk / 720 
metreswww.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
193
Appendix 6 – Coal resources
  
South Gloucestershire - Surface Mining Coal Resource Areas
South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
194
Appendix 7 – Coal mining legacy
  
South Gloucestershire - Coal Mining Development Referral Area
Unitary boundary
Referral area
Standing advice
This map is reproduced from the Ordnance Survey material by the Coal Authority [or division thereof] with the 
permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, Crown Copyright. Unauthorised reproduction 
infringes Crown Copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. License Number 100020315.  
The Coal Authority and British Geological Survey own the copyright to these maps. The information we have used 
to produce these maps is protected by our database right.
All rights are reserved and unauthorised use is prohibited. If we provide a map to you, this does not mean that 
copyright and any other rights will pass to you. However you can use the map for your own purposes.  
The copyright and all other intellectual property rights in the maps will remain the property of the Coal Authority 
and British Geological Survey or other third parties (as appropriate). Neither the user nor any other third party will 
acquire any rights in respect of the maps other than as expressly provided in these Terms.
www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
195
Appendix 8 – Nuclear safeguarding 
(consultation) zones
Further information and guidance is available from: 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/nuclear/land-use-planning.htm 
Berkeley - Outer Zone (8km)
- Refer to HSE any development with a population exceeding 500.
Berkeley - Middle Zone (4km)
- Refer to HSE any development with a population exceeding 50.
Berkeley - Inner Zone (2km)
- Refer to HSE any residential or non-residential development.
Berkeley Power Station
Oldbury - Outer Zone (8km)
- Refer to HSE any development with a population exceeding 500.
Oldbury - Middle Zone (4km)
- Refer to HSE any development with a population exceeding 50.
Oldbury - Inner Zone (2km)
- Refer to HSE any residential or non-residential development.
Oldbury Power Station
Unitary Boundary
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
196
Glossary of terms
Comprehensive glossary of planning terms can be viewed at: 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/general/glossaryandlinks/glossary/ 
Affordable Housing
Affordable housing includes social rented, affordable rented and intermediate 
housing, provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the 
market.  Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local 
house prices.  Affordable housing should include provisions to remain at 
an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be 
recycled for alternative affordable housing provision. 
•
  
Social rented housing i
s owned by local authorities and private registered 
providers , for which guideline target rents are determined through 
the national rent regime. It may also be owned by other persons and 
provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed 
with the local authority or with the Homes and Communities Agency.
•
  
Affordable rented ho
using is let by local authorities or private registered 
providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social 
rented housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require 
a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service 
charges, where applicable).
•
  
Intermediate housi
ng is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost 
above social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the 
Affordable Housing definition above. These can include shared equity 
(shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and 
intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable housing, such as 
“low cost market” housing, may not be considered, for planning purposes, 
as affordable housing.
Authority’s Monitoring Report 
(AMR)
A report prepared by the local planning authority assessing progress with 
and the effectiveness of a Local Plan.
Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty (AONB)
An area of particularly attractive landscape and unspoilt character which 
should be protected and enhanced as part of the national heritage.  It is 
designated by the Countryside Commission under the National Parks and 
Access to the Countryside Act 1949.
B Use Classes
The B use classes are types of business development as defined in the 
Town & Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended). They include B1 – 
Business, B2 – General Industrial and B8 - Storage or Distribution.
Biodiversity
Biodiversity is the variety of life, which includes mammals, birds, fish, 
reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates, fungi and plants – and the woodlands, 
grasslands, rivers and seas on which they all depend including the 
underlying geology.
Blue Infrastructure
Assets, such as rivers, streams, floodplains, ponds, rhines and sustainable 
drainage systems which are part of the Green Infrastructure network.
Building for Life 
(BfL 12)
The national assessment method for well designed homes and 
neighbourhoods.
Building Research 
Establishment Environmental 
Assessment Method (BREEAM)
Environmental assessment method for buildings.
Comparison Retailing
Comparison retailing is the provision of items not obtained on a frequent 
basis.  These include clothing, footwear, household and recreational goods.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
197
Community Profiles
These are a collection of data for individual urban and rural communities, 
presented as raw data and in text format.  They aim to present a picture of 
some of the current social, economic and environmental conditions within 
different communities.
Community Right to Build 
Order
An order made by the local planning authority (under the Town & Country 
Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a site specific 
development proposal or class of development (see Neighbourhood 
Planning)
Community Transport
A responsive service for those who are unable to use public transport.
Concept Statement
A concise, diagrammatic document, which illustrates ideas with the potential 
to make the most of a site and its surroundings.  It should be imaginative, 
positive, ambitious and practical, opening up design opportunities.  The 
interpretive notes may refer to ’design requirements’, but it is important to 
remember that the Concept Statement is not the design solution.  It should 
emphasize creative opportunities and prompt designers and their clients to 
demonstrate their design skills.  It is up to the designer to interpret and refine 
the concept, within the spirit of the overall quality objectives.
Conservation Area
Areas of special architectural or historic interest designated by local 
authorities under the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 
1990.
Contribution
Land, services, facilities and/or money given by developers of land to 
the local authority following negotiations, to ensure that the needs of new 
communities generated by the development are catered for. 
Convenience Retailing
Convenience retailing is the provision of everyday essential items, including 
food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and confectionery.
Core Strategy
A Development Plan Document which sets out the long term spatial vision 
and strategic objectives of the planning framework for an administrative 
area.  It identifies where new development will take place, its type and scale, 
protects what is valued about the area and includes the policies needed to 
deliver the vision and objectives.  It is prepared in line with the Sustainable 
Community Strategy. (see also Development Plan Documents).
Crushed rock
Hard rock that has been crushed and graded for use as an aggregate.
Demand Responsive Transport
A scheduled service between defined start and end points that follows a 
route in response to a request, for people who can use public transport but 
who do not have a regular service or any service at all.
Department for Communities 
and Local Government (DCLG)
The government department responsible for setting UK policy on local 
government, housing, urban regeneration, planning and fire and rescue.
Development
“The carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, 
over or under land, or the making of any material changes in the use of any 
building or other land.” (Town & Country Planning Act (1990) Part III Section 
55).
Development Plan Document 
(DPD)
Development Plan Documents are prepared by local planning authorities as 
part of their Local Plan. All DPDs must be subject to rigorous procedures of 
community involvement, consultation and independent examination, before 
they can be adopted. Once adopted, development control decisions must 
be made in accordance with them unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise.
East Fringe
The East Fringe includes Downend, Emersons Green, Mangotsfield, Staple 
Hill, Soundwell, Kingswood, Warmley, Cadbury Heath, Oldland Common, 
Longwell Green and Hanham.
Enabling Development
Development that would be unacceptable in planning terms but for the 
fact that it would bring public benefits, in this context to a significant place, 
sufficient to justify it being carried out. (‘Enabling Development and the 
Conservation of Significant Places’ - English Heritage, 2008).
Evidence Base
The data and information about the current state of South Gloucestershire.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
198
Extra Care Housing
Extra Care is an alternative accommodation choice for older people and 
those with special needs.  It promotes independent living in self-contained 
accommodation, where people are able to readily access high quality, 
flexible support and care services on site to suit their needs.  Differing from 
traditional sheltered/ retirement accommodation, schemes incorporate a 
wide range of communal facilities, available not only to service users but also 
as a potential resource for the wider community.
Greater Bristol Metro Project
A West of England Partnership major transport scheme bid to the 
Department for Transport to provide half-hourly cross-Bristol train services.  
The project is scheduled for completion in 2020.
Green Belt
A planning designation designed to prevent urban sprawl by protecting open 
land around or between urban areas.
Green Infrastructure
Green Infrastructure (GI) consists of a multi-functional network of high quality 
open assets and linkages (both green and blue infrastructure assets) which 
operate at a variety of spatial scales. GI assets contribute to people’s well-
being, and together comprise a coherent managed resource responsive to 
evolving conditions.
Greenfield Land or Site
Land (or a defined site) usually farmland, that has not previously been 
developed.
Gypsy and Traveller
In this document, the term is used to include all ethnic Gypsies and Irish 
Travellers, plus other Travellers who adopt a nomadic way of life.  It does not 
include Travelling Showpeople.
Gypsy and Traveller Site
An area of land laid out and used as pitches for Gypsy and Traveller 
caravans.  Sites vary in type and size and can range from one pitch private 
family sites on Gypsy and Traveller’s own land to large local authority sites.
Heritage Asset
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a 
degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because 
of its heritage interest. Heritage asset includes designated heritage assets 
and assets identified by the local planning authority (including local listing 
and assets contained on the Council’s Historic Environment Record).
Historic Environment
All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people 
and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past 
human activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and 
planted or managed flora. Those elements of the historic environment that 
hold significance are called heritage assets.
Householder Application
Planning application for ‘domestic’ works within the ground of a single 
dwelling. It does not include the erection of a dwelling(s) or sub-division of a 
property to form flats.
Housing Need
A level of socially desirable housing, the demand for which is not reflected 
in the open market, normally due to a lack of income in relation to prevailing 
house prices or rents.  It can therefore only usually be met through an 
element of subsidy.
Housing Market Area 
(HMA)
A geographical area which is relatively self-contained in terms of reflecting 
people’s choice of location for a home, i.e. most people settling in the area 
will have sought a house only in that area.
Independent Examination
The process by which a planning inspector may publicly examine a 
Development Plan Document before issuing a report. The report will have 
one of three outcomes for a local authority – the Plan is unsound and can’t 
be adopted, the Plan is sound and can be adopted without modification, 
or the Plan can be made sound and adopted as long as modifications are 
made. 
Infill Development
The development of a relatively small gap between existing buildings, 
normally within a built up area.www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
199
Infrastructure
The utilities, transport and other communication facilities and community 
facilities required to support housing, industrial and commercial activity, 
schools, shopping centres and other community and public transport 
services.
Interim safeguarded sites 
(Policy CS12 Table 2
Safeguarded employment sites which have the potential for redevelopment, 
to be shaped through the Council’s Local Plan and SCI procedures.
Joint Local Transport Plan 
(JLTP)
5-year strategy for the development of local, integrated transport, supported 
by a programme of transport improvements.  Used to bid to government for 
funding transport improvements.
Joint Waste Core Strategy
A long term vision and strategy for managing waste and the spatial 
strategy for delivering strategic recovery facilities.  It has been developed 
in partnership between Bristol City, Bath and North East Somerset, North 
Somerset and South Gloucestershire Councils.  
Kiss and Ride
Where a passenger is dropped off from a car to continue their journey by 
public transport whilst the driver and vehicle continue to another destination.
Landbank
A stock of mineral reserves with planning permission sufficient to provide for 
continued extraction over a given time period.
Land Take
The land used or required for specific development.
Legibility (in terms of 
settlement patterns)
A legible area is one with a strong sense of local identity. Locations, 
streets, open spaces and places that have a clear image and are easy to 
understand. For example, a location that is easy to find your way around.
Listed Building
Buildings of special architectural or historic interest designated by the 
Department of Culture, Media and Sport under the Planning (Listed Building 
and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Local Development Scheme 
(LDS), now referred to as Local 
Plan Delivery Programme
A public statement identifying which Local Plan documents and 
Supplementary Planning Documents will be produced by the Council and 
when.
Local Nature Reserves (LNRs)
Local Nature Reserve is a statutory designation made under Section 21 of 
the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949.  They are places 
with wildlife or geological features that are of special interest locally.  They 
offer people special opportunities to study or learn about nature or simply 
to enjoy it. (Additional details: http://www.english-nature.org.uk/Special/lnr/
office.htm).
Local Plan
The plan for the future development of the local area, drawn up by the 
local planning authority in consultation with the community. In law this is 
described as the development plan documents adopted under the Planning 
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. Current core strategies or other 
planning policies, which under the regulations would be considered to be 
development plan documents, form part of the Local Plan. The term includes 
old policies which have been saved under the 2004 Act and neighbourhood 
development plans.
Local Strategic Partnership 
(LSP)
A Local Strategic Partnership is a single non-statutory, multi-agency body, 
which matches local authority boundaries, and aims to bring together at a 
local level the different parts of the public, private, community and voluntary 
sectors.
Locally Listed Building
A locally listed building is a building that appears on a list of locally listed 
buildings compiled and maintained by South Gloucestershire Council. 
Major Development
The following categories of development: residential (over 10 dwellings), B1, 
B2/B8, retail and other (which includes agricultural, hotels, nursing homes, 
leisure complexes etc) where the floorspace is 1000 square metres or more 
or where the site area is 1 hectare or more. It covers applications which are 
outline, full, reserved matters, amended proposals, renewals, government 
agencies development and large change of use applications.
Market Towns
Thornbury, Chipping Sodbury and Yate.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
200
Mineral Resource
Potential mineral deposit where the extent and economic viability is 
unproven.
National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF)
The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the Government’s planning 
policies for England and how these are expected to be applied. It must be 
taken into account in the preparation of local and neighbourhood plans, and 
is a material consideration in planning decisions.
Neighbourhood Plan
A plan, introduced by the Localism Act, prepared by a parish/town council or 
neighbourhood forum for a local area, which contains a vision and general 
planning policies and proposals for the future development and use of 
different plots of land.
Neighbourhood Planning
A community initiated process where people get together through a local 
forum or parish/town council and produce a plan for their neighbourhood 
setting out policies and proposals for the development they wish to see. 
There are 3 elements of neighbourhood planning:
•
  
Neighbourhood Plan
s – prepared by the Town/Parish Council or 
Neighbourhood Forum for a particular Neighbourhood Area
•
  
Neighbourhood Deve
lopment Orders - grant planning permission for a 
specific development or type of development in the local area. 
•
  
Community Right to Bui
ld Orders – an order made by the local planning 
authority which grants planning permission for the local community to 
bring forward development in their area where the benefits stay within the 
community.
New Neighbourhood 
A planned new development either within an existing urban area or an 
extension to an existing urban area.
North Fringe
The North Fringe consists of the communities of Filton, Patchway, Bradley 
Stoke, Stoke Gifford, Harry Stoke and Frenchay.
Parish Plan
Parish plans set out a community or parish’s vision for how they wish to see 
their area evolve, supported by a variety of actions aimed at achieving this.  
Pitch
Area of a Gypsy/Traveller site where a single household lives in their caravans 
and other related amenities.
Place Shaping
The Lyons Inquiry into Local Government (Lyons 2006) set out a role for 
local government as the voice of a whole community and an agent of ‘place’.  
This role includes building and shaping local identity, and making sure that 
the right services are provided to local people based on local needs and 
preferences. 
Planning & Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004
National planning legislation from central government aimed at improving the 
planning process and enhancing community involvement in it. Visit www.gov.
uk to find out more. 
Previously-Developed Land
 
(“Brownfield” Land)
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure (excluding 
agricultural or forestry buildings), and associated fixed surface infrastructure.  
The definition covers the curtilage of the development. Previously-developed 
land may occur in both built-up and rural settings.  The definition includes 
defence buildings and land used for mineral extraction and waste disposal 
where provision for restoration has not been made through development 
control procedures.
Priority Neighbourhood
An area requiring additional support in order to improve the quality of life for 
local residents.
Regeneration
The process of putting new life back into often derelict older urban areas 
through environmental improvements, comprehensive development and 
transport proposals.
Registered Park or Garden
A registered park or garden is one that appears on the Register of Parks and 
Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England compiled and maintained by 
English Heritage.
Rhine
Lowland drainage channels. www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
201
Rural ‘Exceptions’ Scheme
Schemes for affordable housing which are allowed in certain circumstances 
as an exception to some restrictive planning policies.
Saved Policies
Policies within the adopted local that are saved pending the adoption of 
replacement policies.
Section 106 Agreement
A legal agreement under section 106 of the 1990 Town & Country Planning 
Act.  Section 106 agreements are legal agreements between a planning 
authority and a developer, or undertakings offered unilaterally by a developer, 
that ensure that certain extra works related to a development are undertaken.
Significance (for heritage 
policy)
The value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because of its 
heritage interest. That interest may be archaeological, architectural, artistic 
or historic. Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’s physical 
presence, but also from its setting.
Smart Ticketing
A bus ‘ticket’ is stored electronically on a microchip, commonly contained 
in a plastic smartcard. Tickets are checked by presenting the smartcard 
to a smart reader on the bus. Integrated tickets are valid on more than one 
operator and/or mode of transport.
South Gloucestershire Local 
Plan (SGLP)
The South Gloucestershire Local Plan is the statutory land use planning 
document for the district. Adopted in 2006, it covers the period to 2011, 
setting a framework against which planning applications can be assessed, 
providing a basis for coordinating public and private development throughout 
the area and informing residents, property/landowners and developers how 
their interests will be affected.
South Gloucestershire Minerals 
and Waste Local Plan 
(M&WLP)
The South Gloucestershire Minerals and Waste Local Plan is the statutory 
land use planning document for the district.  Adopted in 2002, it covers 
the period to 2011, setting a framework against which waste and minerals 
applications can be assessed, providing guidance to the minerals and 
waste industry, and bringing minerals and waste issues before the public 
and informing residents and property/landowners how their interests will be 
affected by future mineral and waste development.
South West Regional Assembly 
(SWRA) and SW Councils
SWRA was responsible for developing and coordinating a strategic vision 
for improving the quality of life in the south west region.  The Assembly was 
responsible for setting priorities and preparing certain regional strategies, 
including Regional Spatial Strategies. Following voluntary abolition of 
the SWRA in 2009, the regional planning function was transferred to the 
Strategic Leaders’ Board, an arm of the South West Councils. This role was 
subsequently revoked by the government in 2010. 
Spatial Planning
Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning to bring together 
and integrate policies for the development and use of land with other policies 
and programmes which influence the nature of places and how they function.  
That will include policies which can impact on land use, for example by 
influencing the demands on, or needs for, development, but which are not 
capable of being delivered solely or mainly through the granting or refusal of 
planning permission and which may be implemented by other means.
Special Area of Conservation 
(SAC)
A site designated under the EU Directive on the Conservation of Natural 
Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora as of special importance.
Special Protection Area (SPA)
A site designated under Article 4 of EC Directive 19/409 as being of particular 
importance for the conservation of rare and/or migratory wild birds.
Stakeholder
A person, group, company, association, etc. with an economic, professional 
or community interest in the district or specific part of it, or that is affected by 
local developments.
Statement of Community 
Involvement (SCI)
The Statement of Community Involvement sets out the local planning 
authority’s policy for involving the community in the preparation and revision 
of Development Plan Documents, Supplementary Planning Documents and 
planning applications.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
202
Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA)
A generic term used internationally to describe environmental assessment as 
applied to policies, plans and programmes.  European Directive 2001/42/EC 
‘on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the 
environment’ requires a formal environmental assessment of all Development 
Plan Documents.  In the UK this is incorporated into the Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA) process.
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA)
A SFRA provides an overview of the flood risk, from a variety of sources, 
within a local planning authority area.  The SFRA will assist the delivery of 
sustainable development by providing technical advice on the avoidance, 
reduction and management of flood risk.  The document will inform 
decisions, on both the land allocation process (through the preparation of 
development plans) and planning applications.
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment 
(SHLAA)
A study aimed at identifying sites with potential for housing, assessing their 
housing potential and assessing when they are likely to be developed.
Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (SHMA)
An assessment aimed at assessing the need and demand for housing within 
a housing market area.
Strategic Nature Areas (SNAs)
SNAs were defined by the South West Nature Map (www.
biodiversitysouthwest.org.uk).They represent landscape scale blocks of land 
which may comprise a number of formally designated sites as well as land 
that has no designation for biodiversity conservation.  One of the aims of 
these SNAs is to improve habitat networks and to sustain wildlife within them.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)
Sustainability appraisal is as a systematic and iterative appraisal process, 
incorporating the requirements of the European Strategic Environmental 
Assessment Directive. The purpose of sustainability appraisal is to appraise 
the social, environmental and economic effects of the strategies and policies 
in a Development Plan Document from the outset of the preparation process.
Sustainable Community 
Strategy
The Sustainable Community Strategy is a developed by South 
Gloucestershire’s Local Strategic Partnership and is a document which sets 
out how the vision and priorities for South Gloucestershire will be achieved.
Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS)
A sequence of management practices and control structures designed 
to drain water in a more sustainable manner than some conventional 
techniques.  Typically these are used to attenuate run–off from development 
sites.
Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD)
A document that has not been subject to independent testing and does not 
have the weight of development plan status.  SPDs replace Supplementary 
Planning Guidance that was part of the old planning system.  Helps to 
amplify the policies contained in Development Plan Documents.
Sustainable Urban Drainage 
(SUDs)
SuDs are physical structures designed to receive surface water runoff 
in order to reduce the negative impact of development on the water 
environment.  They can usually be incorporated into the planted or paved 
area of the development.
Tidal Barrage
An obstruction in a tidal stream, which is designed to control tidal flow in 
order to change the environment or harness the energy of the tide.
Town Centre/Town Centre Uses
A defined area including the primary shopping area and areas predominately 
occupied by main town centre uses within or adjacent to the primary 
shopping area. Main town centre uses are retail development (including 
warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities, 
the more intensive sport and recreation use (including cinemas, restaurants, 
drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and 
fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, 
culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and 
concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
203
Transit pitch
Authorised Gypsy and Traveller pitch intended for short-term use by those 
in transit to other areas.  The pitch is permanent, sometimes seasonal, but 
people who stay on it may only do so for a temporary period.  These pitches 
have fewer facilities than permanent residential sites.  Pitches can be on 
sites solely designed for transit use or form an area on a residential site and 
designed for use by visitors to permanent residents.
Travel To Work Area (TTWA) 
An area in which the majority of the resident population also work. 
Travelling Showpeople
Travelling Showpeople are members of a community that consists of 
self-employed business people who travel the country, often with their 
families, holding fairs. Although their work is of a mobile nature, showpeople 
nevertheless require secure, permanent bases for the storage of their 
equipment and more particularly for residential purposes.
Unauthorised Encampment
A piece of land where Gypsies and Travellers reside without planning 
permission.  The land is not owned by those involved in the encampment 
and is often located on the edge of roads/car parks or in other unsafe or 
unsuitable environments.
Urban Extension
Development forming a planned expansion adjoining an existing urban area.
Waste
Material is waste if, when disposing of it, or having it disposed of on his 
behalf, the producer intends to discard it or throw it away.  Even if the material 
is reusable, if it is discarded it is still waste.  It is the original producer’s 
intention that determines if a material is waste.  Waste is generally referred 
to as being either controlled or uncontrolled. Controlled waste consists of 
household, commercial and industrial waste and falls within the scope of 
waste regulation and environmental protection legislation.  Uncontrolled 
waste consists of radioactive waste, explosive waste, mines and quarries 
waste and agricultural waste and is regulated by other legislation.
Waste Recycling
Recovering re-usable materials from waste or using a waste material for a 
positive purpose.
West of England
The West of England covers the administrative areas of Bristol City, Bath and 
North East Somerset, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire. 
Windfall Sites
Sites which have not been specifically identified as available in the Local 
Plan process. They normally comprise previously-developed sites that have 
unexpectedly become available.South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
204
Key Diagram
Severn 
Beach 
Pilning 
Thornbury 
Tytherington 
Charfield 
Cromhall 
Wickwar 
Rangeworthy 
Yate 
Chipping 
Sodbury 
Frampton 
Cotterell 
Pucklechurch 
Marshfield 
Avonmouth 
Westbury 
on Trym 
Shirehampton 
Clifton 
Horfield 
Fishponds 
St George 
Brislington 
Hengrove 
 
Bristol Airport 
Weston-super-Mare 
Weston-super-Mare, 
Taunton, Exeter, 
The South West 
Portishead 
A403 
A4018 
Coalpit 
Heath 
Emersons 
Green 
Staple 
Hill 
Kingswood 
Warmley 
Longwell 
Green 
Hanham 
Bitton 
Filton 
Wells 
Bath 
A420 
Bath 
A420 
A46 
A432 
M4 
A420 
Chippenham 
Swindon, Reading, 
London 
A433 
Tetbury 
Nailsworth, 
Stroud 
Gloucester, Cheltenham, 
The Midlands 
Gloucester 
A38 
A38 
Chepstow 
Newport, Cardiff, 
South Wales 
Severn Estuary 
A420 
Bedminster 
Swindon, Reading, 
London 
Gloucester, 
Cheltenham, 
Birmingham 
Weston-super-Mare, 
Taunton, Exeter 
 
Bath 
Bath 
A46 
2 
3 
Severnside 
1 
A38 
Hawkesbury 
Upton 
6 
7 
5 
Frenchay 
Patchway 
Downend 
Y 
E 
C 
4 
1 
19 
16 
17 
18 
22 
1 
14 
19 
15/20 
18 
v9 9/12/13 
U 
Bradley 
Stoke 
Winterbourne 
21 
W 
This map is reproduced from Ordnance Survey material with 
the permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of the Controller 
of Her Majesty
s Stationery Office Crown copyright. 
Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown copyright and may 
lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. South Gloucestershire 
Council Licence No 100023410, 2013. 
 
S 
BRISTOL 
City Centre 
P 
©
 South Gloucestershire Council. All rights reserved LA 100023410, 2014www.southglos.gov.ukSouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027 
205
Key Diagram 
South Gloucestershire Council Boundary 
Green Belt Area 
Cotswold AONB 
Open Countryside (not Green Belt or AONB) 
Visually Important Hillsides 
Severn Estuary  
Main Built Up Areas 
Transport 
Motorways 
Proposed M49 Junction 
Major Roads 
Other main roads 
Railway Stations 
Passenger Railway 
Freight Railway 
Re-introduction of passenger services - Rail  
Proposed Greater Bristol Metro (MetroWest) 
Rail: Safeguarded Station Sites  
(Charfield, Filton & Henbury) 
North Fringe to Hengrove Package (MetroBus) 
Proposed MetroBus extension (indicative alignment) 
Future potential MetroBus extension (indicative alignment) 
Cotswold Way 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
Regional Shopping Centre 
University of the West of England 
Wildlife Park 
Active Mineral Sites 
SGLP Committed Sites
: 
Severnside 
Filton Northfield (Charlton Hayes) 
Wallscourt Farm (Cheswick) 
Land East of Coldharbour Lane 
Harry Stoke 
Science Park 
Emersons Green East 
New Neighbourhood Areas
: 
Cribbs/Patchway 
East of Harry Stoke 
North Yate 
Thornbury Housing Opportunity areas 
Y 
E 
C 
7 
19 
S 
U 
W 
P 
KeySouth Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy adopted December 2013  2006 – 2027
www.southglos.gov.uk 
206
www.southglos.gov.uk
 
(access is free from your local library)
If you need this information in another format or 
language please contact 01454 868009
SGC
 
CREATIVE 
DESIGN
  •  Printed on recycled paper  
S
  09|14