December 2010St Edmundsbury
Core Strategy   St Edmundsbury  
 
Core Strategy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 2010  
 
 
 
  2 
   3 
 St Edmundsbury  
 Local Development Framework  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Strategy  
 
 
 
 
 
December 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning & Economic Development  Services  
St Edmundsbury Borough Council  
West Suffolk House  
Western Way  
Bury St Edmunds  
IP33 3YU  
 
www.stedmundsbury.gov.uk  
LDF@stedsbc.gov.uk  
Tel: 01284 757368  
 
 
The Ordnance Survey mapping included within this publication is provided by St 
Edmundsbury Borough Council under licence from the Ordnance Survey in order to 
fulfil its public function as a planning authority. Persons viewing this mapping 
should contact Ordnance Survey copyright for advice when they wish to licence 
Ordnance Survey mapping for their own use.  
 
 
 St Edmundsbury Core Strategy  
 
Foreword 
 5 
1. Introduction 
 6 
2. Profile of St Edmundsbury 
 16 
3. Spatial Vision for St Edmundsbury 
 24 
4. Framework for Sustainable Development  
 28 
   Policy CS1 – St Edmundsbury Spatial Strategy 28 
       Proposals Map and Key Diagram 34/35 
   Policy CS2 – Sustainable Development 36 
   Policy CS3 – Design and Local Distinctiveness 42 
   Policy CS4 – Settlement Hierarchy and Identity 44 
   Policy CS5 – Affordable Housing 48 
   Policy CS6 – Gypsies,  Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople 51 
   Policy CS7 – Sustainable Transport 52 
   Policy CS8 – Strategi c Transport Improvements 55 
   Policy CS9 – Employment and the Local Economy 56 
   Policy CS10 – Retail, Leisur e, Cultural and Office Provision 
 60 
5. Strategy for Bury St Edmunds 64 
   Policy CS11 – Bury St Edmunds Strategic Growth 
 66 
6. Strategy for Haverhill  69 
   Policy CS12 – Haverhill Strategic Growth 
 71 
7. Strategy for the Rural Areas 73 
   Policy CS13 – Rural Areas 
 78 
8. Infrastructure, Implementation and Monitoring 79 
   Policy CS14 – Community infrastructure capacity and  
tariffs 84 
   Policy CS15 – Plan, Monitor, Manage  86 
  
Appendices  
1. Glossary of Terms 87 
2. Saved Policies to be replaced 92 
3. Housing Trajectory 93 
4. Policy CS4 – Settlements with boundaries removed 95 
5. Strategic Site Allocations  107 
6. St Edmundsbury Infras tructure Requirements 111 
7. Monitoring Targets and Indicators  149  5 
 Foreword  
Councillor Terry Clements  
Portfolio Holder, Transport and Planning  
The borough of St Edmundsbury is one of the most attractive and vibrant places in 
the East of England. To ensure that people continue to enjoy the same high quality 
environment and quality of life, it needs a strong planning framework to deliver 
sustainable growth over the coming years.  
The Core Strategy represents the  first component of that framework, providing an 
outline for the more detailed policies and proposals in subsequent local planning 
policy documents. The Core Strategy has, at its heart, a vision that will mean the 
borough maintains its distinctiveness, imp roves opportunities for sustainable living 
and uses the planning process to support the aspirations of all who live, work and 
enjoy being in the borough.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  6 
  
1. Introduction  
1.1 This Core Strategy Development Plan Document (DPD) is part of the St 
Edmundsb ury Local Development Framework (LDF) and sets out the following;  
 visions for how the future growth of Bury St Edmunds, Haverhill and the 
Rural Areas will be managed;  
 a collection of objectives and strategic policies to help guide the sustainable 
distribut ion of new development across the borough and achieve the visions;  
 policies to guide the scale, type and location of new development;  
 identified broad locations for growth in Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill; and  
 information on how the detail in the Core Stra tegy will be implemented and 
monitored  
1.2 The Core Strategy provides the strategic context that will guide the preparation 
of subsequent Development Plan Documents identified in the timetable in the 
councils Local Development Scheme.   It includes an outli ne for delivering strategic 
development needs, including housing, employment, leisure and retail. The Strategy 
also contains policies that seek to protect the historic and natural  environment and 
distinct character of the borough. The Core Strategy does no t include details of site 
specific allocations or policies for the management of new development. These will 
be set out in separate Development Plan Documents.  
Glossary of Terms  
1.3 The preparation of LDF documents involves the frequent use of jargon and 
acronyms.   To help understand what these mean we have included a Glossary of 
Terms  in Appendix 1.  
Background to the Local Development Framework System  
1.4 In September 2004 a new  system of preparing development plans at a local level 
came into effect with the introduction of Local Development Frameworks, commonly 
known as the LDF.   The LDF consists of a series of different documents (see Figure 
1.1 below). It will eventually repla ce the existing Replacement St Edmundsbury 
Borough Local Plan 2016, adopted in 2006, and the saved policies in the Suffolk 
County Structure Plan 2001.   7 
 
 
Figure 1 .1 Components of a Local Development Framework  
1.5 At present, certain policies in the Replacement Local Plan and the Structure Plan 
are officially „saved‟ so that they can still be used to determine proposals for 
development.  Those which are replaced by the Core Strategy are set out in Appendix 
2. However, some of these policies will become out of date and all of them will 
eventually be superseded by the LDF as its component parts are adopted, and by 
other government policy st atements. The programme for the preparation of the LDF 
is set out in our Local Development Scheme which has been approved by the 
Government Office for the East of England and can be viewed on our website.  
1.6 These documents, together with the Regional Spa tial Strategy for the East of 
England that was published in May 2008, will form the Development Plan against 
which proposals for new development will be assessed unless other material 
considerations indicate otherwise.  
1.7 One of the main differences betwe en the LDF and the old Local Plan is that the 
focus has become far wider than traditional land use planning and is now more 
spatially based. This means that land use factors will need to be integrated with 
proposals and strategies dealing with matters such  as health, education and 
community safety. Spatial planning can be defined as follows:  
“Spatial planning produces outcomes for the future of a place, led by the 
community‟s choices, taking into account evidence of social, economic and 
environmental charac teristics that are delivered through a local infrastructure 
investment programme.”  
„Shaping and Delivering Tomorrow‟s Places: Effective Practice in Spatial Planning‟, 
Planning Advisory Service, May 2007.  
 
  8 
 What is the Core Strategy?  
1.8 The Core Strategy Development Plan Document (DPD) is one of the key 
documents that we have produced as part of the LDF. It  
 covers the whole of the administrative area of St Edmundsbury, as illustrated 
in the map below;  
 sets out a vision of what the borough should be like in  the future;  
 provides a strategic policy framework that will manage and guide 
development in the borough over the next twenty years and beyond to 
achieve this vision; and  
 guides the council‟s aspirations and those of other service providers and 
stakeholder s. 
 
Map 1.1 St Edmundsbury Borough  
1.9 The Core Strategy provides the strategic context that will guide the preparation 
of subsequent Development Plan Documents identified in the Local Development 
Scheme.     9 
 1.10 It is important to note at this time that t he Core Strategy does not identify 
every site that is to be allocated for new development.   These will be published in 
the Rural Site Allocations document and Area Action Plans for Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill that will follow later in the process. In add ition, it does not contain detailed 
policies for the control of specific types of development; these are included in the 
Development Management DPD.  
Preparation and Adoption Process  
1.11 The Core Strategy went through a number of stages before it was final ly 
approved as statutory planning policy for the area.   These stages are set out in the 
table below, together with a timetable of when these stages were reached.   These 
stages correspond with the timetable included in our revised Local Development 
Scheme, which was submitted to the Government Office for the East of England 
(GO-East) for approval in December 2009. It should be noted that the Council‟s Local 
Development Scheme may be periodically updated, in consultation and agreement 
with GO -East to accurate ly reflect progress on the production of the LDF.  
Core Strategy Preparation and Adoption Process  
Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report  Completed April 2007  
Issues and Options Report Complete  April 2008  
Preferred Options Consultation  November 2008 to  January 2009  
Final Submission Core Strategy 
consultation  12 August – 7 October 2009  
Submission to Secretary of State  January 2010  
Hearing by independent planning 
inspector  April 2010  
Receipt of Inspectors Report  August 2010  
Adoption  December 2010  
Table 1.1 Core Strategy Preparation and Adoption Process  
How was the Document Prepared?  
1.12 At the outset, we gathered relevant information and identified potential issues 
for spatial planning and policy options to address them. We consulted widely on a n 
Issues and Options Report over a six week period in March and April 2008 and on a 
Preferred Options Report over a nine week period from November 2008 to January 
2009. A consultation on the Submission Core Strategy took place from August to 
October 2009. All consultation was undertaken in accordance with the Council‟s 
adopted Statement of Community Involvement (2008). All the comments received 
were reported to council meetings and a copy of the summary of the responses is 
available on the planning policy p ages of our website at 
www.stedmundsbury.gov.uk/ldf and for inspection at our offices. The key issues 
raised during the Preferred Options consultation and the Submission consultation are 
set out in Statem ents of Engagement and Consultation which are available to view 
on our website.  
Local Development Framework Evidence Base  
1.13 A large amount of evidence was gathered during the preparation of the Core 
Strategy.  In particular, the Scoping Report of the LDF  Sustainability Appraisal  10 
 contains large quantities of baseline data by which strategies and proposals can be 
measured. The following studies were already in place when preparation of the Core 
Strategy commenced:  
 Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill Retail, Offic es and Leisure Study - 2007 
 Bury St Edmunds transport study and strategy - 2005 
 A14 corridor study - 2005 
 Cambridge Sub -region Housing Market Assessment - 2004 
 Western Suffolk Local Strategic Partnership Community Profile - 2007 
 St Edmundsbury Local Develo pment Framework Annual Monitoring Report - 
2007 
 Employment Land Availability Study - 2007 
 St Edmundsbury Housing Requirements Study - 2005 
 Open Space Assessment - 2005 
 Urban Capacity Study - Review 2005  
1.14 We supplemented the existing evidence with a num ber of additional studies, 
including:  
 Employment Land Review (2009) (with Forest Heath and Mid Suffolk districts)  
 Water Cycle Study for the Stour Valley (2009) (with Braintree district)  
 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and Water Cycle Study for remainder of  the 
borough (2009)  
 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009) (with Forest Heath, 
Mid Suffolk and Babergh districts)  
 Environmental and Infrastructure Capacity Study of main urban areas and 
rural service centres (2009) (with Forest Heath distric t) 
 Green Infrastructure Study (2009)  
 Affordable Housing Economic Viability Study (2009) (with Forest Heath, 
Fenland and East Cambridgeshire districts, and Cambridgeshire Horizons)  
 A14 Bury St Edmunds Transport Study (2009)  
 Infrastructure Delivery Plan (200 9) 
 St Edmundsbury LDF Transport Impacts (2009)  
1.15 These studies have completed the robust evidence base on which to test the 
soundness of the Submission document for accommodating the future growth in the 
borough.  
Local Development Framework: Key Strateg ies and Plans  
1.16 In producing all the Local Development Framework documents we have had 
regard to a collection of other key strategies and plans from the national to the local 
level.  The Core Strategy does not take policies wholly from these other Strat egies 
and Plans but instead interprets and applies them to St Edmundsbury, ensuring they 
are relevant and locally  distinctive.  
 
 
  11 
  
Figure 1.2  Plans and Strategies  St Edmundsbury Local 
Development Framework  National Guidance  
 Planning Policy 
Statements and Guidance  
 Planning circulars  
 Securing the Future – the 
UK Government 
Sustainable Development 
Strategy  Regional Guidance  
 East of England Plan (RSS)  
 Regional Economic 
Strategy  
 Sustainable Developm ent 
Framework for the East of 
England  Other Local 
Strategies and Plans  
 Suffolk Climate 
Action Plan  
 Suffolk Biodiversity 
Action Plan  
 Suffolk Health and 
Wellbeing Strategy  
 
Suffolk Local Strategic 
Partnership  
 Suffolk Community Strategy  
(inc. Local Area Agreement)  
West Suffolk Local 
Strategic Partnership  
 Making Life Better: West 
Suffolk Community 
Strategy  
 Town and Parish 
Councils  
 Parish Plans  
Suffolk County Councils Plans and 
Strategies  
 Suffolk Local Transport Plan  
 Suffolk Rail Strategy  
 Suffolk Bus Strategy  
 Suffolk Minerals LDF  
 Suffolk Waste LDF  
 Suffolk Education Plans  Plans of Neighbouring 
Authorities  
 Forest Heath District Council  
 Mid Suffolk District Council  
 Babergh District Coun cil 
 Braintree District Council  
 South Cambridgeshire District 
Council  
 Breckland District Council  
 East Cambridgeshire District 
Council  
  12 
  
1.17 Under the Local Government and Public Improvement in Heal th Act 2007, all 
local authorities in England have a duty to work with partners to develop a Local 
Area Agreement (LAA). In two tier areas such as Suffolk, the County Council is the 
lead authority and is accountable for the LAA, but district and borough co uncils must 
be involved at all stages. It also places a duty on specific named partners to co -
operate in the preparation of the LAA and to have regard to it in their everyday 
functions within their own organisation.   
1.18 Suffolk‟s LAA will form part of th e action plan for delivering the Suffolk 
Community Strategy priorities. LAA focuses on a small number of priorities which will 
deliver specific elements of the long term vision. It does this by translating the long -
term (20 year) ambitions set out in the c ommunity strategy into short -term (3 year) 
targets that will help us deliver improvements in local services. The community 
strategy priorities are much wider than LAA alone and there are a number of other 
partnership and organisational activities that will  also contribute to this agenda, 
including the St Edmundsbury Local Development Framework which will help to 
deliver spatial aspects of the agreement.  
1.19 Some of the LAA targets for Suffolk, which the St Edmundsbury Core Strategy 
will contribute towards achieving include, as National Indicators; the number of net 
additional homes added; planning to adapt to climate change; and; per capita 
reduction in CO2 emissions in the Local Authority area.  
1.20 The West Suffolk  Community Strategy has been particularly  important in 
forming the vision and strategic objectives of St Edmundsbury‟s Core Strategy. This 
has meant that as far as possible, the spatial objectives contained in the document 
are in conformity with the needs and aims  of the local community.   Figure 1.3 below, 
provides an explanation of how the West Suffolk Community Strategy has fed 
through into the Spatial Objectives and the Core Strategy Policies.  
  13 
  
 
Figure 1.3  Community Str ategy and Core Strategy Linkages   14 
  
Sustainability Appraisal  
1.21 Accompan ying this document is the Core Strategy Submission Sustainability 
Appraisal prepared by Atkins Planning Consultants.   It was prepared in accordance 
with our Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report that was adopted in April 2007.   The 
Scoping Report set out  the Sustainability Appraisal Framework and establishes a 
method for describing, analysing and comparing sustainability.   Natural England, 
English Nature, English Heritage, Suffolk Primary Care Trust, East of England 
Regional Assembly, East of England Deve lopment Agency, Suffolk Wildlife Trust , 
Suffolk County Council and GO –East were consulted on this document in October 
2006.   
1.22 The Sustainability Appraisal tested the Core Strategy Submission Document 
against the framework developed in the Scoping Repor t, ensuring that its objectives 
and implications were in line with those identified in the Sustainability Appraisal.  
Appropriate Assessment  
1.23 Under Regulation 48 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats & c.) Regulations 
1994 (the Habitats Regulations) an Appropriate Assessment was carried out for the 
St Edmundsbury Core Strategy Submission Document in order to see whether its 
proposals could have the potential to result in adverse effects upon an internationally 
important site.   These are sites that have b een designated for their international 
nature conservation interests and include:  
·  Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) designated under European Council 
Directive 92/43/EEC(a) on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (the Habit ats Directive);  
·  Special Protection Areas (SPA) designated under the European Council 
Directive 79/409/EEC on the Conservation of Wild Birds (the Birds 
Directive); and,  
· The UK Government (in the accompanying circular to Planning Policy 
Statement 9) as a matter of policy has chosen to apply the appropriate 
assessment procedures in respect of Wetlands of International Importance 
(Ramsar sites), candidate SACs (cSACs) and potential SPAs (pSPAs) even 
though these are not European sites as a matter of law.  
1.24 Within St Edmundsbury there are three international sites.   Those of relevance 
to the Plan are the Breckland SAC, Breckland SPA and Waveney and Little Ouse 
Valley Fens SAC.  
1.25 In accordance with Regulation 48 of the Habitats Regulations an Appropriat e 
Assessment screening was carried out to determine whether this document is likely, 
either alone or in combination with other plans and projects, to have a significant 
effect upon the international sites identified.  
1.26 The results of the Appropriate Ass essment Screening indicated that there are 
no likely significant effects on the three international sites.   The accompanying  15 
 Appropriate Assessment report shows the outcome of the assessment which is 
available to view on our web -site at www.stedmundsbury.gov.uk/ldf  
1.27 If a proposed development could have a likely significant effect on an 
international site, further consideration and assessment will need to be made for 
these proposals at the development c ontrol stage or as part of lower tier 
development plan documents (including the Bury St Edmunds Area Action Plan, the 
Haverhill Area Action Plan and the Rural Site Allocations Development Plan 
Document).   This will require a thorough ecological assessment of the potential 
effects upon the relevant international site(s) so as to allow us  the ability to 
determine whether the development is likely to result in significant adverse impacts 
on the integrity of the site(s).   
1.28 Any development that cannot demons trate that it would not have a significant 
adverse effect upon the integrity of a European site, or that impacts can be 
adequately mitigated, will be refused (and in the case of lower tier development plan 
documents, these site allocations will not be take n forward in the final plans) .   This 
is in accordance with the precautionary principle enshrined within the Habitats 
Regulations.   Where there are imperative reasons of over -riding public interest and 
we are unable to conclude no adverse effect on the int egrity of a site, we will notify 
the Secretary of State and allow them to call in the application for determination.   In 
these situations compensatory measures to protect the European site must be put in 
place.   16 
 2. Profile of St Edmundsbury  
Geography  
2.1 St Edmundsbury is located in western Suffolk. The borough has borders with 
Norfolk and Breckland district to the north, Mid Suffolk & Babergh districts to the 
south and east, Essex and Braintree district to the south and Cambridgeshire and 
South and East Ca mbridgeshire districts and Forest Heath district to the west. While 
administratively links are with Suffolk County Council, the borough is increasingly 
playing a stronger role in the sub -region of Cambridge due to common economic and 
social needs.  
2.2 The borough has two main towns, Bury St Edmunds in the centre and Haverhill 
to the south.   A large number of villages and small settlements ensure the 
predominantly rural character is retained despite the pressures of growth in the 20th 
Century.  
Transport Infr astructure  
2.3 The borough has improving road and rail links, although these are not consistent 
across the area. There is only one rail station, at Bury St Edmunds, which currently 
provides services to Cambridge, Ipswich and Peterborough (for the East -Coast 
Mainline) and London Liverpool Street. However, across the remainder of the 
borough access to rail services is particularly limited and the opportunity to use 
public transport or journeys to work remain poor and infrequent.  
2.4 The A14 trunk -road passes east-west through the borough and bisects Bury St 
Edmunds. Recent improvements have provided an additional junction to the east of 
the town but the central and eastern interchanges (junctions 43 and 44) are 
congested at peak periods and place restrictions on the ability of the town to 
accommodate further growth.  
2.5 At the southern end of the borough, the A1307 provides a major access route 
for Haverhill from the west, including Cambridge and the M11.   The majority of this 
road is outside of the borough and  once again it suffers from congestion at peak 
times; the Borough Council is, however, working with Cambridgeshire authorities to 
manage the demand for car -based journeys along this corridor. In 2008 the A1307 
attracted considerable press attention across Suffolk and Cambridgeshire following a 
series of fatal accidents.  
2.6 Aside from the A14, the borough‟s road network consists mainly of smaller rural 
roads, some of which are narrow in places and can be unsuitable for heavy goods 
vehicles.   This presents a  problem on routes such as the A143 which is the main link 
between Haverhill and Bury St Edmunds and from Bury St Edmunds to the ports of 
Lowestoft and Great Yarmouth and the most direct route from Haverhill to towns 
such as Ipswich, and beyond to the othe r ports of Suffolk.  
2.7 A proposal to bypass Great Barton was explored by the County Council and 
rejected in the preparation of the Local Transport Plan. As part of the LDF evidence 
base, the Infrastructure & Environmental Capacity Appraisal (2009) has hig hlighted 
that, whilst the road network around both of the main towns is reasonable, new 
infrastructure will be required to develop more public transport routes and services 
and to promote the modal shift necessary to accommodate high levels of growth.   17 
 Popu lation  
2.8 The population of St Edmundsbury has grown steadily over the past 25 years, 
rising from 88,400 in 1982 to 102,900 in mid 2007.   The current age profile of the 
borough is similar to the county and regional profile although compared to the 
nationa l profile, has a higher than average number of 65+ residents and a lower 
than average number of under 16 residents.  
2.9 However, the rate of growth of the age group 65+ has been significantly steeper 
than in any other group and will continue to 2031; popul ation estimates suggest that 
by 2031 over a quarter of the population of St Edmundsbury will be aged 65 or over 
whereas the rate of change of the number of residents under 18 will be zero, which, 
proportionally will result in a shrinking of this age group.   
2.10 Despite the fact that the UK has an ageing population, the proportion of St 
Edmundsbury‟s residents aged 65+ by 2031 will be much greater than the national 
average.  
2.11 Over 96% of the population is White, which is greater than the national 
average  of 88%.  
Economy  
2.12 St Edmundsbury is well located in terms of its relationship with a number of 
economic centres; Cambridge, Ipswich and Stansted are all major draws in terms of 
employment.   Consequently, unemployment rates have always been well below t he 
regional and national averages although there are some pockets of higher 
unemployment and some specific settlements where residents rely on a single large 
employer.   Recent economic conditions have led to an increase in unemployment to 
a rate of 3.1% of  all economically active persons in February 2009 but this remains 
below the county, regional and national averages.  
2.13 Overall, the economy in St Edmundsbury has been fairly strong although it 
does lack a broad range of types of employment, an issue whi ch has become more 
marked in recent years.   More people in St Edmundsbury work in public 
administration, distribution and manufacturing than the national average and while 
the overall number of new businesses created in 2007 was higher in St Edmundsbury 
than it is for Suffolk, it is still below the national rate.  
2.14 As part of the LDF evidence base, the Employment Land Review (2009) has 
projected a total employment growth in the borough of 22.2% to 2026.   This growth 
will be mainly in Finance and other bu siness services, Public services, Distribution 
and Construction.  
2.15 The review found that employment sites in St Edmundsbury are poorly served 
by public transport although the employment areas in the south of the borough do 
have good access to strategic road links, making it an attractive destination for 
distribution uses.   It also found that whilst there is currently an over representation 
of logistics and distribution in Haverhill, there was evidence that this sector is already 
starting to spin -off into  other sectors, such as finance and other business services 
and driving a demand for new office space, a demand which is being well met.  
  18 
 Housing  
2.16 Whilst the ratio of housing prices to earnings has improved with the downturn 
of the housing market, hous ing in St Edmundsbury remains unaffordable to large 
sections of the population, and there is an even more distinct lack of affordable 
housing in rural areas.   Average house prices remain over £200,000 which is almost 
7.5 times average earnings.   The issue of access to housing has also been worsened 
by the „credit crunch‟ reducing the ability for first -time buyers to gain access to 
finance and mortgages and has also caused the supply of available housing to 
decrease.  
2.17 Table 2.1 below sets out housing com pletions between 1996 -2008. The table 
illustrates that housing growth in the borough has been fairly stable over time, and is 
not growing any faster today than in previous years.  
Table 2.1 Housing completions (net) 1996 -2008  
Year      Bury St 
Edmunds         Haverhill          Rural 
Area       Total  
1996-97         278     331     144     753 
1997-98         203     273     110     586 
1998-99         177     261     140     578 
1999-00         135     317     116     568 
2000-01         137     244       97        478 
2001-02         92        182       64        338 
2002-03         321       83        64        468 
2003-04         306     206     100     612 
2004-05         86          47          37        170 
2005-06         190     135     42        367 
2006-07         285     109     142     
         536 
2007-08         320     168       58        546 
Total      2530     2356     1114     6000   
Annual  
Average           211      196         93         500  
 
  19 
 Natural and Historic  Environment   
2.18 Within the borough there are a number of internationally, nationally and 
locally important nature conservation sites. Special Landscape Areas cover the 
Lark Valley, the Brecks, and the area south of Bury St Edmunds. There are two 
Special Areas of Conservati on (SACs) within the Borough (Breckland SAC and 
Waveney and Little Ouse Valley Fens SAC). In addition to these, the important 
natural environment sites include the historic parks and gardens at Culford, 
Euston, Ickworth and the Abbey Gardens and Precincts in Bury St Edmunds, and 
county and local wildlife sites. The borough  also has a range of assets in terms of 
the built environment and these will continue to be preserved and enhanced.  
2.19 However, it is recognised that there are shortfalls in open space provision in  
some areas of the borough.   A Recreational Open Space A ssessment prepared for 
the Council in 2005 initially highlighted this and the Green Infrastructure Study 
(2009) undertaken to support the Core Strategy emphasises that open space is 
still lacking in some parts of the borough. In partnership with all district and 
borough councils in Suffolk, in 2009 the County Council published a Suffolk 
Landscape Character Assessment in order to  assist with the review and 
replacement of local countryside de signations. The landscape character types 
identified around St Edmundsbury include undulating estate farmland and ancient 
farmland to the south and estates and lands to the north -west and plateau estate 
farmland to the north -east.  
2.20 As Table 2.2 and Ma p 2.1 show, large areas of the Borough are covered by 
an environmental designation:  
Table 2.2 St Edmundsbury Environmental Designations  
Area Type   Approximate Size of 
Area (ha)   % of 
Borough   
Special Protection Area  3,473.00  5.3%  
Sites of Special Scient ific 
Interest (SSSI)  5,449.58  8.3%  
National Nature Reserve  169.99  0.25%  
Special Landscape Area  16,687.52  25.5%  
Special Area of Conservation  256.67  0.39 
Total Borough  65,450.00   
2.21 These fig ures show that over 30% of the b orough is either within a Sp ecial 
Protection Area or Special Landscape  Area, and in addition, 8.3% of the b orough 
is within a Site of Special Scientific Interest (although designated areas may 
overlap).   There is also one Regionally Important Geological Site (RIGS) at 
Thelnetham call ed Bugg‟s Hole Fen.  
2.22 Bury St Edmunds is an exceptional historic town both  in the region, and in 
the national context. Laid out in the 12th century as a medieval planned town it 
has an exceptional range of historic buildings from early timber framed st ructures 
to buildings of the later periods, especially from the Georgian period, and also the 
Victorian period. Its rich collection of built heritage and archaeology survives  20 
 largely intact and is of great integrity and significance. The historic assets of  the 
borough are key to its distinctive character.  
 
Map 2.1 Environmental Designation Map  
Quality of Life   
2.23 The residents of St Edmundsbury generally enjoy a high quality of life.   Life 
expectancy and general health are well above the national averag e, crime rates 
are below national averages and St Edmundsbury has a ranking in the Index of 
Multiple Deprivation in the 25% least deprived Local Authorities in the country.     21 
 2.24 However, this generally good picture does mask some significant local 
variat ions.  For example, one ward in Haverhill ranks in the worst 30% in the 
country in terms of deprivation and there are related spikes in teenage 
pregnancies and crime rates reported for this ward.    
2.25 Further, 14 of the wards in the borough rank in the w orst 10% nationally in 
terms of access to housing and services.   This means that there are large areas of 
the borough where daily access to essential services such as a shop or a post 
office is limited.   68% of the borough‟s parishes do not have a food sho p or 
general store and 67% do not have a post office, a statistic due to worsen with 
expected forthcoming closures of four post offices and one  food shop.   However 
60% have a public house and 69% have a village or community centre.  (Services 
and Facilities  Study, 2009).  
2.26 This has resulted in a number of villages being characterised in a certain 
way; they very much retain their attractive rural nature but due to a lack of 
employment opportunities, key local services (shop, GP, etc.) and regular bus 
service, experience a high level of out commuting using private cars.   In some 
areas the erosion of local services and employment has led to a perceived decline 
in quality of life but in other areas, people may have selected to live in these more 
isolated area s precisely because of their quiet, rural nature.   Research only points 
to this becoming a pronounced issue in places that have a higher than average 
proportion of residents at or above retirement age; the corridor between Bury St 
Edmunds and Haverhill app ears to be particularly affected by this.  
Key Strategic Challenges   
2.27 Research and statistics all point to St Edmundsbury being, in the main, an 
affluent and attractive area where residents enjoy a high standard of living.   Any 
future development needs  to strike a balance between protecting the historic and 
rural character of the borough whilst at the same time, increasing residents‟ ability 
to access housing and essential services and decreasing reliance on the private 
car.  Also, development will need  to have regard to the individual characteristics of 
each settlement.   For example, Haverhill has a far younger population than the 
rest of the borough and a much greater need for regeneration and an expansion 
of its employment and retail base.  
2.28 Howev er, when looking at the borough as a whole, the Council have 
identified a number of key challenges that the Core Strategy will need to take into 
account and address;  
An ageing population  
Population projections suggest that by 2031 over a quarter of St Edm undsbury 
residents will be aged 65 or over.   This presents challenges in the provision of and 
access to appropriate housing and local services  
 
Rural areas with low provision of services, affordable housing, few local 
employment opportunities and poor pub lic transport  
14 of the wards in the borough rank in the worst 10% nationally in terms of 
access to housing and service s.  New housing will need to be directed to 
appropriate and sustainable rural settlements to bring with it new services, 
employment and i nfrastructure to improve quality of life, safeguard existing  22 
 services and increase the sustainability of rural settlements.  
To support the delivery of affordable h ousing, the Council has reviewed its 
Affordable Housing Policy and undertaken an Economic Vi ability Assessment.   The 
aim of this is to ensure that as much affordable housing as is viably possible can be 
delivered in locations of need.  
 
Employment base in need of diversifying  
The key challenge identified by the Employment Land Review (2009) is in  
matching the supply of appropriate employment land to demand, especially in 
Bury St Edmunds, as the current projections are for an under supply in office 
space and an oversupply in industrial land. This will need to not only be carefully 
managed but activ ely planned for, to shape the nature, quality and diversity of the 
economy in Bury St Edmunds.    
In Haverhill the challenge will be to continue to capture the positive affects of the 
town‟s position near Cambridge and the strategic road network by ensuring  an 
existing land supply for other sectors and meeting the growing demand for quality 
office space.   Addressing infrastructure issues will be important in unlocking 
further potential from Haverhill‟s growing economy.  
The development of the Suffolk Busines s Park will need to be supported and 
encouraged as it will be a key strategic employment site for Bury St Edmunds, the 
borough and West Suffolk.   The Council will need to ensure policies are in place to 
guide the development of the site and to meet the emp loyment land supply 
demand the town currently has.  
In more general terms, the Borough Council will need to take an active approach 
to planning the employment land supply and to recognise existing assets, take 
advantage of strengths and develop new strateg ic sites to meet demand and to 
exploit opportunities.  
 
 
Over reliance on private car for transport  
The Infrastructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal (2009) has highlighted 
that whilst both towns have a good road network, the infrastructure does not  yet 
exist to encourage a move away from a reliance on the private car.   It is 
recognised that in the more rural areas of the borough, the use of a private 
vehicle is viewed as a necessity but the challenge will be to deliver both an 
improved public transp ort service to the towns and Key Services Centres and also 
to maintain and improve the level of local services to reduce the need to travel.  
 
 
Historic and Environmental assets in need of protection  
The many historic and environmental assets in St Edmund sbury are integral to the 
unique character of the district, especially its historic buildings, archaeology, 
landscape and settlement patterns. These are central to making an attractive  23 
 place for business and residents alike as well as being an important to urist 
attraction and leisure asset.  New housing must respect design conventions to 
maintain local character and large scale strategic sites will need to protect existing 
historical and environmental areas as well as providing new green infrastructure to 
complement existing open space.  
 
 
High -levels of growth to deliver  
The East of England Plan identifies Bury St Edmunds as a Key Centre for 
Development and Change.   The Core Strategy will need to deliver policies that not 
only deliver the medium -term housin g, employment and retail growth set out in 
the East of England Plan but also prepare the way for potential additional growth 
beyond 2016 by looking at strategies to resolve infrastructure capacity issues.  
 
 
A Changing Climate  
The UK Climate Impacts Progr amme (UKCIP) produces projections using recent 
advances in climate science to better quantify some of the uncertainties 
associated with climate modelling. UKCIP predicts Suffolk‟s climate to experience 
the following:  
 An increase in the number of very hot days 
 A decrease in the number of very cold days  
 An increased risk of drought  
 An increase in extreme sea level flooding events  
 An increase in the number extreme weather events  
 A longer growing season.  
UKCIP launched its latest projections for the UK cl imate in June 2009. The UK 
Climate Projections have been created to help the UK to plan for a changing 
climate. The Projections contain information on observed and future climate 
change, based on the latest scientific understanding.  
Our actions to address  the climate change challenge will need to be twofold:  
 Mitigation  – Action taken to reduce the impact of human activity on the 
climate system, primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  
 Adaptation  – Adjustment in natural or human systems in resp onse to 
actual or expected stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or 
exploits beneficial opportunities arising from climate change.  
The challenge for the Core Strategy is to deliver a high quality sustainable 
environment which contributes towards mitigating against and adapting to climate 
change.  
  24 
 3 Spatial Vision for St Edmundsbury  
3.1 It is considered essential that the Core Strategy sets out a vision of what the 
borough will look like and how it will function in the future.  
3.2 The overall vi sion and area -based visions have been prepared to provide a 
locally -specific spatial context to the Core Strategy. This has been derived through 
the identification of key issues and priorities during the consultations and 
community engagement undertaken in  the various preparation stages of this 
document. Whilst the vision should be drawn up in close correlation with the 
Sustainable Community Strategy, it has been decided that the vision should have 
close regard to the local strategic partnerships objectives  in view of the absence of 
an overall vision in that Strategy.  
Vision for St Edmundsbury  
By 2031 St Edmundsbury will remain a vibrant part of Suffolk and a region where 
the distinctive local character, unique local heritage and environmental and 
cultural  assets are retained and enhanced for the enjoyment of all.   The Borough 
will be a safe place to live with strong communities.   Employment growth and 
development will produce a prosperous sustainable economy including sustainable 
tourism.   All residents of  the borough will have an equal opportunity to access 
services, jobs, housing and leisure facilities to maximise their potential to live and 
work in an environmentally sustainable manner.   A hierarchy and network of town 
and village centres will grow and d evelop to provide a wide range of services in a 
good environment and accessible to all, appropriate to the size of settlement.  
The borough will respond to the challenge of delivering growth in a manner that 
does not just respect the heritage and culture o f St Edmundsbury but actually 
strives to enhance them in an environmentally sustainable way.   The natural and 
built environment and local biodiversity of the borough will be protected and 
where possible enhanced to increase access to the countryside and th e provision 
of green open space in recognition of the county ambition to become the greenest 
county.   The challenges of climate change will be addressed to ensure that the 
specific threats that Suffolk faces are mitigated but that other adaptations are als o 
made such as an increase in renewable energy and water efficiency and an active 
decrease in carbon emissions.   All new development will respect the  Breckland 
Special Protection Area, Special Areas of Conservation and Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest.     
Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill will be the cultural and economic hearts of the 
borough with strong, sustainable links to the surrounding key services centres, 
villages and countryside.    
Bury St Edmunds   
 The town will respect its nationally  important he ritage to offer a town rich 
 with employment and retail opportunities, green open spaces and historic and 
 cultural assets.    
 The town will capitalise on its status as the sub -regional centre for West 
 Suffolk and its position between Cambridge and Ipswich .   
 The town will develop employment opportunities at Suffolk Business Park and 
 other new strategic limited use sites of a scale sufficient to reduce out -
 commuting.  
 Strategies will be developed to increase public transport, walking and cycling  25 
  and prom ote a shift to non -car modes of travel.      
 Existing surrounding settlements will be protected from coalescence and have 
 green buffer zones developed between them and Bury St Edmunds to 
 maintain their integrity.  
 The educational offer of the town will be  increased with the expansion of 
 West Suffolk College and the provision of both further education and, 
 crucially, Higher Education to retain skills and talent within the borough.    
 West Suffolk Hospital will be relocated to the west side of town to allow  for 
 the development of a modern Health Campus.    
 Development will be encouraged on previously developed land but greenfield 
 urban extensions will take place to the north -west, west, north -east, east and 
 south -east of the town within a framework whereby  environmental capacity 
 and respecting the identity of surrounding villages takes priority.  
 Existing green spaces along the Lark and Linnet Valley at the Leg of Mutton 
 will be enhanced and new green infrastructure established at Fornham All 
 Saints.    
 The historic core of the town will have high quality streets where the 
 pedestrians and other non -car users can move around safely and 
 comfortably.  
 Public transport, walking and cycling links will be improved to provide access 
 to the town centre and bett er connect residents with other local and regional 
 destinations.  
 The economy of the town will be carefully managed through the supply of 
 appropriate land to develop a diverse, vibrant and modern economy to 
 increase jobs and enhance prosperity.  
Haverhi ll  
 Regeneration of the town will continue with the aim of being able to have a 
 more attractive retail, leisure and employment offer to its residents to 
 decrease the amount of out -commuting and to grow an organic 21st Century 
 town based on strong commun ity.   
 The town centre will be a high quality environment where pedestrians and 
 other non -car users can move around safely and comfortably.  
 Development will be focus ed initially on the north -west Haverhill site and 
 long-term development located on the n orth eastern edge of Haverhill.  
 Existing surrounding settlements will be protected from coalescence and have 
 green buffer zones developed between them and Haverhill to maintain their 
 integrity.    
 Haverhill will diversify its employment base, building on  the bio -chemical 
 industry and capitalising on the strong links it has with Cambridge and 
 Stansted.    
 To achieve the latter, long -term sustainable transport solutions will be 
 developed to mitigate the difficulties of accessing strategic road networks 
 along the A1307, A1017 and A143.    
 Within the town, cycling and pedestrian links will be established.  
Outside Bury St Edmunds and Haverhil l, new development will be focu sed 
primarily on those settlements where there are good levels of services and 
faciliti es, having regard to the  environmental and infrastructure capacity  of those 
settlements and the desire to safeguard existing services and employment.   26 
 Strategic Spatial Objectives  
3.3 It is essential that the Core Strategy provides measurable objectives t hat set 
the context for spatial policies and proposals in the Local Development 
Framework.   The objectives will also provide a framework for performance 
measurement in the C ouncil's Annual Monitoring Report.    The recent 
Replacement St Edmundsbury Borough Local Plan already contains relatively up -
to-date strategic aims for planning in the borough.   The Core Strategy maintains 
these objectives (A to I), with some amendments, and adds an additional 
objective (J) to address issues around global warming and cli mate change.  
Strategic Spatial Objectives  
Strategic Objective A   
To meet the communities need for housing in a sustainable way, including 
specialist and affordable housing, by providing an adequate and continuous supply 
of land for housing.  
Strategic Obj ective B   
To secure economic vitality and growth by delivering an adequate and continuous 
supply of land for employment to meet the needs and demands of different 
sectors of the economy and reduce the need for out -commuting.  
Strategic Objective C   
To sust ain and enhance rural communities by providing, where infrastructure and 
environmental capacity exists, new housing to grow settlements and safeguard 
existing rural services while, maintaining and, where possible, improving the rural 
environment.  
Strategi c Objective D   
To maintain and develop leisure, cultural, educational and community facilities, 
including access to green space, commensurate to the level of housing and 
employment growth to meet the needs of residents and visitors.  
Strategic Objective E   
To provide opportunities for people to shop for all their needs by sustainable 
means in thriving and economically viable town, local and district centres.  
Strategic Objective F   
To enable people and goods to move around efficiently and safely to the bene fit 
of the economy and community, with minimum harm to the environment by 
seeking to reduce car dependency and encouraging more sustainable forms of 
transport.  
Strategic Objective G   
To maintain and protect built and natural environment and ensure that ne w 
development maximises the opportunity to re -use previously developed land and 
protects and enhances assets of local design, cultural, historic and conservation 
importance, and character of the landscape and townscape.  
Strategic Objective H   
To maintain,  protect and enhance the biodiversity, geodiversity and natural 
environment and seek opportunities to increase the provision of green open space  27 
 and access to the countryside.  
Strategic Objective I   
To ensure that new development only occurs where there i s adequate capacity in 
existing services, facilities and infrastructure or where this capacity can reasonably 
be provided where necessary before development is occupied.  
Strategic Objective J   
To ensure new development addresses and tackles environmental and 
sustainability issues including climate change adaptation, carbon emissions 
reduction, renewable energy provision, recycling, waste reduction and water 
efficiency.  
 
 
    28 
 4 Framework for Sustainable Development  
4.1 The past 20 years have seen a growin g realisation that the current model of 
development is unsustainable. We are seeing the increasing burden our way of life 
places on the planet on which we depend:  
 the consequences of already unavoidable climate change  
 increasing stress on resources and e nvironmental systems – water, land and   
 air – from the way we produce, consume and waste resources; and  
 increasing loss of biodiversity locally and globally.  
4.2 The goal of sustainable development is to enable all people throughout the 
world to satisf y their basic needs and enjoy a better quality of life, without 
compromising the quality of life of future generations.  
4.3 The Government published its Sustainable Development Strategy, “Securing 
the Future”, in 2005 in which it set out four aims for sus tainable development . 
These are:  
 social progress which recognises the needs of everyone;  
 effective protection of the environment;  
 the prudent use of natural resources; and,  
 the maintenance of high and stable levels of economic growth and  
 employment.  
4.4 These aims should be pursued in an integrated way through a sustainable, 
innovative and productive economy that delivers high levels of employment, and a 
just society that promotes social inclusion, sustainable communities and personal 
well being, in ways that protect and enhance the physical environment and 
optimise resource and energy use.  
4.5 Planning policies should promote high quality inclusive design in the layout of 
new developments and individual buildings in terms of function and impact, not  
just for the short term but over the lifetime of the development.  
Policy CS1 - St Edmundsbury Spatial Strategy  
Regional Spatial Strategy context   
4.6 In putting together our strategy, we have conformed  to the proposed levels of 
growth in housing and jobs  prescribed in the East of E ngland Plan.   The P lan 
requires a minimum of 10,000 new homes to be built in St Edmundsbury between 
2001 and 2021, with a minimum of a further 5,400 between 2021 and 2031.   In 
addition, there is a requirement to provide a propor tion of the identified 18,000 
new jobs that the regional plan identifies will be required in Forest Heath, Mid 
Suffolk and St Edmundsbury between 2001 and 2021.  
4.7 In terms of housing, a number of the 10,000 new homes have already been 
built and more hav e got planning permission but have not yet been finished.   In 
addition, a number of sites have been allocated in the Replacement Local Plan for 
housing, and we have examined whether the circumstances have changed since 
the local plan was published, that wo uld mean some of these sites will not be 
developed.    With this information in mind, Policy CS1 illustrates the minimum 
number of new homes the Local Development Framework will need to cater for.   29 
 4.8 The East of England Regional Assembly has been asked by  the government to 
roll forward the East of England Plan to make provision for housing growth  to 
2031.   The work on this has commenced and will continue as this Core Strategy is 
taken through to adoption.   It may be that the housing requirements for St 
Edmundsbury through to 2031 might increase as a result of this work, which will 
need to be taken into account through a revision to the LDF.  
4.9 As set out in Policy CS1, the  use of previously developed land should be 
maximised through a sequential approach to the identification of development 
locations in settlements . It is also important that the development of previously 
developed sites is balanced with the need to ensure an adequate supply of 
development land to deliver the strategy.  30 
  
Policy CS1 - St Edm undsbury Spatial Strategy  
The spatial strategy provides a framework for environmentally 
sustainable economic growth within the overall guidelines of the East of 
England Plan and the context of the Western Suffolk Sustainable 
Community Strategy.   The Key Di agram illustrates the Council’s vision 
for the management of growth in the borough for the period to 2031.   
The protection of the natural and historic environment, the distinctive 
character of settlements and the ability to deliver infrastructure will 
take  priority when determining the location of future development.   
Opportunities to use previously developed land and buildings for new 
development will be maximised through a sequential approach to the 
identification of development locations in settlements.    The 
development of previously developed sites will be balanced with the 
need to release further greenfield land for development in the context of 
the delivery of the spatial targets. The towns of Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill will be the main focus for t he location of new development, 
supported by appropriate levels of development in Key Service Centres, 
Local Service Centres and Infill Villages.   In particular, longer term 
strategic growth will be provided to the south -east and north -east of 
Bury St Edmu nds and the north -west and north -east of Haverhill.   
Lesser, mixed use development will take place on the eastern, north -
western and western edges of Bury St Edmunds.    
All growth around Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill will protect the 
identity of those vill ages that surround the towns and strategic 
landscaped buffers will be identified and where necessary provided to 
ensure that the settlements do not become part of the larger urban 
area.   Precise boundaries to determine the extent of the built up area of 
the towns will be defined in preparing the Area Action Plans for Bury St 
Edmunds and Haverhill.   
Provision is made for a commensurate proportion of the 18,000 new 
jobs allocated in th e East of England Plan for the r est of Suffolk and the 
same Plan’s requirem ent for at least 15,400 new homes (net) between 
2001 and 2031.    
The table below sets out the components of the new housing provision 
and its proposed distribution across the borough.  All new allocations 
are minimum numbers.   31 
  
Town / 
settlement 
category  Already 
built 
2001 -
2009  Currently 
permitted 
(April 200 9)  Remaining 
Local Plan 
allocations 
rolled forward  Strategic 
directions 
of growth  Other 
potential*  Rural 
windfall  Total  Percentage  
Bury St 
Edmunds    1759  818  441 4350 750    8118   52  
Haverhill    1037  291  1273 2500 200     5301   34 
Rural 
Area Key 
Service 
Centres  
592  245  240 
  565  
325  2212   14  Local 
Service 
Centres  35 200  
Other 
villages    10 
Totals      
3388 1354 1989 6850 1725  325  15631      
 
 
* The figures in  the "Other potential" column  are rounded and include:   
 large sites that have gained planning consent since 1 April 2008;   
 sites with approved development briefs or masterplans (including North West Haverhill); or    
 are identified in the Strategic Housing Land Availab ility Assessment (SHLAA).   
Area Action Plans for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill and a Site Allocations Development Plan Document for the rural area 
will identify the location and precise boundaries of future development land.   32 
  
4.10 The Core Strategy makes  provision for the construction of at least 9,000 new 
homes in St Edmundsbury between 2008 and 2031.   These homes will be 
provided as follows:  
2008 – 2016  481 per annum  
2017 – 2021  577 per annum  
2022 – 2031  583 per annum  
4.11 A number of new homes hav e been constructed since 2001, the base date 
for the East of England Plan and further sites have a valid planning consent and/or 
are currently under construction.   Notwithstanding the current downturn in the 
housing market, there remains a demand for new h omes in the borough over the 
long term to meet the demand created by natural growth in the existing 
population and inward migration.   The Core Strategy therefore needs to be in a 
position to respond to this demand and identify, in broad terms, where at lea st 
9000 new homes will be built between 2008 and 2031 to meet the requirements 
of the East of England Plan.  
4.12 We have reappraised all sites in the Replacement Borough Local Plan 2016 
that was adopted in 2006 and made provision for those sites that have  not yet got 
planning permission to come forward in the LDF.   In addition, we have undertaken 
a separate Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) in accordance 
with government guidelines that has identified available and deliverable sites ove r 
a 15 year timeframe.   As the housing requirement is based on the situation at 1 
April 2008, it is considered important to take account of a number of larger sites 
that have either gained planning consent or have approved development briefs or 
masterplan s since that time.   Their omission from the housing requirements 
calculation would have a significant impact on the need to identify new sites for 
homes.  
4.13 In the rural area there are a large number of villages that have continued to 
demonstrate that t hey are capable of delivering a significant proportion of new 
homes.   Policy CS4 sets out our settlement hierarchy for the Local Development 
Framework and some 44 settlements in the rural area.   Our monitoring in the form 
of the Annual Monitoring Report an d, prior to this, housing land availability studies 
have demonstrated that there is an ongoing proportion of new homes in the rural 
area being built on sites within housing settlement boundaries that cannot be 
identified through the plan making process.   This is especially the case for sites 
that have an area of less that 0.2 hectares or a capacity of less than 10 new 
homes and that are not identified in the Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment process.   An allowance is made for 25 new homes a yea r to come 
forward on windfall sites of less than 10 homes in the rural area.   This equates to 
around half a new home being constructed in each settlement every year.   Our 
monitoring has identified that, on average, 93 new homes a year have been built 
on all sites in the rural area since 2001 and, on this basis, the provision for 25 new 
homes a year on rural windfall sites is a very conservative estimate.  
4.14 Strategic directions of growth are identified on the Key Diagram in Bury St 
Edmunds and Haverhill and the estimate of the potential amount of housing that 
can be delivered in these areas is based on the environmental capacity and 
community infrastructure requirements of each area.   Specific policy requirements 
are set out in Policies CS11 and CS12.   33 
 4.15 We have sought to estimate the house building rate that will be required 
through to 2031 to meet these targets.   However, given the current slow down in 
new house building, we think that the delivery of new homes in the next couple of 
years is likely to  be less than the Regional Plan envisages. A housing trajectory is 
included at Appendix 3 which further illustrates the predicted rate of housing 
growth in the borough.  
Proposals Map   
4.16 The Proposals Map will ultimately illustrate the spatial aspects o f all 
documents within the Local Development Framework. Map layers will build up as 
documents are produced. This is the first time that the Proposals Map has been 
published and it shows all strategic landscape and environmental designations 
which are being  carried forward from the Replacement Local Plan without 
amendment. The Map also illustrates the two strategic employment sites in Bury 
St Edmunds and Haverhill and the existing large housing allocation at north -west 
Haverhill.  
Key Diagram   
4.17 The Key D iagram illustrates the Spatial Strategy and illustrates the broad 
policy objectives for St Edmundsbury.   The Strategy provides a framework for 
balancing the distribution of growth with the protection of the natural and built 
environment that makes St Edmun dsbury so distinct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  34 
  
Map 4.1 Proposals Map  
 
 35 
  
Map 4.2 Key Diagram  
 36 
  
Policy CS2 - Sustainable Development  
4.18 A fundamental aim of the Core Strategy is to ensure that development within 
the borough is sustainable. Sustainable develop ment is a core principle 
underpinning all spatial planning. Sustainable development aims to ensure a better 
quality of life for everyone, now and in the future. The principles of sustainable 
development should form the basis for individual decisions which people take 
regularly about where to live, and work, shop,  where to travel, how to dispose of 
waste, and how to use energy and other natural resources efficiently. Sustainable 
development will not only underpin the policies and proposals in the Local 
Devel opment Framework but will also form the basis of decisions on individual 
planning applications.  
4.19 There are certain broad requirements which all development should meet if 
it is to be acceptable. Proposals must be acceptable in terms of their: impact o n 
the landscape, natural environment and cultural heritage; quality of design; 
sustainable use of resources; amenity; highway safety; and infrastructure.  
4.20 The landscape of the borough is both natural and man -made.   Over time 
many features in our local  environment have been lost through development and 
changes in farming practices and land management.   Local authorities have a duty 
to protect biodiversity and enhance the natural and built environment, and 
national policies and international, European an d UK regulations protect the 
countryside, landscape and its geodiversity and biodiversity for its own sake.   
Policies in the Core Strategy and the Development Management DPD support their 
protection and the potential impact that development might have on t hem.  
4.21 Sites protected for their international, European, national or local importance 
for their biodiversity or geodiversity value are illustrated on Map 2.1 in Section 2 
of this document.  
4.22 The various designations and data available for the boro ugh indicate the 
range, richness and diversity of the landscape.   These include the underlying 
geology, the quality of the farmland, the presence of trees and woodlands, 
brecklands, historic parklands, ponds, and river valleys.   Although existing 
designate d sites are protected, conservation alone is not enough, and the council 
will continue to protect and manage designated sites across the borough.  
4.23 Within St Edmundsbury there are three sites of European conservation 
interest which have been assessed t hrough a Habitat Regulations Assessment 
Screening, to ensure that the policies within the plan have no likely significant 
effect on the European sites. (1) The results of the Habitats Regulations 
Assessment Screening shows that the broad locations for growth, identified in 
policies CS11  and CS12, are not likely to have significant effects on the European 
sites. The following avoidance and mitigation measures are included to ensure 
that the Core Strategy is not likely to have a significant effect on the interest 
features of the SPA;  
1. The identification of a 1,500m buffer zone from the edge of those 
parts of the SPA that support or are capable of supporting stone curlews  
2. The identification of a 400m buffer zone from the edge of those parts 
of the SPA that support or are capable of su pporting nightjar or 
woodlark.   37 
 4.24 Development in either of these buffers which would lead to an adverse 
effect on the integrity of the SPA will not be allowed, unless the tests of 
Regulation 49 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regulations 199 4 (as 
amended) are met.  
4.25 As a result of research undertaken by Footprint Ecology (2) to support 
Breckland District Council‟s Core Strategy (2009), it has been determined that th e 
same approach should be applied in St Edmundsbury, in respect of determining a 
further 1,500m buffer to fall around those areas   which have supported 5 or more 
nesting attempts by Stone Curlew since 1995, which lie outside of the SPA, but act 
as supporti ng habitat. All development within 1,500m of these areas will require a 
project level HRA. Where it cannot be ascertained that development will not have 
an adverse effect on the integrity of the SPA, it will not be permitted, unless the 
tests of Regulation  49 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regulations 
1994 (as amended) are met.  
4.26 The Council considers that a baseline visitor survey and study regarding 
visitor impact to the SPA is a broader piece of work which it is willing to undertake 
in coordination with other neighbouring authorities.   Such a study would be 
beneficial to the Council, to improve understanding of the issues of recreational 
impact, to supplement the Local Development Framework evidence base on this 
issue, and to identify add itional mitigation measures which may further reduce the 
likelihood of significant effects to the SPA.   The Council is therefore willing to 
engage, as appropriate, in work to assess recreational disturbance impacts to 
Breckland SPA in support of any initia tives promoted through the review of the 
RSS.  
4.27 None of the broad locations for growth, in policies CS11 or CS12, fall within 
the SPA or the buffers identified above. These measures ensure a consistent cross 
boundary approach with Breckland District Co uncil and Forest Heath District 
Council and are set out in Policy CS2 below, the Proposals Map and the Key 
Diagram.  
4.28 Suffolk County Council and the district and borough councils in Suffolk have 
carried out a Landscape Character Assessment (2009) that includes a wide variety 
of factors, such as geology, topography, soil types, ecology, ground cover and 
condition, land use, field patterns, cultural influences, and historical changes.   
Whilst this provides a good level of information it is insufficiently detailed at 
borough level to form the basis for the replacement of the Special Landscape Area 
(SLA) designation as advised in PPS7: Sustainable Development in Rural Areas.   
Therefore, for the time being the SLAs will continue to be protected through 
inclus ion in policies in the Development Management DPD until a more detailed 
Landscape Character Assessment of the borough is carried out.  
4.29 As well as, and often in conjunction with national or local designations, the 
countryside is vital “green space”, an d a fundamental part of the borough‟s green 
infrastructure.   We will continue to protect, manage and encourage the creation of 
a network of green spaces, and ensure access to them.  
4.30 As referred to elsewhere in the Core Strategy, the built environment is also 
part of our environment, and the protection and enhancement of the built 
environment will also be a key objective for the borough council.  
(1) Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and Special Areas of Conservation (SACs)    38 
 (2) The effect of housing development and roads on the distribution of stone curlews in the Brecks‟ 
(2008) Footprint Ecology, Wareham, Dorset. Report for Breckland District Council.  
Policy CS2 Sustainable Development  
A high quality, sustainable env ironment will be achieved by designing 
and incorporating measures appropriate to the nature and scale of 
development, including:   
The protection and enhancement of natural resources:   
A) making the most resource efficient use of land and infrastructure;  
B) protecting and enhancing biodiversity, wildlife and geodiversity, and 
avoiding impact on areas of nature conservation interest in both rural 
and built up areas ; 
C) identifying, protecting and conserving: a network of designated sites 
including the Breckla nd Special Protection Area (SPA)* and other sites 
of national and local importance; Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) habitat 
and species; wildlife or green corridors , ecological networks;  and other 
green spaces will be identified, protected and habitats crea ted as 
appropriate;  
D) conserving and, wherever possible, enhancing the character and 
quality of local landscapes and the wider countryside and public access 
to them, in a way that recognises and protects the fragility of these 
resources;  
E) conserving and , wherever possible, enhancing other natural 
resources including, air quality and the quality and local distinctiveness 
of soils;  
F) protecting the quality and availability of water resources;  
G) maximising the efficient use of water including recycling of  used 
water and rain water harvesting;  
H) maximising the potential of existing and new sources of energy from 
biomass including timber and other energy crops; and   
Sustainable design of the built environment:   
I) providing the infrastructure and services necessary to serve the 
development;  
J) incorporating the principles of sustainable design and construction in 
accordance with recognised appropriate national standards and codes of 
practice to cover the following themes: -  
 Energy and CO 2 Emissions – seekin g, where feasible and viable, 
 carbon neutral development , low carbon sources and decentralised 
 energy generation;   
 Water – ensuring water efficiency by managing water demand and 
 using such waste water reuse methods as rainwater harvesting and 
 grey wate r recycling;   
 Materials - minimising the use of resources and making use of local 
 materials;   
 Surface Water Run -off – incorporating flood prevention and risk 
 management measures, such as sustainable urban drainage;   
 Waste – adhering to the waste hierarch y during construction and 
 following development to prevent waste generation and ensure 
 reuse, recovery and recycling;    39 
  Pollution – remedying existing pollution or contamination and 
 preventing further pollution arising from development proposals;   
 Transp ort – minimising the need for travel and ensuring a balance 
 between transport infrastructure and pedestrians;   
 Health and Wellbeing – ensuring that the development enhances 
 the quality of life of future occupants and users;   
 Ecology – valuing and enhanci ng the ecological features of the 
 development site, where appropriate.   
K) ensuring that developments and their occupants are capable of 
managing the impact of heat stress and other extreme weather events;  
L) making a positive contribution towards the vit ality of the area 
through an appropriate mix of uses.   In areas of strategic growth this 
will include employment, community, retail, social, health and 
recreation facilities (including the protection and provision of informal 
and formal recreation, parks, open spaces and allotments);  
M) creating a safe environment which enhances the quality of the public 
realm;  
N) making a positive contribution to local distinctiveness, character,  
townscape and the setting of settlements;  
O) conserving or enhancing the hist oric environment including 
archaeological resources.   
Where appropriate,  site specific and area targets, along with detail of 
viability, to meet national standards and codes, will be set out in the 
Development Management document,  Area Action Plans and the  Rural 
Site Allocations document .  
* Only development that will not adversely affect the integrity of the 
SPA will be permitted. In applying this policy a buffer zone has been 
defined that extends 1,500m from the edge of those parts of the SPA 
that support  or are capable of supporting stone curlews, within which: - 
a) Permission may be granted for the re -use of existing buildings and for 
development which will be completely masked from the SPA by existing 
development; alternatively  
b) Permission may be grant ed for other development not mentioned in 
sub paragraph (a) provided it is demonstrated by an appropriate 
assessment that the development will not adversely affect the integrity 
of the SPA.   
A further 1,500m buffer zone has been defined which extends aroun d 
those areas (shown on the Proposals Map) outside of the SPA which 
have supported 5 or more nesting attempts by stone curlew since 1995 
and as such act as supporting stone curlew habitat, within which 
permission may be granted in accordance with a) and b)  above. 
Additionally within this zone, where it can be shown that proposals to 
mitigate the effects of development would avoid or overcome an 
adverse impact on the integrity of the SPA or qualifying features, 
planning permission may be granted provided the  Local Planning 
Authority is satisfied that those proposals will be implemented. In these 
areas development may also be acceptable providing alternative land 
outside the SPA can be secured to mitigate any potential effects.  
Development at Risby (which lie s partly within the 1,500m stone -curlew  40 
 buffer) will be possible if it is fully screened from the Breckland SPA by 
existing development.   A project level appropriate assessment should be 
undertaken to ensure no adverse affect upon the integrity of the SPA.   
A 400m buffer zone has been defined around those parts of the SPA that 
support or are capable of supporting nightjar and woodlark. Any 
development proposal within this zone will need to clearly demonstrate 
that it will not adversely affect the integrity of the SPA.  
Building for Life   
4.31 We will have regard to the Commission for Architecture and the Built 
Environment‟s (CABE) “Building for Life” standards as a tool for considering 
proposals for new housing development.  
4.32 The Building for Life stand ard is the national benchmark for well -designed 
housing and neighbourhoods in England and was launched by the Deputy Prime 
Minister in 2003. It can prove a helpful tool in recognising and influencing good 
design in terms of how it contributes positively to  place-making. There are 20 
criteria, divided into the main categories of: character; roads, parking and 
pedestrianisation; design and construction; and environment and community.  
4.33 These standards have been adopted and are a performance indicator that  
will need to be monitored as part of the Annual Monitoring Report.   Details of 
these  standard s can be found at www.buildingforlife.org  and on the council‟s web -
site at www.stedmundsbury.gov.uk   
Code for Sustainable Homes   
4.34 The Code for Sustainable Homes is an environmental assessment method for 
rating and certifying the performance of new homes.  It is a national standard for 
use in the design and constructio n of new homes with a view to encouraging 
continuous improvement in sustainable home building.    
4.35 The Code is based on EcoHomes and provides a comprehensive measure of 
the sustainability of new homes, ensuring that sustainable homes deliver real 
improv ements in key areas such as carbon dioxide emissions and water use.  
4.36 The Code covers nine categories of sustainable design including:  
 Energy and CO2 Emissions  
 Water  
 Materials  
 Surface Water Run -off  
 Waste  
 Pollution  
 Health and Wellbeing  
 Managemen t  
 Ecology.  
4.37 One or more performance requirements (assessment criteria) are assigned 
by the Code to all of the environmental issues. When each performance 
requirement is achieved, a credit is awarded (except the four mandatory 
requirements with no ass ociated credits). The total number of credits available to 
a Category is the sum of credits available for all the issues within it.   41 
 4.38 The Code became operational in April 2007 in England, and having a Code 
rating for new build homes mandatory (with cer tain exceptions), from 1st May 
2008.  
4.39 The Government‟s ambition for the Code is that it becomes the single 
national standard for the design and construction of sustainable homes, and that it 
drives improvements in home building practice.  
Building Res earch Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 
(BREEAM)   
4.40  BREEAM is the Building Reseach Establishment‟s environmental assessment 
method for commercial buildings.  It sets the standard for best practice in 
sustainable design and has become the de facto measure used to describe a 
building's environmental performance.  
4.41  BREEAM assesses the performance of buildings against a similar set of 
categories to that used by the Code for Sustainable Homes.  
4.42  Credits are awarded in each area and a set o f environmental weightings 
then enables the credits to be added together to produce a single overall score. 
The building is then rated on a scale of:  
 PASS *  
 GOOD **  
 VERY GOOD ***  
 EXCELLENT ****  
4.43  In considering planning applications the Council wil l adhere to national codes 
and targets for Code for Sustainable Homes, BREEAM and Building for Life, which, 
as stated in Policy CS2, will be set out in lower tier Development Plan Documents 
to be backed up by viability details.   42 
  Policy CS3 - Design and L ocal Distinctiveness  
4.44  Successful places depend upon good design. Cultural opportunities are also 
vital attractions in successful towns and cities. The involvement of urban 
designers, landscape architects and artists and crafts people early in the desig n 
process will help greatly in creating an urban form which is culturally stimulating 
and unique, while the creation of attractive open spaces can make a significant 
difference to the quality of the urban environment.  
4.45  The most successful urban places  are unique and memorable because they 
combine an attractive built environment with a lively mix of functions. As a 
consequence they tend to be reasonably self -contained, being capable of meeting 
the local needs of their communities. Getting these qualitie s right at the outset of 
any development will deliver more prosperous communities and truly distinctive 
places.  
4.46  There are many parts of the borough which, although not of sufficient 
architectural or historic merit to warrant Conservation Area status,  nevertheless 
have a strong local identity which is valued by residents and contributes positively 
to the borough‟s character. Areas will develop strong links around a variety of 
shared interests or common values, and community interaction can be influence d 
by the type and location of housing and other facilities. In areas attractive to 
families with children, for instance, the local school or play area will be important 
focal points, and community networks can build from these links.  
4.47  It is important that the streetscape, or “public realm” of our town centres is 
safe, attractive and people -friendly to encourage walking, cycling, shopping, sight -
seeing and other leisure activities.   In some cases traffic will need to be calmed to 
provide a safe and attr active street environment. Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill 
will be priority areas for streetscape improvements and traffic management to 
support the additional growth in these towns.   Schemes will be identified in the 
Area Action Plans to be prepared for the  two towns, and a detailed policy requiring 
new development to contribute to improvements to the public realm will be 
included in the Development Management DPD.  
4.48  The design and layout of development can have a significant impact on the 
environment, q uality of life and the use of limited resources. Concept Statements, 
Development Briefs and Masterplans will be required on certain sites to help in 
providing definition and meaning to a place which is to be created and to assist in 
setting out the framewo rk for investment and implementation.  
Policy CS3 Design and Local Distinctiveness  
Proposals for new development must create and contribute to a high 
quality, safe and sustainable environment.    
Proposals will be expected to address, as appropriate, the fo llowing 
components:  
 detailed heritage and conservation design appraisals and 
 information;   
 consideration of protection of the landscape and historic views;   
 an understanding of the local context and an indication of how the 
 proposal will enhance the area  and improve community safety;   
 protection of the natural and historic  environment;   
 in proposals for housing, the density and mix of housing;    43 
  provision or enhancement of open space, play, leisure and cultural 
 facilities;   
 access and transport considerat ions.   
Concept Statements/Development Briefs and Masterplans will be 
required for sites which by virtue of size, location or proposed mix of 
uses are determined by the local planning authority to require a 
masterplanning approach.   A landscape/townscape appraisal will be an 
essential component  for Concept Statements, Development Briefs and 
Master plans. Area Action Plans and Site Allocations DPDs will define 
those sites where this approach is required. In some cases the content 
required for Concept Statement s will be included in Area Action Plans.  
In Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill improvements to the environment of 
streets and spaces to secure attractive, safe and people -friendly town 
centres will be a priority.   Proposals for new development in the towns 
will be required to contribute to improving the public realm.   The Area 
Action Plans and the Development Management DPD will include 
specific schemes and policies to support this.   
 
  44 
 Policy CS4 - Settlement Hierarchy and Identity  
Rural Areas   
4.49  Whilst th e two towns of Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill will provide the main 
focus for large scale growth in the borough, a high proportion of the new housing 
and employment development in the borough will be located in the rural areas, in 
those villages which have a range of services and facilities to meet local needs.    
4.50  Borough wide local services and facilities surveys are undertaken annually 
with the last one completed in spring 2009. These surveys assess the services 
available to people to help the council to identify those settlements that should be 
the focus of development, as they have access to the widest range of services and 
will reduce the need to rely on the car.  
4.51  The additional growth in the rural areas will be dependent upon the capacity 
of the natural and built environment to accommodate development without 
unacceptable environmental harm being caused, and the ability of existing or 
planned infrastructure to cope with the development.  
4.52  The Core Strategy identifies three hierarchies of set tlement in the rural area 
where development will normally be acceptable;  
Key Service Centres   
4.53  The five villages identified as Key Service Centres generally have a wide 
range of services as well as local employment provision.   New housing 
developments  of between 20 and 70 houses and some additional jobs are already 
planned in some of these settlements.   These settlements meet the criteria set out 
in The East of England Plan for the designation of Key Service Centres as follows:  
“Large villages with a good level of services, which might include:  
 a primary school within the settlement and a secondary school within the 
 settlement or easily accessible by public transport;  
 primary health care facilities;  
 a range of retail and service provision capable o f meeting day -to-day needs, 
 in particular for convenience shopping;  
 local employment opportunities; and  
 frequent public transport to higher order settlements.”  
4.54  The Key Service Centres will be the main focus for additional homes, jobs 
and community  facilities outside of Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill.   However, the 
scale of growth in the individual settlements will be dependent upon the local 
environmental and infrastructure capacity of the settlement concerned.   This is a 
matter that will be address ed through the more detailed work of the Rural Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document and we will seek to involve the local 
communities in determining the most appropriate levels of growth and the 
locations for that development.  
Local Service Centres   
4.55  In order to improve the sustainability of development in the rural areas, we 
are designating a category of village titled “Local Service Centre”.   These will be 
villages that have at least three of the following:  
 a primary school;   45 
  community, leisur e and social facilities;  
 convenience goods shop;  
 local employment opportunities; or,  
 a good journey to work public transport service to higher order towns.  
4.56  We have identified 13 villages that meet these criteria.   Within these 
settlements, some sm all scale housing and employment development will be 
encouraged.   As a general guide, we consider that a limit of ten homes per 
development site would be appropriate, although more than one site might be 
identified in the village during the plan period.   However, the scale of growth in 
the individual settlements will be dependent upon the local environmental and 
infrastructure capacity of the settlement concerned.   This is a matter that will be 
addressed through the Rural Site Allocations Development Plan D ocument.   
Proposed development sites would normally be adjacent to existing housing 
settlement boundaries.  
4.57  Further information on Key Service Centres and Local Service Centres can be 
found in Chapter 7 – Strategy for the Rural Areas.  
Infill Villages  
 4.58  Villages that only have a limited range of services and less than Local 
Service Centres, are designated Infill Villages.   In these villages, only infill 
development comprising single dwellings or small groups of five homes or less 
within the designa ted housing settlement boundary would be permitted.   This 
would be dependent on other environmental and infrastructure constraints.  
Countryside   
4.59  A number of small settlements across the borough do not benefit from 
having any services or facilities at  all or have only limited services like a recreation 
ground, village hall or a pub.   In these circumstances, the residents predominantly 
rely on the motor car to get to work, shops or use other facilities.    We consider 
that in these settlements the constr uction of further new homes is unsustainable 
and it is unlikely that additional development would provide sufficient further 
customers to render the provision of a shop or other community facility viable.   
We therefore propose to remove the housing settlem ent boundaries of those 
villages which would prevent any further development from taking place unless 
exceptional circumstances apply, for example replacement dwellings or dwellings 
for key agricultural workers. Maps illustrating those settlements where th e 
boundaries have been removed can be found in Appendix 4.  
4.60  Within the borough there are some nationally important operational MOD 
sites. We recognise the importance of defence both nationally and to the local 
area and economy, and provide a positive framework for the continued operation 
of defence sites within the Borough. Subject to environmental and infrastructure 
impact the Council supports the sustainable development of MOD sites to meet 
operational requirements.  
Protecting Settlement Identity   
4.61 We recognise that the strategy for the further growth of Bury St Edmunds 
and Haverhill, in particular, could threaten the identity of neighbouring settlements 
through potential coalescence.   There is no designated Green Belt around these 
towns and ther efore it is for the local planning policy frameworks to determine the 
role of land between settlements.   It is not uncommon for this land to be under  46 
 severe pressure for development and this can erode the separation and identity of 
nearby settlements.   Where proposals for urban extensions and strategic sites on 
greenfield land are considered, it will be essential to have regard to the protection 
of the individual character and identity of nearby settlements and the potential to 
provide positive enhancements  for that community should be high on the list of 
factors to be considered in determining whether greenfield urban extensions 
should be developed.  
Policy CS4 Settlement Hierarchy and Identity  
All proposals for new development will be expected to have rega rd to 
the position of the site within the settlement hierarchy as follows;   
Towns   
Bury St Edmunds   Haverhill   
Key Service Centres   
Barrow   Clare   
Ixworth   Kedington   
Stanton    
Local Service Centres   
Bardwell   Barningham     
Cavendish   Chedburgh   
Great Barton   Great & Little Thurlow   
Great & Little W helnetham   Hopton   
Hundon   Ingham   
Risby   Rougham   
Wickhambrook      
Infill Villages   
Barnham   Bradfield St George   
Chevington   Coney Weston   
Cowlinge   Fornham All Saints   
Fornham St Martin   Great Bradley    47 
 Hawkedon   Hepworth   
Honington & Sapiston   RAF Honington   
Horringer   Lidgate   
Market Weston   Ousden   
Pakenham   Rede   
Stanningfield   Stansfield   
Stoke by Clare   Stradishall   
Thelnetham   Troston   
Whepstead   Withersfield      
Countryside   
All other settlements not identified in the list above and where a 
housing settlement boundary is not identified on the Proposals Map.   
Careful consideration will be given to maintaining the identity, character 
and historical context of settlements, to ensure new development does 
not detract from the environmental quality, townscape , functional 
vitality and setting of the settlement as a whole. The coalescence of 
towns with surrounding settlements through new development will not 
be allowed to happen.    48 
 Policy CS5 - Affordable Housing  
Issues and Trends   
4.62  One of the top priorities of the Borough C ouncil is the availability of 
affordable housing. The borough has some of the highest house prices in Suffolk 
and, despite fluctuations in prices and economi c conditions, homes are still difficult 
to purchase for many, given the lower than county average incomes across the 
borough.  
4.63  There are currently in the region of 5,200 households on the housing 
register (June 2009), of which approximately 50% are si ngle person households, 
40% families and 10% older people. There is an increased need for supported 
housing, particularly for older people, however, the current direction of national 
policy does not encourage sheltered housing schemes and has a preference for 
supporting older people in their own homes.  
4.64  At the end of 2008:  
 The average sale price of market housing in St Edmundsbury was £218,000;  
 The average household income was £450 a week ( £23,400 a year);  
 The house purchase affordability ratio was eight times average earnings; and  
 The necessary household income to afford the cheapest market property was 
 in the region of £52,000  
4.65  The term “affordable housing” is used to encompass intermediate and social 
(or affordable) rented housing, irrespec tive of tenure or ownership (whether 
exclusive or shared) or financial arrangements, that will be available to people 
who cannot afford to rent or buy houses available on the open market.  
4.66  For affordable housing to be viable to those in housing need i t must meet 
the following tests:  
 be only for households lacking their own housing or living in housing which is 
 inadequate or unsuitable, who are unlikely to be able to meet their needs in 
 the housing market without some help; and  
 such housing should b e available, both initially and for subsequent 
 occupancy, only to those with a demonstrable housing need.  
4.67  Planning policies have been in place for nearly ten years to assist with 
delivering affordable housing through the planning process, but in 200 6/7 only 
22.6% of all new homes completed in the borough were classed as affordable. 
This is considerably below the needs identified in our Housing Requirements Study 
commissioned in 2005. The study concluded that 40% of all housing provided 
should be affo rdable and that we should seek to secure affordable housing on as 
many sites as possible in order to maximise affordable housing delivery across the 
borough.  
4.68  Government planning policy on affordable homes is contained within 
Planning Policy Statement  3: Housing published in 2006. It requires Local 
Development Frameworks to:  
i. Set an overall target for the amount of affordable housing to be provided;  
ii. Set separate targets for social -rented and intermediate affordable housing 
where appropriate;   49 
 iii. Specify the size and type of affordable housing needed in particular 
locations;  
iv. Set out the range of circumstances in which affordable housing will be 
required including site size thresholds; and  
v. Set out the approach to seeking developer contribut ions to facilitate the 
provision of affordable housing.  
4.69  The Government‟s national indicative minimum site size threshold is 15 
homes, although Local Planning Authorities can set lower minimum thresholds 
where viable and practicable, including in rural  areas.   The Council has been 
working to a lower threshold in the rural areas in recent years, but there is 
sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the thresholds are not delivering optimal 
affordable housing and that they should be changed.  
4.70  The pref erred approach therefore is to reduce the threshold and ask for a 
smaller percentage of affordable homes on smaller sites in Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill. It is considered that this will be a more viable option for developers and 
provide a better distribu tion and more integrated provision of affordable homes in 
these areas.  
4.71  In addition, Planning Policy Statement 3: Housing states that Local Planning 
Authorities need to undertake an informed assessment of the economic viability of 
any threshold and pr oportion of affordable housing proposed as part of their LDF 
including their likely impact upon overall levels of housing delivery and creating 
mixed communities.  
4.72  To meet this requirement the Borough Council has undertaken an Affordable 
Housing Econo mic Viability Assessment in conjunction with three other Local 
Authorities – Forest Heath District Council, Fenland District Council, East 
Cambridgeshire District Council, and Cambridgeshire Horizons.   The study, as part 
of the LDF evidence base, has teste d the financial viability of different proportions 
of affordable housing and varying thresholds across a number of locations in the 
borough, against a range of market conditions.  
4.73  The conclusions of the study support Policy CS5 which puts forward an 
appropriate set of targets given that a balance needs to be sought between the 
level of housing need, and viability factors. Compared with higher value areas 
where increased targets are more sustainable, there is more limited scope for 
typical local develop ment value levels to support affordable housing alongside 
increasing requirements and cost areas associated with building specification, 
renewable energy and wider planning obligations.  
4.74  Since the Local Plan target of 40% was adopted in 2006, there ha ve been 
certain changes which means that this is no longer a viable or achievable target, 
including a down turn in the economy and changes to the housing market.  
4.75  The study has found that seeking more than 30% affordable housing, as a 
borough -wide tar get (applicable to sites of 30 dwellings or more), could represent 
an over ambitious target, even if the current market conditions change and 
become more buoyant.  
4.76  On smaller sites, the viability study recommends a reduced target of 20% 
affordable hou sing be sought. This is not because smaller sites are necessarily 
more or less viable than larger ones, by way of their size alone. It recognises, 
however, that sites of 5 to 14 dwellings in the larger settlements would be 
impacted by affordable housing po licy for the first time. The first time impact of  50 
 this policy area is the most significant. Alongside this factor, the study 
acknowledges that the development values produced by such schemes will usually 
be smaller and can be more marginal in relation to e xisting/alternative use values.  
4.77  The study recognises that, subject to further viability review and the relevant 
development brief / master planning processes in due course, there is scope for 
consideration of a higher target than the general 30% in r espect of particular 
strategic development areas.   In the absence of this further work it would be 
inappropriate to set higher targets for these locations at this stage.   However, 
consideration can be given to alternative targets for individual sites in th e 
forthcoming Area Action Plans subject to detailed viability assessment.    
4.78  Any affordable housing provided under the terms of Policy CS5 should be 
available in perpetuity for those in local need.   The Borough Council will only work 
with Registered Pr oviders – independent housing organisations registered with the 
Homes and Communities Agency –  in the provision of such housing and in 
particular would aim to work through Housing Associations as the main providers 
of rented affordable housing.  
4.79  Policy CS5 will be subject to monitoring and review and, through the Annual 
Monitoring Report, will set out any necessary actions/contingencies to ensure that 
the affordable housing targets are delivered as appropriate.  
Policy CS5 Affordable Housing  
Developer s will be expected to integrate land for affordable homes 
within sites where housing is proposed, to ensure that affordable 
housing is provided and comes forward in parallel with market homes, 
with targets as follows:   
1. Where sites are between 0.17 hecta res and 0.3 hectares or between 5 
and 9 dwellings, 20% shall be affordable.   
2. Where sites are 0.3 hectares and above or 10 dwellings or more are 
proposed, 30% shall be affordable   
On those broad locations for development, identified in policies CS11 
and CS12, individual targets for affordable housing may be set. These 
would be subject to master planning and a viability review, the details 
of which would  be set out in the Area Action Plans for Bury St Edmunds 
and Haverhill.   
These criteria shall also apply  where a site is part of a wider but 
contiguous site.   
Conditions or legal obligations will be used to ensure that affordable 
housing is secured and retained for those in housing need.   
The mix, size, type and tenure of affordable homes should meet the loc al 
identified housing need and be appropriately weighted to ensure that 
the provision makes at least a proportionate contribution to the 
categories of greatest need.   Where it is demonstrated/proven that such 
an approach is necessary,  the Local Planning Au thority will consider 
issues of development viability and mix, including additional costs 
associated with the development of brownfield sites and the provision of 
significant community benefits, and may be willing to negotiate a lower 
percentage or tenure mix of affordable housing.    51 
 Policy CS6 – Gypsies , Travellers  and Travelling Showpeople  
4.80  In considering the needs of gypsies a nd travelling show people, the Borough 
Council will have regard to government and regional policy. A single issue review 
of the East of England Plan, “Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation” 
has been carried out, and the Secretary of State published the final policy in July 
2009.  
4.81  The review sets out the number of authorised pitches in each authority, and 
under Pol icy H3 sets targets for the provision of pitches by 2011. St Edmundsbury 
is required to provide a minimum of 20 additional pitches by 2011 (the number of 
authorised pitches in 2008 was two). In addition, beyond this period the review 
requires the Council t o plan for an annual 3% increase in overall pitch provision.   
For St Edmundsbury   this would mean an additional requirement of 17 pitches 
between 2011 and 2021.       
4.82  Policy H4 of the review sets out the provision for Travelling Showpeople and 
requires  nine plots to be provided in Suffolk between 2006 and 2011. Beyond this 
period there is a requirement for a 1.5% annual increase. This accommodation will 
be provided to meet identified needs through joint partnership working as 
required under Policy H4 of  the review.                                                     
4.83  Sites for permanent and transit accommodation will be identified in the  Area 
Action Plans  for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill   and the Rural Site Allocations 
DPDs after consultation with t he community and all interested parties.    
Policy CS6 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
Sites will be identified for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
in the Rural Site Allocations DPD and the Area Action Plans for Bury St 
Edmunds and Haverhill in accordance with national and regional policy.   
Proposals for Gypsy sites and sites for Travelling Showpeople will be 
permitted where a site has been identified in a DPD, or in the interim, 
where  they would not cause unacceptable harm havin g regard to the 
following factors:   
a) Designated and protected habitats and species, heritage 
designations, soil and water quality, and other natural resources;  
b) The location in relation to schools, medical facilities, shops and other 
local services and  community facilities;  
c) The amenities of nearby occupiers;  
d) Their size and scale in relation to any nearby existing community;  
e)The character and appearance of the countryside;  
f) The provision of a satisfactory means of access and the adequacy of 
the highway network.  
A condition or legal agreement to control the future use s of sites for 
Gypsies and Travelling Show people may be imposed, as appropriate.  
Where the  use is short term , the development will be limited by a 
temporary permission.  
 
  52 
 Policy CS7 - Sustainable Transport  
4.84  The Government‟s long term strategy for a modern, efficient and sustainable 
transport system was unveiled on the 20th July 2004 in „ The Future of Transport‟   
White Paper. The strategy sets out a vision for;  
 the road network providing a more reliable and freer -flowing service for both 
personal travel and freight, with people able to make informed choices about 
how and when they travel;  
 the rail network providing a fast, reliable and efficient service, particularly for 
interurban journeys and commuting into large urban areas;  
 bus services that are reliable, flexible, convenie nt and tailored to local needs;  
 making walking and cycling a real alternative for local trips  
4.85  The East of England Plan (2008) includes the Regi onal Transport Strategy 
(RTS). This establishes a framework for the delivery of transport investment and 
policy priorities at the regional level which support the aims of the spatial strategy. 
The objectives of the RTS are to increase the number of travel movements by 
sustainable modes, such as walking, cycling and public transport. An objective is 
also to enable the provision of infrastructure and transport services that are 
required to support existing communities and development proposed in the spatial 
strategy.  
4.86  Measures are proposed for urban areas and Key Centres for Development 
and Change like Bury St Edmunds to reduce car dependency and bring a modal 
shift away from the car to alternative modes of travel. Bury St Edmunds is defined 
as a regional  transport node in Policy T5 where priorities should be to improve the 
integration of strategic and local networks, including the need to improve access 
to rail stations and develop strategic park and ride sites.  
4.87  The Plan recognises the challenges fa ced by rural areas, like St 
Edmundsbury, where reliance on the car, for many people, is essential due to the 
lack of transport alternatives.  
4.88  The Suffolk Local Transport Plan (2006 -2011) contains local objectives 
towards achieving a sustainable transp ort network. The problems of traffic 
congestion in the market towns of Haverhill and Bury St Edmunds is noted, as is 
the high number of daily vehicle movements passing through Haverhill due to out 
commuting to Cambridge. The Plan acknowledges the economic importance of 
Bury St Edmunds within western Suffolk and that future development could be 
limited by increasing congestion at junctions on the A14. The implementation 
programme identifies specific objectives for St Edmundsbury including the need to 
relieve  congestion in and around Bury St Edmunds town centre and improve public 
transport, walking and cycling in the town. Whilst the rural areas are not suffering 
a high level of congestion, many rural areas experience inappropriate traffic levels 
and the assoc iated noise, safety issues and visual impacts.  
4.89  The Bury St Edmunds Transport Strategy (2006) identifies the nature and 
scale of transport infrastructure req uired to support Bury St Edmund s‟ role as a 
Key Centre for Development and Change. The study u ndertook an assessment of 
the degree to which the capacity of the local transport network, particularly the 
A14 junctions, will limit future employment, service and housing growth in and 
around the town. It identified that the town has few major transport problems but 
does have a considerable urban heritage to protect. It was concluded that the  53 
 levels of development being discussed at the time could cause significant traffic 
congestion problems in the future and as such the study has been updated  
4.90  All strategic sites in the Bury St Edmunds Transport Strategy were re-tested 
in 2009 and the outcomes from this have helped inform the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan and will help inform the  Area Action Plan for Bury St Edmunds.  
Strategic Highway Network   
4.91  The Suffolk Local Transport Plan identifies a hierarchy of roads in the 
borough which the Borough Council will respect when considering proposals for 
development. The A14 trunk road is designated as part of the Trans -European 
Network and is administered by  the Highways Agency. A number of junctions on 
the A14 in the Bury St Edmunds area suffer with traffic congestion at peak periods 
and careful consideration has been given to the location of development to 
minimise its impact on the road and make use of exi sting capacity.  
4.92  Other roads in the borough which are part of the Primary Route Network are 
carrying large volumes of traffic. Where they pass through villages, the local 
environment is being put under significant pressure. Increased levels of traffic  
between Bury St Edmunds and Diss on the A143, between Bury St Edmunds and 
Thetford on the A134 and between Haverhill and Cambridge on the A1307 are of 
particular concern.  
4.93  Bury St Edmunds has good transport links and is centrally placed in the 
region . It is close to the A14 and has the only railway station in the borough, 
linking it with London to the south, Ipswich to the east and Cambridge and 
Peterborough to the west.  
4.94  Haverhill lies on the A1307, less than 20 miles from Cambridge and 16 miles  
from the M11 to London. It is part of the wider M11 corridor and is near Stansted 
Airport. There are aspirations to reinstate a rail link between Haverhill and 
Cambridge. The A1017 south east of Haverhill provides important links to the east 
coast and the re is a need for appropriate measures to improve this route.  
4.95  The rural areas of the borough are highly dependent on the car and through 
traffic for some communities, such as Great Barton, Clare and Ingham, is a major 
environmental issue. Although not  the highway authority, t he Council will continue 
to explore ways of delivering improvements for these settlements including, where 
feasible, the delivery of bypasses. Whilst an aim of the Local Development 
Framework is to improve access to public transpor t for all sectors of the 
community, it should also be recognised that given the rural nature of the 
borough many residents may continue t o rely on the private car. The C ouncil will 
be seeking to reduce the need to travel by car by securing improvements to public 
transport infrastructure, particularly in the rural areas where new development is 
proposed.  
4.96  Accessibility is central to the creation of sustainable communities where 
homes, services, facilities and employment are provided within walking dista nce, 
or within reach of a good quality public transport network.  
 
 
  54 
 Policy CS7 Sustainable Transport  
The C ouncil will develop and promote a high quality and sustainable 
transport system across the borough and reduce the need for travel 
through spatial pla nning and design.   
All proposals for development will be required to provide for travel by a 
range of means of transport other than the private car in accordance 
with the following hierarchy:   
 Walking   
 Cycling   
 Public Transport (including taxis)   
 Commercia l vehicles   
 Cars  
All development proposals will be required to be accessible to people of 
all abilities including those with mobility impairments.   
New commercial development, including leisure uses and visitor 
attractions, which generate significant dema nds for travel, should be 
located in areas well served by a variety of transport modes. Where 
appropriate, development proposals that will have significant transport 
implications will be required to have a transport assessment and travel 
plan showing how c ar based travel to and from the site can be 
minimised.   
  55 
 Policy CS8 - Strategic Transport Improvements  
4.97  The route of the A14 from Felixstowe to Cambridge has been identified as an 
area that can accommodate significant economic growth and residential 
development. In St Edmundsbury several of the A14 intersections are nearing 
capacity at peak times. Unless this problem is tackled, the borough may not be in 
a position to benefit from this growth. The current capacity issues in relation to 
the A14 interse ctions in Bury St Edmunds will need to be addressed as part of a 
wider sustainable transport strategy for the East of England, and measures such 
as the provision of park and ride, car parking and access demand management, 
bus prioritisation, greater emphas is on public transport, walking and cycling will 
need to be investigated further.  
4.98  Regional and local transport funding will be necessary, in part, to enable the 
provision of transport infrastructure to alleviate existing problems and mitigate 
against  new issues arising from the allocation of development sites. Planning 
obligation and Community Infrastructure Levy contributions will be maximised 
both to provide facilities directly and to lever funding from other sources. Further 
details on measures to be used are in Chapter 8 Implementation and Monitoring.  
 
Policy CS8 Strategic Transport Improvements  
The C ouncil will continue to work with relevant partners, including 
Suffolk County Council and the Highways Agency, and developers, to 
secure the necessar y transport infrastructure, as identified in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan and, in particular to achieve improvements 
to:  
 Junctions 43 and 44 of the A14 adjacent to Bury St Edmunds;   
 Transport safety on the A1307 between Haverhill and the A11;   
 Relieve  the adverse impacts of traffic in Bury St Edmunds, Haverhill 
 and those villages which have identified transport issues;   
 Rail infrastructure in the borough;   
 The public transport  network in the towns and rural areas;  
 Rights of Way in the borough t o ach ieve the objectives of the 
 Suffolk Rights of Way Improvement Plan ; and   
 The Rougham Road/Sicklesmere Road through the delivery of a 
 A134 relief road as part of the strategic growth to the south east of 
 Bury St Edmunds   
 
4.99  In urban areas, particularl y town centres, freight movement can add 
congestion at certain times of day. Overnight parking for lorries and roadside 
services are important facilities and policies to manage this matter will be 
included, where necessary, within the Area Action Plans for  Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill and the Rural Site Allocations document.   56 
 Policy CS9 - Employment and the Local Economy  
4.100  Economic and employment policies for St Edmundsbury in the Core 
Strategy and Local Development Documents are shaped by the integra ted layers 
of policies that flow from national to regional, sub -regional and county -wide 
policies and objectives.    The East of England Plan (2008) sets an ambitious target 
of 18,000 for the creation of jobs in the “Rest of Suffolk” (Mid Suffolk / St 
Edmun dsbury / Forest Heath).     
4.101  The Government‟s policy approach to the rural economy is part of a 
continuing focus which started with the Rural White Paper and subsequent 
publication of Planning Policy Statement (PPS) 7 Sustainable Development in Rural 
Areas, and included, in 2008, the review by Matthew Taylor MP of the Rural 
Economy and Affordable Housing.   In December 2009 the Government  published 
Planning Policy Statement 4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth  which 
amalgamat es policy advice in Pl anning PPGs and PPSs into a single new PPS.  (3) As 
part of this exercise rural policies have been re -examined and integrated to 
highlight that rural areas have an important contribution to make to the regional 
and national economy.   A supportive, flexible and empowering approach is set out 
in PPS4, and it is clear that local planning authorities will be expected to plan 
positively f or a sustainable rural economy in Local Development Documents.  
4.102  The Government has indicated that, following the Taylor report, it will 
introduce and re -emphasise policies that remove significant barriers to rural 
economic development and that author ities are encouraged to make use of the 
advances in technology to take into account different ways of working. The Core 
Strategy and other LDDs will set out local policies for economic development and 
employment within this national and regional policy fra mework.  
4.103  As a Key Centre for Development and Change, Bury St Edmunds will be 
expected to provide for the development of a wide range of well -located, quality 
employment premises for the town and the wider area of western Suffolk.   
Haverhill is well p laced to build on recent growth in new, high quality employment 
premises as part of the Cambridge sub -region offering a wider range of 
employment opportunities in the future, particularly in research and development, 
biotechnology, distribution and new ind ustries.    
Western Suffolk Employment Land Review (ELR)   
4.104  To address the target new jobs figure of 18,000 in the RSS for “the rest of 
Suffolk” (Mid Suffolk, St Edmundsbury and Forest Heath) the three authorities 
involved have worked together and commi ssioned consultants to jointly produce a 
Western Suffolk Employment Land Review ( ELR).  
4.105  The study shows that both Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill have strong 
demand for employment land and potential for employment growth over the plan 
period.   The ELR recommends the promotion of Bury St Edmunds as a Key Centre 
for Development and Change, and concurs with the long -term strategy of 
developing the Suffolk Business Park to the east of the town.   Alongside this it 
recommends carrying out a phasing assessment  and quality audit of the existing 
employment areas to ensure a managed balance between employment land and 
other land uses, and the provision of appropriately located employment land 
premises fit for the 21st century.    
4.106  It is anticipated that employ ment opportunities in Haverhill will continue to 
grow in response to proximity to Cambridge and the M11, in particular providing  57 
 the potential for the location of good quality Research and Development and/or 
high value manufacturing premises in proximity t o Cambridge, as well as storage 
and distribution.  The ELR recommends the promotion of Haverhill as part of the 
Cambridge sub -region and the encouragement of development on existing 
allocated sites.   It also recommends working with partners to improve and 
upgrade the A1307 Cambridge road.  
4.107  Employment in areas outside the Town and Country Planning 'B' Use 
Classes (business, industrial and storage and distribution) are dominant in the 
borough, and this, combined with proximity to Cambridge, mean that it  is 
important that employment policies are robust and forward looking to cope with 
both retaining and strengthening the key employment sectors in the west of 
Suffolk, and flexible encouraging and nurturing the establishment and location of 
businesses in ne w and developing industries.     
The Local E conomy   
4.108  St Edmundsbury has a diverse and growing economy.    The Core Strategy 
supports, encourages and provides for the development of land and use of 
buildings for employment purposes, appropriate in scale to the towns and villages, 
and in sustainable locations.   Policy needs to be sufficiently flexible to suit and 
promote diversity and recognise changing patterns and types of employment 
throughout the plan period and beyond.  
4.109  The development of 68.28 hectares of allocated employment land to the 
east of the Suffolk Business Park in Bury St Edmunds (See Proposals Map, Key 
Diagram and Appendix 5)  will secure an eastern relief road with direct access from 
the A14 and a supply of quality, well serviced site s well located within the borough 
and the region.   This strategic site allocation will provide long -term certainty and 
enable the town to respond to changes in demand.   It will also allow the 
opportunity and flexibility for older inappropriately located an d/or poor quality 
employment sites within the town to be regenerated and/or re -used for other 
purposes (i.e. businesses that may not fit neatly into the B Use Classes).   This will 
be addressed in more detail in the Bury St Edmunds Area Action Plan.  
4.110  Haverhill is close to the M11 corridor and Stansted Airport.   Its proximity to 
Cambridge has increased its economic prosperity.   Employment sites are mainly 
manufacturing and storage, although one of the largest employers Genzyme, is a 
biotechnology compan y.  Detailed policies will be set out in other Local 
Development Documents, including the Haverhill Area Action Plan.  
4.111  Culture, tourism and the creative industries are of growing regional and 
local importance, and St Edmundsbury is in a good position  to optimise the 
opportunities that these activities bring to the local economy.   Whilst the term 
“employment” to describe land and premises used for commercial purposes will 
continue to refer to uses in the B Use Classes, we will take a broader view of 
“employment” in proposals that involve non -B Use Classes (including tourism) jobs 
and/or positive benefits to the local economy providing a convincing case is put 
forward and the proposal complies with the objectives of sustainable 
development.   If necessary , detailed policies will be included in the other DPDs.    
4.112  Development for employment opportunities that fall outside the B Classes 
in the Town & Country Use Classes Order will be considered on their merits 
dependent on location, the number and qualit y of jobs created, and satisfying 
criteria in detailed policies in  Development  Plan Documents. Sustainable 
employment development will be encouraged, including proposals for home -based  58 
 working, such as workspace extensions (subject to criteria including sc ale, noise 
and disturbance), and live/work units.   The conversion or redevelopment of 
traditional rural buildings to create small local business parks or rural enterprise 
hubs in sustainable locations and in scale and character with their surroundings 
will also be encouraged.  
Policy CS9 Employment and the Local Economy  
Provision will be made for development that will aim to deliver at least 
13,000 additional jobs in the borough by 2026.  Employment land east of 
Suffolk Business Park, Bury St Edmunds (68.28 hectares) and Hanchett 
End at Haverhill (12 hectares) ( Proposals Map, Key Diagram and 
Appendix 5) is allocated to enable the delivery of  additional jobs in 
sustainable locations in the towns of Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill. 
 Employment growth will also be  achieved by the allocation of land for 
employment uses in mixed use developments in Bury St Edmunds, 
Haverhill, and the Key and Local Service Centres, and through policies 
supporting growth in the rural economy, retail, leisure and tourism.   
Existing Gene ral Employment Areas in or near Key Service Centres or 
Local Service Centres will continue to be protected and promoted for 
employment uses.   
Policies in Area Action Plans will ensure employment growth within a 
diverse local economy that will deliver a sub stantial proportion of the 
jobs target for “the Rest of Suffolk” identified in the East of England 
Plan.   Growth will focus on Bury St Edmunds in the north of the borough 
to ensure that the town can fulfil its role as a Key Centre for 
Development and Chang e, by providing for quality employment 
development at the Suffolk Business Park. In the south of the borough, 
growth will be concentrated in Haverhill so that it can continue to meet 
the local employment needs in the Greater Cambridge area, particularly 
those of research and development and bio -technology industries.    
Existing employment areas will continue to meet local and sub -regional 
needs at Clare, Great Wratting, Chedburgh, Barnham, Saxham and 
Stanton/Hepworth (Shepherd's Grove).   
Proposals for grow th in Key Service Centres and Local Service Centres 
will be expected to include provision for employment land and premises 
to meet local needs and encourage sustainable communities including, 
where viable, integrated within strategic areas of growth.   
All employment proposals will be expected to meet the criteria set out in 
Policy CS2 to protect and enhance natural resources and ensure the 
sustainable design of the built environment.   
Policies in Development Plan Documents will set criteria for the 
continue d encouragement of sustainable employment development and 
tourism development opportunities (including conversion of suitable 
buildings) in villages and rural areas.   
3. This PPS  replaces Planning Policy Guidance Note 4: Industrial, commercial development and 
small firms (PPG4, 1992), Planning Policy Guidance Note 5: Simplified Planning Zones (PPG5, 
1992), Planni ng Policy Statement 6: Planning for town centres (PPS6, 2005), Planning Policy  59 
 Statement 7: Sustainable development in rural areas (PPS7) (as far as it relates to economic 
development) and paragraphs 53, 54 and Annex D of  Planning Policy Guidance Note 1 3: Transport.    60 
 Policy CS10 - Retail, Leisure, Cultural and Office Provision  
4.113  Government planning policy on town centres and retail was published in 
2010 in Planning Policy Statement 4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth . 
This document  brings  together a set of policies on planning for sustainable 
economic growth in urban and rural areas. The document states that when 
considering sites for development, regard should be had to the need and scale of 
the proposed development, the application of the seq uential approach and the 
need to assess the impact of any development on existing centres and ensure 
locations are accessible by a wide means of transport.  
4.114  The East of England Plan, in Policy E5, identifies Bury St Edmunds as a 
Major Centre, with a role of strategic importance for retail and other town centre 
purposes. Policy SS6 of the Plan sets out the overall aims for town centre 
development.   It is important that the retail economy in the borough is planned 
positively, and as the East of England Plan states, is located in existing centres 
and is consistent with the scale and type of retail they provide.  
Retail, Leisure and Office Hierarchy   
4.115  The main centres in the borough are diverse and cater for a wide range of 
different customers. The bo rough has two towns and five Key Service Centres and 
13 Local Service Centres, as identified in Core Strategy Policy CS4. The settlement 
hierarchy reflects the differences in the towns and larger villages across the 
borough and role of these settlements in  terms of retail, leisure and office 
development which is expanded on below.  
Towns   
4.116  Bury St Edmunds is the focus for shopping, leisure, business and cultural 
activities.   It acts as a sub -regional centre serving both the town itself and 
surrounding smaller settlements as well as meeting needs outside the borough. 
The 'arc' retail development (opened spring 2009) and the development of a 
multiplex cinema (opened end 2005) has helped to confirm Bury St Edmunds role 
as a destination shopping and leisure  centre. The town provides a high quality 
shopping environment and offers a range of attractive shops and services in a 
pleasant setting.  
4.117  Haverhill is an important centre serving a large area including the town 
itself and a number of surrounding sma ller settlements. The ease of access to 
Cambridge and proximity to other retail centres limits Haverhill‟s catchment area. 
There is a council led 10 year programme of investment in Haverhill to help 
strengthen the centre and to promote inward investment. T his investment has 
recently included the development of a multiplex cinema and restaurants (opened 
autumn 2008) and refurbishment of the town‟s leisure centre ( opened July 2009).  
4.118  The Employment Land Review (2009), which forms part of the LDF 
evidenc e base, concluded that the current office space in Haverhill was of a higher 
quality than that in Bury St Edmunds due to the recently completed new build 
development in the town.  
4.119  In addition to the main shopping areas in the two towns there are a 
number of smaller local centres which provide shops and services to cater for the 
every day needs of the local community.  
 
  61 
 Key Service and Local Service Centres and Rural Areas   
4.120  The primary function of the Key Service and Local Service Centres is to 
ensure they continue to provide services and shops which meet the everyday 
needs of their populations and neighbouring smaller villages. The individual 
characteristics of these settlements are set out later in this document.  
4.121  It is important that eco nomic development in rural areas is strictly 
controlled. The countryside should be protected with most new development in 
rural areas located in or on the edge of those existing settlements identified as 
Key Service and Local Service Centres.  
2007 Bury St  Edmunds and Haverhill Retail, Leisure and Offices Study   
4.122  In 2007 Donaldsons undertook a Retail, Leisure and Offices Study for Bury 
St Edmunds and Haverhill to help inform the Local Development Framework. The 
study identified some key areas in relati on to the need for future retail, leisure and 
office floor space in the towns up to 2021;  
Bury St Edmunds   
 The opening of the 'arc' in spring 2009, on the former Cattlemarket site in 
 Bury St Edmunds, will fulfil the need for comparison goods floor space until 
 2021 and address a weakness in terms of a lack of large modern shops. Any 
 proposals after this date would need to be subject to a detailed retail 
 assessment.    
 There is a qualitative and quantitative need for two new discount food stores 
 in Bury St Edmunds.  
 There is some forecast need for additional warehouse floor space in Bury St 
 Edmunds which increases significantly towards 2021. This would need to be 
 located in accordance with the sequential approach.  
 There is currently no identified need for any additional commercial leisure 
 sites in the town, although if operator demand is forthcoming, some 
 commercial leisure facilities, such as branded restaurants, could be included 
 in mixed use schemes in the town centre.    
 There is no need to identi fy and allocate sites for new office sites and new 
 sites should be considered on their merits in accordance with guidance in 
 PPS6.  
Haverhill   
 The need for convenience goods stores will, in the short term, be met by   the 
 existing provision and the new T esco store ( opened September 2009).  
 There would be sufficient expenditure from 2011 to support additional 
 comparison goods floor space in the town.  
 The principal need in Haverhill is to introduce a greater range of shops and 
 services and to encourage a  greater concentration of retail uses in the town 
 centre.   62 
  There are a lack of eating out venues and further provision would improve 
 the attractiveness of the town centre as a place to visit and the evening 
 economy.  
 There is no pressing need to identif y new commercial leisure developments in 
 Haverhill. As and when proposals arise, they should in principle be welcomed 
 and accommodated in accordance with the sequential approach.  
 Demand for new offices in Haverhill is weak and there is no pressing need to 
 allocate new sites. However there is a need to diversify the employment 
 base. As with Bury St Edmunds it is considered that sites coming forward 
 should be considered on their own merits in accordance with national, 
 regional and local policy.  
Infras tructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal (2009)   
4.123  It is acknowledged that the Retail, Leisure and Offices Study assessed the 
relevant market information and forecasts in 2005/6 when the economy was 
buoyant and they will be interpreted and used in  that context. More detailed work 
on retail need for both towns will be undertaken in preparing the Area Action 
Plans for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill.  
4.124  The St Edmundsbury and Forest Heath Infrastructure and Environmental 
Capacity Appraisal (2009) i dentified requirements for additional retail, leisure and 
office floor space in the borough in line with projected housing growth figures to 
2031. These areas are likely to include those outlined in the 2007 Retail Study 
above, as well as the small scale g rowth of existing local centres in towns and 
villages and at the identified broad locations for development which are outlined in 
the chapters on the Strategies for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill.  
4.125  It is recognised that through the Local Development F ramework it is 
difficult to predict the need for future retail, leisure and office development up to 
2031 given the changing nature of business, and the predicted growth of 
technology based businesses such as on -line shopping. The Annual Monitoring 
Report will be used to keep under review the network and hierarchy of centres, 
the need for additional development and the vitality and viability of existing 
centres.  
4.126  More detailed policies on retail, leisure and office development, including 
site allocati ons, will be included within the Development Management Document, 
Area Action Plans for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill and the Rural Site Allocations 
document.  
Policy CS10 Retail, Leisure , Cultural and Office Provision  
The town centres of Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill will continue to be the focus for new 
retail, leisure, cultural and office development, taking into account:   
 the need to maintain their vitality and viability;   
 the requirement to assess and accommodate the need for   future growth;   
 the sequ ential approach to development;   
 the impact of any development on existing centres; and   
 the need to ensure locations are accessible by a variety of modes of transport   
The 2007 Retail Appraisal identified the need for additional retail floorspace in Bury St  63 
 Edmunds and Haverhill as outlined in the table below:     
  2011 (sq m net)  2016 (sq m net)  2021 (sq m net)  
Location 
(1) (2)  
(3) Convenience 
Goods  Comparison 
Goods  Convenience 
Goods  Comparison 
Goods  Convenience 
Goods  Comparison 
Goods  
Bury St 
Edmunds 
Town 
Centre  2,800  2,000  3,350  11,350  3,900  22,100  
Bury St 
Edmunds  
Non 
Central  -150 2,050  400 9,300  950 17,550  
Haverhill  
Town  
Centre  2,100  2,250  2,400  3,600  2,650  5,050  
Haverhill  
Non 
Central  0 -50 200 700 400 1,550  
(1) The forecasts in the table are  cumulative, i.e. the forecasts for each date include the forecasts for 
the previous dates and are not additional to those earlier requirements.  
(2) The forecasts are for new floorspace in addition to the permitted Cattle Market scheme in Bury St 
Edmunds town centre. They include the proposed superstore on the Roys site in Bury St Edmunds town 
centre and the Tesco superstore in Haverhill; the net comparison goods sales areas in which should be 
subtracted   from the forecasts, to arrive at the capacity for f urther floorspace thereafter  
(3)The „Town Centre‟ and „Non Central‟ retail floorspace figures should not be used to prejudge the 
outcome of the sequential approach.  
Since the Appraisal was completed, additional consents have been granted for (Asda) 3,400  
sq metres net of convenience goods floorspace in Bury St Edmunds and (Tesco) 3,988 sq 
metres net of convenience goods floorspace in Haverhill.  The net areas should be 
subtracted from the above forecasts in the 2011 column to arrive at the capacity of furt her 
floorspace thereafter.  
Retail and leisure activity elsewhere will be focused on those Key Service and Local Service 
Centres identified in Core Strategy Policy CS4 and in the new local centres located in the 
areas for growth identified in Policies CS11  and CS12. The development of services and 
facilities in these locations will be expected to be of an appropriate scale and character to 
reflect the role and function of the local centres and in accordance with the sequential 
approach.    64 
 5 Strategy for Bu ry St Edmunds  
5.1 This nationally significant historic market town will be the main focus for the 
location of new development, in accordance with its role as a Key Centre for 
Development and Change in the East of England Plan.   Its strategic location on 
the A14, midway between the Cambridge Growth Area and the Haven Gateway 
Growth Point make it ideally placed to grow in a sustainable manner while playing 
an important role in the settlement hierarchy of the region.   The town has 
accommodated a consistent lev el of growth for many years, averaging 225 new 
homes a year since 1991, but failure to resolve the infrastructure issues identified 
in the RSS will have a significantly detrimental impact on the further growth of the 
local economy.    
5.2 It is estimated th at, by 2031, we will need to find sites for at least 3,500 new 
homes, over and above those that  are already identified in the Local P lan or are 
being built at the moment.   However, this will be dependent upon the capacity of 
the natural and built environme nt to accommodate this growth without 
unacceptable damage being caused and the ability of existing or planned 
infrastructure to cope with the development, particularly in the longer term.  
5.3 The medieval historic core, with its high quality architecture and 
archaeological heritage  is of exceptional value. It will be essential for development 
to respect this heritage and avoid any detrimental impact on its unique fabric.   
This should include careful consideration of indirect impacts or pressures, for 
instance, from increased traffic or for development that is out of scale or character 
with the centre. There may be a need for additional shopping and leisure floor 
space in the town centre, which should remain the focus for such uses and the 
Area Action Plan w ill identify how such needs might be accommodated.   In 
addition, the countryside around the town plays an important role in separating 
the urban area from the surrounding villages and this policy of separation will be 
maintained.  
5.4 The A14 trunk road an d the railway, while making the town highly accessible 
within the region, act as significant barriers to movement within in the town.   The 
central and eastern junctions (43 and 44) are at capacity at peak times making it 
difficult to travel from north of t he A14 to the town centre.   There are few 
opportunities to cross the A14 and the railway by foot or cycle, thereby increasing 
reliance on the motor car to gain access from northern suburbs to the town 
centre.  
5.5 It is proposed to prepare an Area Action P lan for the whole of Bury St 
Edmunds as part of the Local Development Framework.   The Area Action Plan will 
provide a more detailed framework for managing the long -term sustainable 
growth of the town and work commence d on this in late 2009.  
5.6 Across the  town there will need to be a balanced approach to catering for 
motorised journeys and other methods of travel in order to manage levels of 
congestion, air quality and road safety.   The delivery of sustainable transport 
solutions should remain a high prior ity and measures to reduce out -commuting, 
especially by car, will be encouraged.  
5.7 The provision of good quality green infrastructure will remain a high priority, 
as will the need to address localised issues of deprivation and the incidence of 
crime.   In particular, the lack of accessible good quality open spaces in the north -
west of the town will need to be addressed by the Area Action Plan.   In addition, 
the future growth of West Suffolk College/University Campus Suffolk, the potential  65 
 relocation of We st Suffolk Hospital and the need for a new Secondary School are 
major issues that the Area Action Plan will need to encompass.  
Developing the strategy - Issues and Options   
5.8 The Core Strategy Preferred Options Document (November 2008) considered 
the op tions for meeting the strategic growth of Bury St Edmunds as part of the 
overall spatial strategy.   The following options were examined:  
1        Mildenhall Road / Tut Hill;  
2        North of Westley (promoted for employment use only);  
3        Westley / Horringer edge;  
4        Rougham edge;  
5        Moreton Hall; and  
6        Compiegne Way, A143  
5.9 Each of these options was considered carefully against a range of 
sustainability criteria including the provision, availability and potential to deliver 
different levels of infrastructure, its potential impact on the environment and its 
ability to integrate fully with the existing built up area and bring bene fits (Core 
Strategy Submission  Sustainability Appraisal). As part of the evaluation process 
the Boroug h Council also worked with a range of stakeholders to assess the 
impact and deliverability of infrastructure to meet the community‟s needs and 
produced a number of evidence based studies which helped inform our final 
selected strategy.  
5.10 This evaluatio n confirmed that:  
 some of the options would not be available to deliver housing until later in 
 the plan period due to the need to deliver major infrastructure required by 
 the development;  
 the identification of some sites for development could result in  the 
 coalescence of Bury St Edmunds and surrounding villages unless appropriate 
 policies were put in place to protect the physical limits of any new 
 development;  
 it was unlikely that one option alone could meet all the housing need 
 requirements of the  town and a balanced supply of housing over the whole of 
 the LDF period; and  
 some larger, long term releases would need to make provision for significant 
 community infrastructure as capacity in existing facilities would be reached.  
5.11 On this basis, all five options that would be capable of accommodating 
additional housing are being proposed for various levels of development during 
the plan period, but the capacity of each is to be determined by environmental 
considerations that would seek to minimise  their impact on environmental and 
infrastructure capacity.  
Broad Locations for Growth   
5.12 The Key Diagram identifies the broad location for the future strategic growth 
of the town.   These are sites that will primarily be capable of delivering a mix of 
uses including homes, jobs, community and social facilities that will be developed 
over a longer period.   The government describe strategic sites as those that are 
“central to the achievement of the strategy.”    The Area Action Plan will need to 
provide mo re detail about the boundaries and mix of uses to be accommodated in 
these locations.   However, the Area Action Plan will need to have regard to the  66 
 policies in this Core Strategy, in particular in relation to protecting the identity of 
settlements and the  delivery of infrastructure.  
Policy CS11 Bury St Edmunds Strategic Growth  
An Area Action Plan DPD will be prepared for Bury St Edmunds that will 
provide a co -ordinated spatial planning framework for the whole town, 
including the release of larger, strateg ic greenfield sites.   
Subject to other relevant policies, in particular CS2, the release of 
strategic greenfield sites will have regard to the spatial strategy in CS1 
and the need to ensure that all essential infrastructure is in place before 
any developme nt is occupied or as required by the local planning 
authority.   
In order to accommodate the long term strategic growth for the town, 
land will be released, in a phased manner, in the following locations:   
i)         2011 onwards - Limited growth to the nor th-west that:   
 Maintains the identity and segregation of Fornham All Saints;   
 Provides new high quality strategic public open space and 
 recreation facilities between the development and Fornham All 
 Saints;   
 Provides traffic relief for Fornham All Saints in the form of a relief 
 road between the A1101 south east of the village and the B1106 to 
 the south;   
 Delivers around 900 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
 affordable homes;   
 Provides opportunities for B1 use class local employment;   
 Delivers ad ditional education, community and leisure facilities to 
 meet the needs of this development and is located in a way that can 
 achieve positive integration with  the wider area; and   
 Provides improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the town 
 centr e and other locally significant leisure, employment and service 
 destinations.   
ii)      2011 onwards – Limited growth completing the existing Moreton 
 Hall urban extension by:   
 Making provision for a secondary school;   
 Providing additional recreation and community facilities, including 
 the relocation of Bury Town Football Club;   
 Delivering around 500 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
 affordable homes;   
 Providing improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the 
 town centre and other locally  significant leisure, employment and 
 service destinations;   
 Enabling potential transport links to the north of the railway line;  
 The additional housing will not be permitted until the completion of the 
Eastern Relief Road to junction 45 of the A14 (Rooke ry Crossroads).   
iii)       Medium term  - Limited growth to the west that:    67 
  Maintains the identity and segregation of Westley;   
 Provides new high quality public open space and recreation facilities 
between the development and Westley;   
 Provides traffic rel ief for Westley in the form of a relief road to the 
east of the village;   
 Delivers around 450 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
affordable homes;   
 Makes provision for the long term development of  a sub -regional 
health campus ( relocation of the West  Suffolk Hospital) of landmark 
buildings set within high quality landscapes;   
 Delivers additional education, community and leisure facilities to 
meet the needs of this development and is located in a way that can 
achieve positive integration with  the wider  area; and   
 Provides improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the town 
centre and other locally significant leisure, employment and service 
destinations.   
iv)       Long term strategic growth - north -east Bury St Edmunds that:   
 Maintains the iden tity and segregation of Great Barton and creates 
 a new, high quality, entrance to Bury St Edmunds;   
 Facilitates the provision of an A143   Great Barton bypass;   
 Contributes to reducing congestion at appropriate junctions on the 
 A14 in Bury St Edmunds;   
 Provides improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the town 
 centre and south towards the A14 and strategic employment sites;   
 Delivers around 1,250 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
 affordable homes;   
 Provides opportunities for B1 use clas s local employment;   
 Provides new high quality strategic public open space and 
 recreation facilities; and   
 Delivers additional education, community and leisure facilities to 
 meet the needs of this development and is located in a way that can 
 achieve pos itive integration with  the wider area;   
v)        Long term strategic growth – south -east Bury St Edmunds that:   
 Positively uses the framework for new development provided by the 
 existing natural environment and character of the area including 
 maintainin g significantly important open spaces that provide the 
 setting of the historic centre;   
 Makes a positive contribution to reducing the potential for flooding 
 both in the area and downstream in the Lark Valley   
 Contributes to reducing congestion at appropr iate junctions on the 
 A14 in Bury St Edmunds;   
 Delivers a relief road that reduces levels of through traffic using the 
 A134 Rougham Road and Sicklesmere Road;   
 Provides improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the town 
 centre and north towards  the A14 and strategic employment sites;   
 Contributes to reducing congestion at appropriate junctions on the 
 A14 in Bury St Edmunds;    68 
  Provides new high quality strategic public open space and 
 recreation facilities; and   
 Delivers additional education, com munity and leisure facilities to 
 meet the needs of this development and is located in a way that can 
 achieve positive integration with  the wider area; and   
 Delivers around 1,250 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
 affordable homes;   
In each case, the actual amount of development will be determined by 
environmental and infrastructure capacity considerations and the 
preparation and adoption of detailed masterplans in which the local 
community and other stakeholders have been fully engaged.   
Provision  of affordable housing and, where appropriate, sites for gypsy's 
and travellers should be made in accordance with Policies CS5 and CS6.  
  69 
 6 Strategy for Haverhill  
6.1 Haverhill has consistently accommodated high levels of growth and is well 
placed to make  a contribution to the accommodation of growth in the Cambridge 
sub-region, as well as the wider London, Stansted, Cambridge, Peterborough 
Corridor Growth Area.   In addition, sites are available in the town centre for future 
retail, leisure and service dev elopment necessary for balanced growth.   The 
proximity of Stansted Airport, around 30 minutes drive to the south of the town, is 
resulting in a number of residents working at the airport as well as businesses 
locating in the town that require easy access t o the airport.  
6.2 The higher than average levels of manufacturing based industry in the town 
has led to an imbalance in the employment base and a high level of out -
commuting.   However the town is well placed to seize upon the opportunities for 
growth pre sented by the restrictions around Cambridge and the intensification of 
the use of the existing runway at Stansted.  
6.3 A similar level of growth to that currently provided for in the Replacement 
Local Plan will take place in the town in order to encourage  further inward 
investment.   The growth will be in homes and, most importantly, jobs in an effort 
to try and reduce the levels of out -commuting and create a better balance of 
employment types in the town.    
6.4 It is proposed to prepare an Area Action Plan  for the whole of Haverhill as 
part of the Local Development Framework.   The Area Action Plan will provide a 
more detailed framework for managing the long -term sustainable growth of the 
town and work commence d on this in late 2009.  
6.5 Across the town the re will need to be a balanced approach to catering for 
motorised journeys and other methods of travel in order to manage levels of 
congestion, air quality and road safety.   The delivery of sustainable transport 
solutions will remain a high priority and mea sures to reduce out -commuting, 
especially by car, will be encouraged. Ways of encouraging cross town trips by 
non car traffic will  particularly  be encouraged.  
6.6 Regeneration of the town centre to improve opportunities for retail, leisure 
and business op portunities will remain a priority and this will include the 
improvement of the environment and management of traffic to resolve 
vehicle/pedestrian conflict.  
6.7 The provision of good quality green infrastructure will remain a high priority, 
as will the n eed to address localised issues of deprivation.  
6.8 A strategic site has previously been identified through the Local Plan for a 
housing led development in north -west Haverhill that will be developed over a 
long timescale (See Proposals Map, Key Diagram a nd Appendix 5).   However, due 
to the limited opportunities for the re -use of previously developed land, it will be 
necessary to release a further greenfield site on the edge of the town to meet the 
local needs for housing, jobs and other facilities. Detail s of how the preferred site 
was sel ected are set out below.   
Developing the strategy - Issues and Options   
6.9 The Core Strategy Preferred Options and Strategic Sites Issues and Options 
Document (November 2008) considered the alternatives for meeting the 
greenfield element of the Borough‟s growth requirements around Haverhill and the 
following options were examined:   70 
  Development to the western edge of the town beyond Hanchett End to the 
 north and south of the A1307;  
 Development to the northern edge of the  town beyond the area recently 
 developed at Withersfield Road;  
 Development to the north -eastern edge beyond Samuel Ward Upper S chool 
 and Chalkstone Way; or  
 A combination of these approaches  
6.10 Each of these options was considered against a range of sustainability 
criteria including the provision, availability and potential to deliver different levels 
of infrastructure, its potential impact on the environment and its ability to 
integrate fully with the existing urban fabric and bring benefits (Core St rategy 
Submission Sustainability Appraisal). As part  of the evaluation process the 
Borough C ouncil also worked with a range of stakeholders to assess the impact 
and deliverability of infrastructure to meet the community‟s needs and produced a 
number of evi dence based studies, including the Infrastructure and Environmental 
Capacity Appraisal, which helped inform our selection of a suitable area for 
development.  
6.11 This evaluation confirmed that a critical mass is required to deliver essential 
infrastructu re requirements such as schools and health care facilities. These would 
not be delivered by adopting a combination approach.  
6.12 As the Infrastructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal confirmed, 
development of the western edge of the town would be le ast likely to integrate 
with the existing urban fabric, being the most remote from the town centre and 
would be most likely to encourage out commuting to Cambridge. Furthermore, 
although the low lying area has minimal environmental impact, parts are subjec t 
to risk from flooding. The area is also poorly located for foul water disposal being 
located at the furthest point from the waste treatment works, likely to overburden 
the existing sewerage network including the town centre.  
6.13 The northern edge is le ss remote from the centre than the western edge, 
but it would be the most likely to have a significant environmental impact, being 
the closest point to the adjacent village of Withersfield and likely to conflict with 
Policy CS4 which seeks to protect settl ement identity.  
6.14 The results of the background work to the Core Strategy concluded that the 
most appropriate location for the future growth of the town was the land 
extending beyond Samuel Ward Upper School and Chalkstone Way forming the 
north-eastern  edge to Haverhill.   This location is well positioned to accommodate 
future long term strategic growth for the town and create sustainable communities 
following the completion of the strategic site to the North West. The area is well 
located for integratio n with the existing pattern of development with foot and 
cycle links to the town centre and employment areas.  
6.15 Careful planning will be required to ensure that the ridge creating the visual 
boundary with Kedington is not breached and the Scheduled Anc ient Monument at 
Wilsey Farm is protected.  
6.16 The release of land in this area will bring considerable community gain 
through the provision of open space and community facilities .  
6.17 The strategy for growth will provide for at least 2,500 new homes i n 
Haverhill by 2031, over and above those that are already identified in the Local 
Plan and are being rolled forward or are being built at the moment.   However, this  71 
 will be dependent upon the capacity of the natural and built environment to 
accommodate th is growth without unacceptable damage being caused and the 
ability of existing or planned infrastructure to cope with the development.  
6.18 The Key Diagram identifies the broad location for the future strategic growth 
of the town.   This site will primaril y be capable of delivering a mix of uses 
including homes, jobs, community and social facilities that will be developed over 
a longer period.   The government describe strategic sites as those that are 
“central to the achievement of the strategy.”    The Area  Action Plan for Haverhill 
will need to provide more detail about the boundaries and mix of uses to be 
accommodated in this location and it is expected that the development of the area 
will be informed by a masterplan that will be the subject of extensive public 
engagement during its preparation.   However, the Area Action Plan will need to 
have regard to the policies in this Core Strategy, in particular in relation to 
protecting the identity of settlements and the delivery of infrastructure.  
Policy CS12 H averhill Strategic Growth  
An Area Action Plan DPD will be prepared for Haverhill that will provide 
a co-ordinated spatial planning framework for the whole town including 
the release of larger, strategic, greenfield, sites.   
Land north -west of Haverhill all ocated in Policies HAV2 and HAV8 of the 
Replacement St Edmundsbury Borough Local Plan 2016 is confirmed by 
this Core Strategy, with the potential to deliver 1,150   new homes and 
other services and facilities and the north -west relief road.   The 
development  will be undertaken in accordance with the masterplan that 
was approved by the Council in June 2009.    
In addition, it will be necessary to release a larger, strategic greenfield 
site at Haverhill to deliver the development strategy of the Local 
Developmen t Framework.   Subject to other relevant policies, in 
particular CS2, the site will be released in a phased manner, having 
regard to the spatial strategy in Policy CS1, and the need to ensure that 
all essential infrastructure is in place before any developm ent is 
occupied and that agreements are in place to deliver the desirable 
infrastructure required as a result of the development.   
Land on the north -eastern edge of Haverhill will:   
 Maintain the identity and segregation of Kedington and Little 
 Wratting;   
 Provide new high quality strategic public open space and recreation 
 facilities;   
 Protect by appropriate means the Scheduled Ancient Monument at 
 Wilsey Farm;   
 Provide improved public transport, foot and cycle links to the town 
 centre and other locally si gnificant leisure, employment and service 
 destinations;   
 Deliver additional education, community and leisure facilities to 
 meet the needs of this development and is located in a way that can 
 achieve positive integration with the wider area;   
 Deliver aro und 2,500 homes of mixed tenure and size, including 
 affordable homes; and    72 
  Provide opportunities for B1 use class local employment.   
It is unlikely that the development at the north -eastern edge will 
commence before 2021.   The actual amount of development  will be 
determined by environmental and infrastructure capacity considerations 
and the preparation and adoption of detailed masterplans in which the 
local community and other stakeholders have been fully engaged.   
Provision of affordable housing and, wher e appropriate, sites for gypsy's 
and travellers should be made in accordance with Policies CS5 and CS6.   
  73 
 7 Strategy for the Rural Areas  
7.1 Nationally, 20 percent of the population live in rural areas. The rural 
population of St Edmundsbury is therefore  above average at 41.5 percent. We 
have defined rural as everywhere in the borough outside Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill.  
7.2 Rural St Edmundsbury has attractive villages and large swathes of unspoilt 
countryside. Our rural residents report that one of th e best things about living in 
the countryside is its peaceful nature. The beauty and peace of the countryside 
offer an excellent quality of life.  
7.3 The population of St Edmundsbury‟s rural areas increased by 3.2 percent 
between 1991 and 2001; this was l ess than the rate of increase in the towns. 
Nationally there are growing differences between the age profiles of rural and 
urban England, as highlighted in the Commission for Rural Communities‟ State of 
the Countryside Report 2007.   A high proportion of ol der people live in the rural 
areas and there has been a reduction in the proportion of people aged between 
20 and 35 years living in the countryside.  
7.4 Nationally, while virtually all households in urban areas have access to 
services, a much smaller pro portion of those in rural villages have similar access to 
services. This again reflected in the rural areas in the borough, where the number 
of post offices, shops and public houses is declining. There is therefore a 
dependence upon the main towns that pro vide employment, schools, shops and 
health and leisure activities. However, since public transport is not always 
available, it makes it very difficult for some people, particularly those without their 
own transport, to access any services. This can lead to  rural isolation and thus a 
reduced quality of life.  
7.5 The borough has an adopted Rural Action Plan which identifies a series of 
actions which contribute to preserving and enhancing the social, economic and 
environmental well -being of rural St Edmundsbu ry.  
7.6 Through the various stages of developing the Core Strategy it is clear that 
residents value the history, visual quality and unique character of the towns, 
villages and countryside in the b orough.   Retaining the local character and 
distinctiveness of the built environment will be an important prerequisite of new 
development proposals.   Detailed policies will be set out in the Development 
Management DPD and the Rural Site Allocations document.    
7.7 Policy CS4 details those five  larger villages whic h have been identified as Key 
Service Centres.   These Key Service Centre villages will be the main focus for 
additional homes, jobs and community facilities outside of Bury St Edmunds and 
Haverhill.   However, growth will not simply be divided between these  and other 
villages.   The scale of growth in individual settlements will be dependent upon 
local environmental and infrastructure capacity of the village concerned.   The 
Infrastructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal has assisted in identifying the 
possible constraints to further development in the Key Service Centres. This 
information has helped us to develop a broad strategy for the future growth of 
these settlements to 2031 and the key characteristics which must be protected 
and enhanced. Set out be low is a broad strategy for growth for each of the 
villages, taking into account the individual characteristics of each settlement.     
7.8 Specific allocations of land for growth will be set out in the Rural Site 
Allocations DPD, and local communities will  be involved in preparing this  74 
 document which will determine the most appropriate levels of and the locations 
for growth in each Key Service Centre.  
7.9 Where statements have been made about local services and facilities these 
relate to the spring 2009 vi llage survey undertaken by the C ouncil. Statements 
about bus services relate to how easy it is to travel during peak periods by bus to 
major employment centres, for example, a „poor‟ bus service means that services 
are unavailable at peak periods.  
Key Ser vice Centres   
Barrow   
7.10 Barrow is one of the smaller Key Service Centres but is close to Bury St 
Edmunds for access to employment and a wide range of services.   The village 
enjoys a good range of services and the compact nature of the settlement 
provide s the opportunity for housing growth to be located within walking distance 
of all the services and amenities.    
7.11 Proposals for growth will need to be sensitive to the proximity of the 
adjacent settlement of Denham, and care will be needed to avoid coal escence.   
Depending on the scale, planned growth will require additional or enhanced and 
expanded services such as GPs, a d entist, and expanded (or new) primary school, 
sports pitches and open spaces.   These requirements will be detailed in the Rural 
Site Allocations DPD.    
7.12 Barrow is a vibrant village and provides a well serviced centre where 
appropriate and well designed growth that has regard to local conditions, such as 
flooding, through the plan period will support and strengthen the range and choi ce 
of services and facilities and the contribute to the community life and character of 
the village.  
Clare   
7.13 Clare is an attractive historic settlement with a lively centre providing a good 
range of shops and key services, facilities, including a libr ary, sports grounds, 
allotments and open spaces.   The popularity of the settlement has created 
problems with lack of parking, and whilst bus journeys to towns such as Haverhill 
and Sudbury are relatively fast and regular throughout the day, there are no 
regular bus services suitable for commuting out of the village to work.  
7.14 The historic settlement pattern follows the road north to south and south 
west with the Middle School and a group of houses a short distance to the east.   
This mainly linear patter n of development and the flood risk areas along the two 
river corridors through the settlement and to the south will strongly influence 
possible locations for growth.   However, it also has the benefit of potentially 
absorbing areas of growth close to the c entre.   Great care will be required with 
the scale, siting and design of new development to ensure it respects the 
landscape setting and attractive historic qualities of Clare, as well as localised 
flooding issues.  
7.15 Growth in Clare should consolidate and enhance local community services 
and facilities, particularly local shops and businesses, and should take place at a 
steady pace so that changes to the physical infrastructure and fabric as well as to 
the social and community character of the settlemen t are absorbed gradually.  
  75 
 Ixworth   
7.16 Ixworth is one of the largest Key Service Centres with a Middle and a 
Primary School, GPs‟ Surgery, a Library, Police and Fire Station, and range of other 
key services.   The A143 borders the village to the east, an d the A1088 to the 
north giving good access to Bury St Edmunds and Thetford, and providing natural 
boundaries to growth in these areas.   There are flood risk areas along river 
corridors to the south and west of the settlement which will also naturally limi t 
growth in these directions.   The settlement is both compact and constrained by 
these features, and these factors, together with the attractive historic core and 
conservation area will provide challenges when planning for growth in Ixworth.  
7.17 There is  potential to accommodate further housing growth over the plan 
period on the eastern edge of the village as a natural extension to an area of 
twentieth century housing.   This potential has been the subject of consideration 
with the local community during I ssues and Options sta ges of preparing the Rural 
Site Allocations Document.  
7.18 Employment and housing growth in Ixworth will help sustain existing 
services and facilities, although some services, such as the Primary School and 
wastewater treatment may ne ed to be expanded or improved.   The compact 
character of the village will remain as the flood risk areas to the south and west 
and the existing roads to the east and north provide defined boundaries for an 
expanded settlement.  
Kedington   
7.19 Kedington is  a settlement divided by the River Stour and a large green area 
in the centre of the village.   The village has a good range of services and facilities 
including a primary school, library and range of local shops.   It is very close to 
Haverhill for jobs, sh ops, leisure and cultural activities.   There is a flood risk area 
along the river corridor and this, along with the central green area, and the 
attractive character of the village creates significant challenges to finding suitable 
locations for growth.    
7.20 Development in Kedington will need to be of a scale to suit both the 
character of the village and the capacity of services, such as the primary school, 
and the potential impact of increased traffic on local junctions.   Some additional 
population will h elp to sustain the good range of services already present in the 
village.  
Stanton   
7.21 Stanton is the largest of the Key Service Centres and is very compact, with 
the A143 forming a physical barrier to the west and north of the village.   There is 
a good journey to work bus service to Bury St Edmunds and a large employment 
area, Shepherd‟s Grove, is situated on a former airfield to the east of the village.    
The centre of the village is a Conservation Area and contains a good range of key 
services, includi ng GPs, Primary and Middle schools, a mobile library, sports 
facilities and open space.  
7.22 There are opportunities for Stanton to grow within the constraints of the 
A143 and the capacity of the village services and facilities.   The capacity of the 
waste water treatment works (which also services Ixworth) may need to be 
examined, and additional primary school places provided if significant levels of 
growth are considered for Stanton.   76 
 7.23 The growth of this Key Service Centre should support the existing g ood 
range of services and facilities, and should be implemented steadily through the 
plan period to ensure that the additional population and the demand for services 
and facilities are absorbed gradually into the community.  
Local Service Centres   
7.24  Policy CS4 also details those villages which have been identified as Local 
Service Centres.   These Local Service Centre villages with a few services and 
facilities, such as a shop and a school, tend to be local centres for a wider rural 
area than the settleme nt alone. These villages will be able to accommodate some 
small scale growth which will be dependent upon local environmental and 
infrastructure capacity of the village concerned.   Set out below is a broad overview 
of each of these villages, setting out th e individual characteristics of each 
settlement. The services and facilities referred to in the villages were in place as of 
Spring 2009.  
7.25  Specific allocations of land for growth will be set out in the Rural Site 
Allocations DPD, and local communities  will be involved in preparing this 
document which will determine the most appropriate levels of and the locations 
for growth in each Local Service Centre.  
Bardwell   
7.26  Bardwell has a population of 690 and a reasonable level of local services for 
a village of its size.   Although it has a post office Bardwell lacks a convenience 
goods shop, and has poor public transport links to Bury St Edmunds.  However, it 
does have a primary school, two pubs, a village hall, and some employment in the 
village, and is c lose to employment opportunities in Stanton and Ixworth, to which 
it has a very basic bus service.  
Barningham   
7.27  Barningham has a decent level of local services, commensurate with its 
population of 928.   It has a primary school and convenience goods sh op, as well 
as a pub and village hall.   However, it does have limited local employment 
opportunities and a lack of public transport although it is only 2.5 miles from 
Stanton, approximately 10 miles from Bury St Edmunds and 9 miles to Thetford.  
Cavendish   
7.28  Cavendish has a population of 922 and is a significant tourism attraction for 
Suffolk and East Anglia and has a very goo d range of local services with three  
pubs, a post office, village hall, school and a selection of shops.   The village does 
however  lack a good bus service to the nearby employment centres in Sudbury 
and Haverhill.  
Chedburgh   
7.29  Chedburgh has a population of 648.   It lacks a primary school, and the shop 
has recently closed.   Nearby Chevington has a post office and a shop which is 
used by Chedburgh residents.   Chedburgh does have a good range of employment 
opportunities, a basic journey to work bus service to Bury St Edmunds and is 
directly off the main road, the A143, between Haverhill and Bury St Edmunds.  
Great Barton   
7.30  Great Barton is the largest of the Local Service Centres with a population of 
2,085.   It has a very good range of services including a village hall, Post office,  77 
 five shops (including good convenience shop in garage), one pub, a school and a 
petrol station.   Great Barton only has limited employment opportunities but it is 
very close to Bury St Edmunds with a decent bus service to the town.  
Great & Little Thurlow   
7.31  Great and Little Thurlow have a combined population of 951; they share a 
primary school and sho p, and have a village hall and pub.    There are very few 
local employment opportunities, apart from those provided by the Thurlow Estate. 
There is a poor bus service to the villages.  
Great & Little W helnetham   
7.32  Great & Little W helnetham has a reasonab le level of services although the 
primary school is some way from the settlement boundary.   It has a reasonably 
high level of local employment opportunities and good bus service to Bury St 
Edmunds.   Its population is 1,014.  
Hopton   
7.33  Hopton has a popul ation of 627 and good range of services and facilities, 
including a doctors and a dentist, but lacks a good bus service to Bury St 
Edmunds.  
Hundon   
7.34 Hundon has a population of 1061. The village has very few local 
employment opportunities and a limited  bus service to Haverhill, but does have a 
primary school, community shop, two pubs and a community centre.  
Ingham   
7.35  Ingham is the smallest Local Service Centre with a population of 419.   It 
lacks a primary school, but has a shop and post office and g ood level of local 
employment opportunities.   Considering its proximity to Bury St Edmunds, and 
that it is on a main road, the village has a poor bus service.  
Risby   
7.36  Risby is located close to Bury St Edmunds and has a population of 829.   It 
does not have any primary health care facilities or convenience shop, although 
recently (March 2009) the farm shop has started stocking convenience goods.   
The bus service to Bury St Edmunds is not considered to be „frequent‟. At the time 
of the Core Strategy Prefe rred Options Consultation we suggested that Risby 
would be suitable as a Key Service Centre. Results of the previous consultation 
and additional evidence based work has resulted in Risby being reclassified as a 
Local Service Centre and so will take a small er scale of development than 
originally proposed.  
Rougham   
7.37  Rougham has a pub, village hall, shop and post office, and primary school, 
although this is some distance from the main settlement.   It has a population of 
1,158.   Within the parish boundary is Rougham Airfield which hosts many public 
events but this is outside the current housing settlement boundary.  
Wickhambrook   
7.38  Wickhambrook is located on the B1063 road to Newmarket, less than a mile 
west of the A143, 10.5 miles from Bury St Edmunds a nd 9 miles from Haverhill.    78 
 Although small, the village is relatively well equipped to provide for day -to-day 
local needs with a primary school, GPs‟ surgery, social centre, sports and play 
facilities, a convenience store, post office and petrol station.   It is a hub for a 
number of smaller villages and rural hamlets but has limited public transport and 
local employment opportunities.  
Policy CS13 Rural Areas  
7.39  It is important that the scale and type of development permitted in rural 
settlements maintain s the sustainability of these communities and that 
development outside these settlements is controlled.  
Policy CS13 Rural Areas  
The scale of development in Key Service Centres, Local Service Centres 
and Infill Villages, as defined in Policy CS1, will refl ect the need to 
maintain the sustainability of local services for the communities they 
serve, the diversification of the economy and the provision of housing 
for local needs.   
Development outside the settlements defined in Policy CS4 will be 
strictly contr olled, with a priority on protecting and enhancing the 
character, appearance , historic qualities and biodiversity of the 
countryside while promoting sustainable diversification of the rural 
economy. Policies in the Development Management DPD and Rural Site  
Allocations DPD will set out detailed uses which are appropriate in rural 
areas.   
 
  79 
 8 Infrastructure, Implementation and Monitoring  
8.1 Delivery and monitoring of progress will be crucial to the success of the Core 
Strategy policies. For this reason a d elivery framework, together with indicators 
and targets are set out to monitor the implementation of the plan. The purpose of 
this chapter is to provide some added explanation which pulls together the various 
policy strands and to set out comprehensive pol icies regarding joint working and 
the role of developer contributions in delivering the required community 
infrastructure. All of these components combined make up the Delivery, 
Implementation and Monitoring Plan for the Core Strategy.  
Joint Working   
8.2 The Core Strategy sets out a vision of how change in St Edmundsbury will be 
managed  over the next 20 years. When considering delivery and implementation, 
it is important to recognise that the Core Strategy is a spatial document and not 
solely a land use pl an. As such it seeks to express the aspirations of the West 
Suffolk Sustainable Community Strategy, along with the Council‟s own priorities 
and national/regional policies. Influencing and managing the development and use 
of land is a key delivery mechanism , but the Core Strategy will rely also upon a 
concerted effort on the part of various organisations, businesses, public sector 
bodies, developers and individuals in achieving the implementation of its policies.  
8.3 The C ouncil has already established a Gr owth Area Partnership Board with a 
remit to manage and co -ordinate the delivery of major development projects. The 
role and membership of the Board will be reviewed on a regular basis to ensure it 
is in the strongest possible position to deliver the strate gic development projects 
of the LDF.  
Environmental and Infrastructure Capacity Appraisal   
8.4 To successfully implement the Core Strategy it will be necessary to coordinate 
and fund new infrastructure to deliver development and to ensure that 
unacceptable  strain is not placed upon existing infrastructure. Key infrastructure 
provisions include water supply, sewerage, drainage, energy provision, health 
provision, police resources, open space and transport infrastructure.  
8.5 It is essential that the Local D evelopment Framework is underpinned by a 
robust evidence base in terms of what infrastructure is currently available and 
what will be required to deliver the growth strategy. To meet this requirement, 
independent consultants were appointed to undertake an Infrastructure and 
Environmental Capacity Appraisal on behalf of St Edmundsbury Borough Council 
(SEBC) and Forest Heath District Council (FHDC) in mid 2008.  
8.6 The study seeks to assess the need for and means of providing and 
maintaining social, physical  and environmental infrastructure to support housing 
growth in these areas, for the period to 2031.  
Objectives of the Study   
8.7 Within the Infrastructure Appraisal, the St Edmundsbury element considers 
the infrastructure capacity of the borough as a whol e, as well as considering the 
towns of Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill and the Key Service Centres as set out in 
Policy CS4.  
8.8 The role of the study was to consider the infrastructure issues and capacity 
implications of meeting the adopted Regional Spatia l Strategy growth figures in 
the current round of Local Development Documents.   80 
 8.9 The study also considered the infrastructure/environmental capacity 
thresholds which might limit the scope for housing growth beyond existing 
Regional Spatial Strategy prop osals, most immediately for the period to 2031, and 
examined how these might be overcome.  
8.10 In particular the study considered how development in the area might be 
accommodated and identified specifically:  
 What infrastructure will be needed to support  this?  
 When it will be needed?  
 How can it be funded?  
 What are the options?  
 What are the associated risks?  
 Where relevant, how can long term future maintenance be secured?  
8.11 Whilst key stakeholders were involved throughout the production of the Cor e 
Strategy through a series of topic based focus groups, the outputs from these 
meetings were supplemented through the consultant led engagement with 
stakeholders during the development of the infrastructure appraisal. This has 
ensured a robust outcome tha t provides certainty of the need for infrastructure 
and the potential costs of provision.  
Outcomes of the Study   
8.12 The Infrastructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal identified no 
capacity issues that could not be overcome through mitigation measu res. The key 
infrastructure capacity issues and risks of non delivery to improve capacity are set 
out in a series of settlement tables in Appendix 6, detailing towns and Key Service 
Centres as established in Policy CS4. These tables also set out the fundam ental, 
essential and required infrastructure for each of these settlements along with 
tipping points (number of new homes required before a certain level of 
infrastructure is required). Finally the tables set out a broad estimation of how the 
required infr astructure provision will be met. All of the information in the tables is 
summarised from the Infrastructure and Environmental Capacity Appraisal which, 
along with the Core Strategy Infrastructure Delivery Plan, should be be read 
alongside these tables.  
8.13 The tables are accompanied by a visual representation of the figures and 
analysis contained within the main report. These figures are not designed to be 
used as a definitive identification of what infrastructure is required at each level of 
growth but does provide an overview of the likely types of infrastructure required.  
8.14 When assessing the requirement for infrastructure associated with housing 
growth, in a policy and delivery climate where resources are limited, there is a 
need to focus on what is most needed, and to make choices and trade -offs 
between the costs and benefits associated with different requirements. This is 
particularly relevant at a time when public finances are likely to be constrained, 
and where development values are pressured by a difficult market.    
8.15 For this reason, the Study has sought to categorise different infrastructure 
types based on a high level view of its necessity in bringing forward development. 
It seeks to distinguish between:  
a „Fundamental‟ infrastructure r equired to overcome development 
„showstoppers‟. This category includes infrastructure that is so fundamental to 
growth taking place that without it development (or occupancy of  81 
 development) could not occur (e.g. supply of water, utilities or access). These  
are infrastructure types that must be provided up -front to support 
development;  
b „Essential‟ infrastructure required to ensure development can be 
implemented with no detrimental effects on site, to the settlement and 
beyond. Infrastructure in this categ ory will be essential to achieving growth in 
a timely and sustainable manner, and which must be delivered at least in the 
medium to long term or to allow later phases to proceed, but where (subject 
to location) a short term alternative might be possible (e .g. school provision, 
where the possibility exists to bus children to a nearby town or village); and  
c „Required‟ infrastructure to ensure sustainable communities are created. This 
category includes infrastructure which is deemed necessary by virtue of 
legitimate policy objectives (e.g. around access to amenities) and the desire to 
achieve high quality and sustainable development.  
8.16 For clarification, the third category „Required‟ does not imply that it is not 
legitimate to seek provision of such infra structure through s.106 agreements, or 
other legitimate arrangements, in accordance with the relevant guidance/SPD.  
8.17 The Borough Council recognises that larger developments could have an 
impact outside the administrative boundary, e.g. traffic impact.  While some work 
has been undertaken to assess traffic impact it will be necessary for the other 
DPDs to assess wider impact and make the necessary arrangements for the 
mitigation of any such impact.  
8.18 By definition, the exercise of defining the above is one that is strategic, 
largely location blind and is a function of policy weight attached before the 
establishment of a formal pattern of growth. It should be recognised that it is 
wholly possible for infrastructure to sit within different categories in  different 
locations/developments.  As the study seeks to assess a broad spectrum of 
infrastructure classes these have been categorised into the three guiding 
principles „fundamental‟, „essential‟ and „required‟ as set out in the table below.  
Table 8.1 In frastructure Types  
Infrastructure Type   Fundamental   Essential   Required   
Natural Environment and 
Green Infrastructure         
Local/National Nature Reserves      X 
Sports Pitches      X 
Non-Pitch Sports Areas      X 
Amenity Open Space      X 
Allotments      X 
Children‟s Play Areas      X  82 
 Infrastructure Type   Fundamental   Essential   Required   
Social Infrastructure         
Health - GPs   X   
Health - Dentists    X   
Nursing Homes – Social Care      X 
Education – Primary Schools 
(pupil places)    X   
Education – Middle Schools 
(pupil places)    X   
Education – Upper Schools 
(pupil places)    X   
Community Centres      X 
Libraries      X 
Emergency Services         
Police, Ambulance, Fire and 
Rescue    X   
Transport         
Road Network  X     
Public Transport  X     
Utilities         
Water  X     
Energy  X     
Leisure, Business and Retail         
Swimming Pools      X 
Sports Halls      X 
Indoor Bowls      X 
Business Support      X  83 
 Infrastructure Type   Fundamental   Essential   Required   
Arts and Culture (Galleries)      X 
Local Convenience Shop    X   
Other Retail (including Town 
Centre and Key Service Centre 
Provision)      X 
Schools Reorganisation   
8.19 Schools are important focal points for communities and meet an essential 
local need. St Edmundsbury has a school organisation structure which currently 
operates on the basis of first, middle and secondary schools. Suffo lk County 
Council is currently implementing a Schools Reorganisation Review (SOR) to 
simplify this structure, and change to a primary/secondary two tier system over a 
phased period. The intention is that this will enable much better use of resources. 
This will have implications for existing schools in the Borough, both 
organisationally and in terms of physical needs. Some may need more space and 
others less.  
8.20 As well as providing for educational needs, many schools provide an 
important focus for local communities providing facilities for recreation and adult 
learning. The Local Development Framework, will, through policies in the Area 
Action Plans, seek to retain all existing school sites which are identified as surplus 
to requirements through SOR, for community uses and only allowing them to be 
developed for commercial gain as a last resort.  
8.21  The emerging Site -specific Rural Allocations Development Plan Document 
and Area Action Plans for Bury St Edmunds and Haverhill will set out more 
detailed pol icies for those schools where some change in space requirements is 
envisaged. The Area Action Plan for Bury St Edmunds will identify a site for a new 
secondary school in the town, although it is envisaged that a location on the 
eastern side of the town wou ld provide a better balance in the distribution of the  
towns education establishments,  for which there is an identified need. The final 
choice of site will be based on accessibility, environmental impact and ensuring 
the site is large enough to accommodate  future needs.  
Balancing the supply of infrastructure and the delivery of development  
8.22 Planning Policy Statement 12 (PPS12) states that the Local Development 
Framework Core Strategy is the means for “orchestrating the necessary social, 
physical and gr een infrastructure required to ensure that sustainable communities 
are created”.  Within this context, an Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been 
prepared as an important part of the evidence base that underpins this Core 
Strategy.   It will be submitted for examination alongside the Core Strategy. 
 Paragraph 4.8 of PPS12 describes the role of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
 The Infrastructure Delivery Plan may also be used to provide a basis to calculate 
appropriate charging mechanisms, should it be decide d to implement locally the 
new Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).  Final guidance on the CIL is expected 
to be published by the Government in Spring 2010 and no provision can therefore 
be made for its introduction at this time.   84 
 8.23 The Infrastructure D elivery Plan briefly outlines the infrastructure projects 
required to deliver the development strategy of the Core Strategy and is based on 
the outcomes of work undertaken for the Council in the preparation of an 
Infrastructure and Environment Capacity Stu dy.  In addition, a separate study of 
Green Infrastructure requirements has been prepared.   Transport infrastructure 
requirements are being assessed separately by the County Council as highway 
authority and this work will be published shortly, at which poi nt the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan will be updated.  
8.24 In some areas the actual cost of infrastructure is unknown at present and 
these cost uncertainties increase when trying to project delivery plans beyond the 
short to medium term.   It is therefore e ssential that this document is regularly 
reviewed as part of the Council's LDF Annual Monitoring Report in order to 
reappraise needs and costs.   In addition, some projects are large and will take a 
number of years to come to fruition.   However, the fact th at LDF plans for the 
longer term, to 2031, provides some certainty for infrastructure providers and 
enables them to plan for this provision within their own investment programmes.  
8.25  Following on from the above, Polic y CS14 set s out our approach to the 
sequential development of sites and community infrastructure capacity and tariffs.  
Policy CS14  Community Infrastructure Capacity and T ariffs  
An Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been prepared to supplement the 
Core Strategy and ensure that development and  the delivery of 
infrastructure is coordinated.   
All new proposals for development will be required to demonstrate that 
the necessary on and off -site infrastructure capacity required to support 
the development and to mitigate the impact of it on existing 
infrastructure exists or will exist prior to that development being 
occupied.     
In circumstances where the provision or improvement of infrastructure 
or other works or facilities is necessary, both within and beyond the 
borough boundary, to address communi ty or environmental needs 
associated with new development or to mitigate the impact of 
development on the environment or existing communities, standard 
charges and/or standard formulae will be imposed for the payment of 
financial contributions towards such  infrastructure, works or facilities to 
ensure that all such development makes an appropriate and reasonable 
contribution to the costs of provision.   
The requirement to pay the standard charge and/or standard formulae 
will be reviewed and modified as appro priate in circumstances where 
the provision of infrastructure, works or facilities normally covered by 
standard charges is to be provided as part of the development 
proposals.   
The provision of infrastructure will be linked directly to phasing of 
developme nt on land throughout the borough to ensure that there is no 
detrimental impact on existing infrastructure, the environment or 
residential amenity.   It will be coordinated and delivered in partnership 
with other authorities and agencies such as the local h ighways 
authority, local education authority, the environment agency, primary 
care trusts, Suffolk Constabulary,  utility companies and other private  85 
 and public sector partners.   The Local Strategic Partnership will also 
have an important role to play in th e co-ordination of infrastructure 
delivery.   
Key infrastructure requirements to deliver the objectives of the Core 
Strategy include, but are not limited to:   
1. Fundamental Infrastructure   
 New relief road s in Bury St Edmunds ;  
 Improved sustainable transpor t links between new neighbourhoods 
 and town centres and other destinations, including cycle networks;   
 Junction improvements to A14;   
 Additional substations and upgrades to wastewater works.   
2. Essential Infrastructure   
 Additional school place provision,  including new school sites;   
 Additional GPs and Dentists;   
 Local convenience shops ;  
 Police resources such as Police Community Support Officers .  
3. Required Infrastructure   
 Community facilities across the borough;   
 Leisure, open space, recreation provisi on and public realm 
 enhancements.   
Policy CS15 Plan, Monitor, Manage  
Monitoring, Targets and Indicators   
8.26  One of the aims of the new Local Development Framework system is to be 
more flexible with the ability to respond quickly to changing circumstanc es 
through the „plan, monitor and manage‟ approach. Government guidance on 
monitoring LDFs advises that a structured approach to developing indicators is 
necessary, recognising their different types and purposes. This enables different 
parts of the plan to  be updated as and when needed. A sound plan should 
therefore include clear mechanisms to:  
• monitor the strategy‟s preparation and outcomes by reviewing its 
performance, effectiveness and relevance  
• manage its implementation by taking early action to ov ercome barriers to 
delivery, or reviewing the strategy to meet changing circumstances.  
8.27  An essential component of the Core Strategy is a framework with clear 
objectives to deliver the strategy.   We have already identified a number of 
strategic documen ts with objectives that the Local Development Framework can 
play a major part in delivering.   Strengthening the relationship between the 
Sustainable Community Strategy and the Local Development Framework will help 
this approach.  
8.28  Monitoring involves m easuring indicators which enable the establishment of 
a link between the implementation of the plan and the likely significant effect  86 
 (positive or negative) being monitored. It helps to ensure that any adverse effects 
arising during implementation of the p lan can be identified and action can be 
taken to address them.  
8.29  The monitoring indicators set out in Appendix 7 are intended to measure the 
key outcomes sought, and provide a brief guide to overall progress on the Core 
Strategy. Each Development Plan Document will be monitored individually, and 
the results brought together in the Annual Monitoring Report. The involvement of 
partner organisations will be sought wherever appropriate and are in many 
instances already being undertaken.  
8.30  Future Annual Monitoring Reports will therefore need to identify whether:  
 The policies are achieving their objectives and especially whether they are 
 delivering sustainable development;  
 the policies are having unintended consequences;  
 the assumptions and objectives that support the policies are still relevant; 
 and,  
 our targets are being achieved, especially in relation to the delivery for new 
 homes and jobs.  
8.31  The Sustainability Assessment process has identified a range of significant 
sustainability effects (a nd indicators) which will require monitoring as part of the 
plan implementation. Sustainability Appraisal monitoring will be incorporated into 
wider monitoring arrangements reported in the Annual Monitoring Report. The 
sustainability effects which should b e monitored and the indicators to be utilised 
are included in the Sustainability Appraisal which accompanies the Core Strategy.  
Policy CS15  Plan, Monitor , Manage  
Compliance with policies and allocations in the Local Development 
Framework (LDF) will be co ntinuously monitored throughout the plan 
period. If, through monitoring, it appears that policies and allocations 
are not being met, the following mechanisms will be triggered:   
1. Review of housing and employment land supply and allocations;   
2. Action to bring  forward sites for development, wherever possible in 
 partnership with landowners and developers;   
3. Action to bring forward development on previously developed land;   
4. Action to secure the timely provision of infrastructure;   
5. Review of relevant parts of the LDF  
 
 
 
  87 Appendix 1: Glossary of Terms  
List of acronyms and technical terms used in St Edmundsbury documents  
Items in italics each have a definition.  
Glossary   
Acronym  Term  Definition  
 Accessibility  The ability of everybody to go conveniently 
where the y want.  
 Adoption  The final confirmation of a Local Development 
Document  as having statutory status by a 
Local Planning Authority.  
 Affordable housing  Affordable housing includes social rented and 
intermediate housing, provided to specified 
eligible hou seholds whose needs are not met 
by the market.   Affordable housing should:  
– Meet the needs of eligible households 
including availability at a cost low enough for 
them to afford, determined with regard to 
local incomes and local house prices.  
– Include p rovision for the home to remain at 
an affordable price for future eligible 
households or, if these restrictions are lifted, 
for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative 
affordable housing provision.  
 Rural Site 
Allocations DPD  The document within the S t Edmundsbury 
Local Development Framework  that will 
contain site specific allocations for rural areas. 
It will have the status of a Development Plan 
Document .  
AMR  Annual Monitoring 
Report  Annual report on the progress of preparing 
the Local Development Framework  Report and 
the extent to which policies are being 
achieved.  
   Areas subject to 
planning 
restrictions  Gardens, open areas with grass and trees, 
greens, and other areas of visually important 
gaps and open spaces within Housing 
Settlement Boundar ies where proposals for 
development will not be considered favourably  
BAP  Biodiversity Action 
Plan A strategy prepared for a local area aimed at 
conserving biological diversity.  
 Brownfield land  Brownfield land (also known as Previously 
Developed Land)  is that which is or was 
occupied by a permanent structure (excluding 
agricultural or forestry buildings), and 
associated fixed surface infrastructure. The  88 definition covers the curtilage of the 
development.   Opposite to greenfield land.  
 Conservation Ar ea Areas of special architectural or historic 
interest, the character, appearance or setting 
of which it is desirable to preserve or 
enhance.  
 Core Strategy  The Local Development Framework  document 
which sets out the long term spatial vision for 
the loca l planning authority area, and the 
spatial objectives and strategic policies to 
deliver that vision. The Core Strategy will have 
the status of a Development Plan Document .  
CAP  Community Action 
Plan Community -led processes for identifying local 
needs and  priorities, prepared within the 
context of the Community Plan .  
CP  Community Plan  The long term vision and action plan for St 
Edmundsbury articulating the aspirations, 
needs and priorities of the local community – 
prepared by the Local Strategic Partner ship.  
 Development Plan  The statutory Development Plan comprises 
the Regional Spatial Strategy  and the 
Development Plan Documents  contained in 
the Local Development Framework .  
DPD  Development Plan 
Document  Development Plan Documents outline the key 
development goals of the Local Development 
Framework .  
 Development 
Management DPD  The document within the St Edmundsbury LDF 
which will contain detailed policies guiding 
particular forms of development. It will have 
the status of a Development Plan Documen t.  
 Greenfield land  Land (or a defined site) which has never been 
built on before or where the remains of any 
structure or activity have blended into the 
landscape over time (opposite of brownfield 
land). Applies to most land outside the 
Housing Settleme nt Boundary .  
 Housing Needs 
Study  A study which assesses the future housing 
needs of the District, in terms of the size, type 
and affordability of dwellings. The St 
Edmundsbury Housing Needs Study was 
published in 2005.  
HSB  Housing 
Settlement 
Boundary  Housing Settlement Boundaries represent the 
development limits or residential areas within 
which development proposals would be 
acceptable, subject to complying with other 
policies contained in the Development Plan .  89 They seek to prevent development from 
gradually extending into the surrounding 
countryside.  
 Issues and Options  Document(s) produced during the early 
production stage of the preparation of 
Development Plan Documents and issued for 
consultation.  
LDD  Local Development 
Document  The various in dividual documents ( DPD, SCI, 
SPD) in the LDF.  
LDF  Local Development 
Framework  The name for the portfolio of Local 
Development Documents. It consists of 
Development Plan Documents , Supplementary 
Planning Documents , a Statement of 
Community Involvement , the Local 
Development Scheme  and Annual Monitoring 
Reports . Together these documents will 
provide the framework for delivering the 
spatial planning  strategy for St Edmundsbury.  
LDS  Local Development 
Scheme  A public statement setting out which 
documents will make up the LDF, and when 
they will be produced.  
 Local Plan  The plan produced under the former planning 
system by District Councils. The Replacement 
St Edmundsbury Local Plan 2016 will be 
replaced by the LDF.  
LTP  Local Transport 
Plan The transpo rt strategy prepared by the local 
transport authority, i.e. Suffolk County 
Council.  
PPG  Planning Policy 
Guidance  Guidance produced by the Government on 
planning matters (being replaced by PPSs).  
PPS  Planning Policy 
Statement  Statements of National Pla nning Policy issued 
by the Government (to replace PPGs).  
 Preferred Options  Document(s) produced as part of the 
preparation of Development Plan Documents , 
and issued for formal public participation. It 
shows the preferred “direction” of a 
Development Pla n Document .  
   Recreational Open 
Space  An area that is primarily used for children‟s 
play, and/or formal or informal organised 
games, but may also be visually important.  
RPG  Regional Planning 
Guidance  The strategic plan for the region prepared 
under th e former planning system, now 
replaced by the Regional Spatial Strategy .   90 RSS  Regional Spatial 
Strategy  The broad spatial strategy for the region 
prepared by the East of England Regional 
Assembly, and forming part of the statutory 
Development Plan .  
   Rural Service 
Centre  A larger village that fits within the Spatial 
Strategy set out in policies SS1 and SS4 of the 
East of England Plan, i.e. villages that include 
some or all of the services and facilities listed 
in paragraph 3.17 of the East of England 
Plan.   
SA  Sustainability 
Appraisal  Identifies and evaluates the effects of the 
strategy or plan on social, environmental and 
economic conditions.  
SCI  Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  Document setting out how and when 
stakeholders and other interested  parties will 
be consulted and involved in the preparation 
of the LDF (and in the consideration of 
individual planning applications).  
SEA  Strategic 
Environmental 
Assessment  An assessment of the environmental effects of 
a plan or programme required by EU  Directive 
2001/42/EC.  Combined with the Assessment 
Sustainability Appraisal .  
 Site specific 
allocations  Allocations of sites for specific or mixed uses 
or development, to be contained in the 
Allocations DPD.  Policies will identify any 
specific require ments for individual proposals. 
The sites themselves will be shown on a 
Proposals Map.  
 Spatial planning  The concept of spatial planning is intended to 
be at the heart of the new planning system. 
Previously, the focus of the planning system 
was narrow an d regulatory. The new spatial 
planning system of RSS and LDF is much 
wider and more inclusive. Spatial planning 
concerns itself with places, how they function 
and relate together – and its objectives are to 
manage change to secure the best achievable 
quality of life for all in the community, without 
wasting scarce resources or spoiling the 
environment. It will include policies which can 
impact on land use, for example by 
influencing the demands on, or needs for, 
development, but which are not capable of 
being delivered solely or mainly through the 
granting or refusal of planning permission, 
and which may be implemented by other 
means.  
SPD  Supplementary Elaborates on policies or proposals in DPDs ,  91 Planning Document  and gives additional guidance.  
SPG  Supplementary 
Planning Guidance  Provides guidance or development briefs to 
supplement policies and proposals in a Local 
Plan (being replaced by SPD).  
 Structure Plan  The strategic plan produced under the former 
planning system by County Councils. The 
Suffol k Structure Plan (and the St 
Edmundsbury Local Plan) will be replaced by 
the RSS and LDF.  
The Act   Planning and 
Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004  Puts in place the new statutory framework for 
preparing RSS and LDFs.  
The 
Regulations   Town and Country 
Plannin g (Local 
Development) 
(England) 
Regulations 2004  The formal Government regulations that 
define how the LDF is produced.  
UCS  Urban Capacity 
Study  A study produced (and kept under review) to 
assess the amount of land available for 
housing on brownfield land (previously 
developed land). The latest St Edmundsbury 
Urban Capacity Study was published in 
September 2005.   92 Appendix 2: Saved St Edmundsbury Replacement Local Plan (2016) 
Policies  
Saved Policies to be replaced   
The St Edmundsbury Replacement Local P lan was adopted in 2006. In 2009 St 
Edmundsbury Borough Council made representations to the Secretary of State to save a 
number of policies from the Replacement Local Plan beyond the transition period from the 
implementation of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act (2004).   
The following saved policies are superseded on adoption of the Core Strategy   
Replacement St 
Edmundsbury Local 
Plan 2016 policy 
reference   Purpose of policy   Where policy is 
superseded by 
the Core 
Strategy   
DS1: Settlement 
Hierarchy  Provides the strategic 
framework for location of 
development in the area.  CS4  
DS3: Development 
Design and Impact  Safeguards the impact of 
development on the wider area  CS3  
H3:Affordable Housing  The Local Plan policy seeks to 
ensure that 40% of all  new 
housing, above a certain 
threshold, is affordable.  CS5  
TCR1:Shopping Centres  Relates to retail, commercial 
and business uses and 
development permitted in 
defined shopping centres.  CS10  
T2:Hierarchical 
Approach to Site Access  Relates to a hiera rchical 
approach to site access for non -
residential developments.  CS7  
IM1:Developer 
Contributions  The Local Plan policy outlines 
the criteria for developer 
contributions to support 
infrastructure delivery as part of 
development.  CS14  
Key to abbrevia tions:  
CS      Core Strategy policies 93 Appendix 3: Housing Trajectory  
 
Figure 3.1 Housing Trajectory  
 
  
2001/2  
2002/3  
2003/4  
2004/5  
2005/6  
2006/7  
2007/8  
2008/9  
2009/10  
2010/11  
2011/12  
2012/13  
2013/14  
2014/15  
2015/16  
2016/17  
2017/18  
2018/19  
2019/20  
2020/21  
Already built  338 468 612 170 367 536 546 351             
Remaining Adopted Local Plan 
Allocations          0 25 116 205 190 269 245 205 170 135 100 100 
Sites with planning permission 
not yet built          358 338 297 189 142 0 30 0 0 0 0 0 
Other Potent ial         0 60 125 97 190 136 72 202 178 74 42 42 
Strategic Growth Areas (Policies 
CS11 & CS12)          0 0 0 50 100 150 150 150 150 250 350 400 
Rural Windfall                    27 27 
Total Completions  338 468 612 170 367 536 546 351 358 423 538 541 622 555 497 557 498 459 519 569 
 
 
  
2021/22  
2022/23  
2023/24  
2024/25  
2025/26  
2026/27  
2027/28  
2028/29  
2029/30  
2030/31  
TOTAL  
Already built            3388  
Remaining Adopted Local Plan Allocations  124 105 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1989  
Sites with planning permission n ot yet built  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1354  
Other Potential  62 42 67 67 42 55 43 44 44 46 1730  
Strategic Growth Areas (Policies CS11 & CS12)  450 450 450 520 520 550 550 550 550 510 6850  
Rural Windfall  27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 324 
Total Completions  663 624 544 614 589 632 620 621 621 583 15635   94  
 
Figure 3.2 Housing Trajectory Diagram  
 
  95  
Appendix 4:  Policy CS4 Settlements with boundaries removed  
 
  96 
 97 
 98 
 99 
 100 
 101 
 102 
 103 
  104 
 105 
 106 
 107 Appendix 5: Strategic Site Allocations  
 
 
 108  
  109 
  110 
 111 Appendix 6: St Edmundsbury Inf rastructure Requirements  
Study Wide Area (St Edmundsbury and Forest Heath) general 
infrastructure requirements   
Existing population 167,000   
The tables below cover non -locationally specific infrastructure across the study 
area as a whole. These types of in frastructure have large catchment areas so it is 
not appropriate to assess the capacity requirements on a settlement basis. 
Regional and Countywide services still need to be considered at the local spatial 
scale, particularly in the impacts that provision of these infrastructure types will 
have on the potential suitability of settlements to support housing growth. Of the 
infrastructure types identified at the larger spatial scales there appears to be a 
generally good provision. The only infrastructure types  that could potentially come 
under considerable strain within the study period are waste and recycling, where 
landfill sites are filling up with a requirement for a Residual Waste Recycling 
Facility already identified and Nursing Homes, where an ageing pop ulation 
combined with additional population could increase demand significantly above 
existing provision.  
St Edmundsbury Borough and Forest Heath District   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/Required 
Infrastructure   How 
provision 
will be  met  
Health   
Hospitals/  
Nursing 
Homes  Current capacity 
and future 
capacity exists to 
accommodate 
levels of planned 
growth  
Risks:  Loss of 
current facilities 
results in lack of 
adequate coverage  Hospitals and nursing 
homes have been 
assessed across the st udy 
area due to their large 
catchments;  
11,500 -18,000+ new 
homes triggers 
requirements to increase 
hospital capacity  
0+ new homes triggers 
requirement for nursing 
home provision (tipping 
point already reached)  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Essentia l 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing 
facilities and 
provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Emergency 
Services   
Police/  
Ambulance/  
Fire Service  It is expected that 
current and future 
capacity exists fo r 
all emergency 
services to 
accommodate 
levels of planned 
growth  
Risks: Adequate 
coverage is not It is assumed that 
Police/Fire/Ambulance 
Services will be provided in 
line with growth as an 
essential service and h ave 
been assessed across the 
study area  
11,500 -18,000+ new 
homes triggers additional 
police, ambulance and fire Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing 
facilities and 
provision of 
new faci lities 
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application  112 maintained due to 
increases in 
population  requirement  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  basis 
Utilities   
Waste and 
recycling  The Suffolk 
Minerals and 
Waste 
Development 
Framework clearly 
identifies a need 
for a new residual 
waste treatment 
plant. Based on a 
new plant opening 
in 2014, existi ng 
landfill capacity 
would be 
exhausted by 2019 
with regional 
forecast figures 
indicating an 
earlier date of 
2017  
Risks:  Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due to 
increases in 
population  Tipping point: 2016 at RSS 
growth levels of 3,210 new 
homes per an num (Suffolk 
Wide) – equivalent to an 
apportion of 6,370 new 
homes across the study 
area  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing 
facilities and 
provision of 
new facilities  
Arts, 
Leisure and 
Culture   
Cinemas/  
Swimming 
Pools/Sports 
Halls/Indoor 
Bowls/  
Theatres/  
Museums 
Galleries and 
Arts Centres  Current and future 
capacity  exists to 
accommodate 
levels of planned 
growth  
Risks:  Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due to 
increases in 
population  Capacity has been 
assessed across the 
borough given the large 
catchment  areas such 
facilities sustain  
56,000+ new homes 
triggers required cinemas 
(study wide area)  
16,250+new homes 
triggers required theatre 
expansion/upgrade (study 
wide area)  
45,300+ new homes 
triggers required 
swimming pool expansion 
(study wide area)  
22,000 + new homes 
triggers required sports 
halls  (study wide area)  
41,400 new homes 
triggers required indoor 
bowls facilities (study wide 
area) Core Strategy, 
Development 
Management 
and Area 
Action Plan 
policies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  113 11,500 -18,000+ new 
homes triggers required 
museums/galleries and 
arts centres (study wide 
area) 
All of the facilitie s are 
classed as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  
 
Bury St Edmunds   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 37,575  
Position in Core Strategy Settlement Hierarchy: Town  
Bury St Edmunds has a comprehensive network of existing infrastructure. In Bury 
St Edmunds infrastructure types such as shops, sports facilities, leisure attractions 
and open space are all provided in very good quantities and qualities for a town of 
Bury St Edmunds‟ size. Currently there is existing capacity within the network of 
schools within the town, although with any potential housing growth this excess 
will be quickly taken up. The transport network is reasonably good, although Bury 
St Edmunds remains a car dominated town and one of the key challenges to 
housing growth will be to improve the public transport network, reduce congestion 
and promote a modal shift, which will potentially require significant infrastructure 
works.  
 
Bury St E dmunds   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/  
Risks   Fundamental/Essential/  
Required Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports 
Pitches/Amenity 
Open 
Space/Allotmen
ts/Playgrounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provisio n of 
nature 
reserves, 
sports 
pitches, 
allotments 
and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth  
Risks:  
Current 
provision will 
not be 
capable of 
providing for 
the 
increased 50,000+ homes triggers a 
requirement for amenity 
open space (new 
developments will still be 
required to provide local 
amenity open space)  
0+ new homes triggers 
required infrastructure for 
allotments and sports and 
non pitch sports, 
playgrounds, allotments and 
nature reserves (tipping 
points already reached)  
All of the abov e are classified 
as „Required Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  114 population    
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current 
capacity and 
future 
capacity 
exists to 
accommodat
e levels of 
planned 
growth  
Risks:  Loss 
of current 
facilities 
results in 
lack of 
adequate 
coverage  7,000+ new homes triggers 
required GPs  
18,000+ new homes triggers 
required Dentists  
(Both of the above assume 
no inflow from rural areas)  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/  
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited 
future 
capacity to 
accomm odat
e growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisati
on on 
capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/ 
expanded 
primary/upp
er schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is 
not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  3,562+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/e xpanded primary 
schools  
1,236+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools (across Bury St 
Edmunds catchment)  
1,347+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded upper school 
(across northern part of the 
borough)  
All of the above are classified 
as „Essential Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Current and 
future 
capacity for 
library 
provision 
and limited 
capacity for 
community 
centre 3,760+ new homes triggers 
requirement for new library 
provision (assuming no 
inflow from the rural areas)  
500+ new  homes triggers 
requirements for new 
community facilities  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Required Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application  115 provision  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is 
not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  Infrastructure‟  basis 
Transpo rt  
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  The town is 
well placed 
to 
accommodat
e new 
housing 
growth in 
the context 
of the 
existing road 
network. 
The town 
has a 
reasonably 
well 
developed 
bus network 
and rail 
station  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is 
not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population 
and high 
levels of 
daily vehicle 
movements  Higher growth levels will 
require junction 
improvements to the A14  
Significant measures are 
required to enhance bus 
service and usage in/to the 
town 
Both of the above are 
classified as „ Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary road 
infrastructure 
improvements 
by lead 
agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/Potab
le Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future 
capacity for 
potable 
water 
supply.  
The SFRA 
and Water 
Cycle Study 
identifies 
Fornham All 
Saints 
WwTW has 12,173+ new homes from 
Fornham All Saints WwTW 
triggers requirement for 
upgrade  
0+ new homes from Playfield 
substation triggers required 
upgrade (tipping point 
already reached)  
500+ new homes from Bury 
substation triggers required 
upgrade  
All of the above are classified Necessary 
infrastructure 
improve ments 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on  116 significant 
headroom 
for 
additional 
development 
to 2031  
Energy 
capacity 
issues 
identified in 
Bury St 
Edmunds 
with the 
Bury 
substation 
soon 
reaching 
capacity and 
the Playfield 
substation 
operating at 
capacity 
with 
upgrades 
required in 
the near 
future  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is 
not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  application 
basis 
Retail and 
Services   
Town 
Centre/Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  No 
immediate 
requirement 
to increase 
town centre 
capacity 
beyond 
existing 
commitment
s. 
Ideally 
homes 
should have 
a 
convenience 
food shop 
within an 
800m walk.  
Reasonable Capacity for additional 
comparison goods floorspace 
beyond 2021, however, this 
will be provided on a 
commercial basis  
2000+ new homes require a 
convenience food shop. 
Areas of development 
800m+ from nearest 
convenience food sh op 
should consider providing 
shop units to provide this 
function  
Any significant new housing 
development, particularly 
those providing growth of 
2000+ homes will need to 
provide new local centres  Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  117 provision of 
local centres 
throughout 
residential 
areas.  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is 
not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  Local Convenience shops are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ whilst the 
remainder of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟   118  
Bury St Edmunds Infrastructure R equirements  
 
  119 Haverhill   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 23,881  
Position in Core Strategy Settlement Hierarchy: Town  
Haverhill has a  good network of existing infrastructure. In Haverhill infrastructure 
types such as shops, leisure attractions and open space are all provided in very 
good quantities and qualities for a town of Haverhills‟ size. Currently there is 
existing capacity within  the network of schools within the town, although with any 
potential housing growth this excess will be quickly taken up. The transport 
network is reasonable but it is apparent that significant infrastructure works to the 
road network are required to suppo rt any growth and that public transport should 
be improved, particularly where it could replace commutes by private car. The 
provision of outdoor sports facilities (pitches and courts), allotments and 
playgrounds should be considered as a priority in new d evelopment, as these 
types of facility are in under supply compared with the Replacement 2016 Local 
Plan‟s target ratio. One key issue to overcome is the apparent current lack of GP 
facilities as an „Essential‟ Infrastructure, although this is set to be re ctified by the 
temporary Polyclinic provision. Further scoping work to assess current GP lists and 
how current GP services are coping should be considered, with sites potentially 
safeguarded for new permanent health facilities for the long term.   
   
Haverh ill  
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essentia
l/ 
Required 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructur
e  
Nature 
Reserves/Sport
s Pitches/Non 
Sports 
Pitches/Amenit
y Open Space/  
Allotments/  
Playgrounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, 
sports pitches, 
allotments and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth  
Current and 
future capacity 
for amenity 
open space  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing 
for the 
increased 
population    0+ new homes trigger a 
requirement for new 
nature reserves, sports 
and non pitch sports, 
allotments,  and 
playgrounds (tipping point 
already reached)  
21,900+ new homes 
triggers required amenity 
open space (new 
developments should 
continue to provide for 
local amenity space)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application basis   120 Health   
GPs/Dentists  Limited 
capacity exists 
to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned 
growth  
GP provision is 
below current 
standards. 
Dentist 
provision is 
adequate for 
existing 
population  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities 
results in lack 
of adequate 
coverage  0+ new homes triggers 
required GPs (tipping 
point already reached)  
100-500+ new homes 
triggers required Dentists  
(Both of the above 
assume no inflow from 
rural areas)  
Both of the above are 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions  
sought on 
application basis  
Education   
Primary/Middle
/Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accommodate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  2,478+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded primary 
schools  
841+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools (across Haverhill 
catchment)  
1,776+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across southern 
part of the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on  
application basis  
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/Com
munity Centres  Current and 
limited 
capacity for 
library 
provision and 
community 
centre 
provision  
Risks:  0 - 500+ new homes 
triggers r equirement for 
new library provision  
0 -1,000+ new homes 
triggers requirements for 
new community facilities  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Required Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application basis   121 Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  Infrastructure‟  
Transport   
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  The town has 
a slightly 
congested 
road network 
and 
suffers 
significantly 
from the strain 
of out 
commuting  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily vehicle 
movements  Significant measures are 
required to enhance bus 
service and usage in/to 
the town and to 
Cambridge along the 
A1307  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary road 
infrastru cture 
improvements 
by lead agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application basis  
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/Pota
ble Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply.  
The SFRA and 
Water Cycle 
Study indicate 
phasing issues 
with the foul 
water and 
sewerage with 
capacity to 
2021 
Energy 
capacity issues 
identified in 
Haverhill with 
a requirement 
to phase 
development 
to ensure 
substation is 
not 
overloaded.  
Risks:  
Adequate 1,604+ new homes from 
Haverhill  WwTW triggers 
requirement for upgrade  
500+ new homes triggers 
required substation 
upgrade  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infrastructure 
improvements 
provided by lead 
agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application basis   122 coverage is not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  
Retail and 
Services   
Town 
Centre/Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  No immediat e 
requirement to 
increase town 
centre capacity 
beyond 
existing 
commitments.  
Ideally homes 
should have a 
convenience 
food shop 
within an 
800m walk.  
Provision of 
Local centres 
is poor but this 
is being 
rectified 
through the 
development 
of new Local 
Centres  
Risks: 
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained 
due to 
increases in 
population  Capacity for additional 
comparison goods 
floorspace beyond 2021, 
however, this will be 
provided on a commercial 
basis 
2000+ new homes 
require a convenience 
food shop. Areas of 
develo pment 800m+ from 
nearest convenience food 
shop should consider 
providing shop units to 
provide this function  
Any significant new 
housing development, 
particularly those 
providing growth of 
2000+ homes will need to 
provide new local centres  
Local Convenie nce shops 
are classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ whilst the 
remainder of the above 
are classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
applicati on basis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  123  
Haverhill Infrastructure Requirements  
  124 Barrow   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 1,508  
Position in Core Strategy  Settlement Hierarchy: Key Service Centre  
Barrow has a reasonable network of existing infrastructure for a Key Service 
Centre of its size. Particularly it is well served currently for allotments and amenity 
open space. Currently there is existing capacity within the primary school, 
although with any potential housing growth this excess will be quickly taken up. 
New provision and improvement of existing provision of required infrastructure 
such as nature reserves, outdoor sports facilities, playgrounds and k ey local 
services will all need to be considered. The key infrastructure constraints for 
Barrow are the provision of GP‟s which is nearing a tipping point and the 
consideration of improving public transport accessibility to ensure sustainable 
travel patter ns where possible. As identified in the SFRA and Water Cycle Study 
Barrow WwTW has very little headroom to accommodate growth, which is a 
critical constraint that will need to be overcome.  
Barrow   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/Requi red 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/  
Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports Pitches/  
Amenity Open 
Space/  
Allotments/Play
grounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, 
sports and non 
pitch sports, 
and 
playground s 
required to 
meet further 
growth.  
Some capacity 
for amenity 
open space 
and allotments.  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing for 
the increased 
population    0+ new homes triggers 
requirement for nature 
reserves and playgrounds  
59+ new h omes triggers 
requirement for sports 
pitches and 100+ new 
homes for non pitch 
sports  
274+ new homes triggers 
requirement for amenity 
open space  
617+ new homes triggers 
requirement for allotments  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current 
capacity to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned growth 
although GP 
will soon reach 79+ new homes triggers 
required GPs  
200 + new homes triggers 
required Dentists  
(Before a Dental Surgery Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions  125 capacity.  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities results 
in lack of 
adequate 
coverage  could be supported)  
All of the above are 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accommodate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorgani sation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  175+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded primary 
schools  
1,236+ new homes 
triggers requir ement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools (across Bury St 
Edmunds catchment)  
1,361+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across northern 
part of the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Current and 
future capacity 
for library 
provision and 
community 
centre 
provision to 
accommo date 
levels of 
planned growth  
Current Village 
Hall serves the 
village well  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  1,444+ new homes would 
trigger a requirement for a 
new permanent library in 
Barrow  
This is   classified as 
„Required Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Transport   
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  Barrow has a 
good existing 
road network 
and links to 
Bury St  Significant development 
may increase congestion 
along the A14  
A growth in population Necessary road 
infrastructure 
improvements 
by lead  126 Edmunds with 
a reasonable 
bus service to 
the town  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily vehicle 
movements  could make the bus 
service more viable and 
improve frequency  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/  
Potable Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply  
The SFRA and 
Water Cycle 
Study identifies 
that Barrow 
WwTW has 
little capacity 
for additional 
development 
up to 2031  
Curren t and 
future capacity 
at Barrow 
substation  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  144+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
wastewater upgrade  
2,500+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
substation upgrade  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infrastructure 
improvements 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Retail and 
Services   
Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  There is one 
convenience 
food shop in 
Barrow. Ideally 
homes should 
have a 
convenience 
food shop 
within an 800m 
walk. 
Provision of 
key local 
services is 
reasonable for 
a centre of 
Barrows‟ size.  A population of 2,500 -
5000 would help the 
village support a range of 
shops and services  
Local Convenience shops 
are classed as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ and Key 
Local Services are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  127 Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population   128 Barrow Infrastructure Requirements  
 
  129 Clare   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 1,900  
Position in Core Strategy Settlement Hierarchy: Key Service Centre  
Clare has a good network of existing infrastructure for a Key Service Centre of its 
size. It is well served currently for allotments and amenity open space. There is 
also a good provision of GPs in Clare. The Library and good provision of 
community facilities mean that it has a range of facilities to underpin strong and 
vital neigh bourhoods in the centre. New provision and improvement of existing 
provision of desirable infrastructure such as nature reserves, outdoor sports 
facilities and playgrounds will all need to be considered. The key infrastructure 
constraints for Clare are the  provision of dentist which is nearing a tipping point 
and the consideration of transport issues if high levels of growth are to be 
accommodated. There is also only a small level of pupil capacity in the settlements 
existing schools.  
Clare   
Theme   Capaci ty 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/ 
Required 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports 
Pitches/Amenity 
Open 
Space/Allotmen
ts/Playgrounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, 
sports and non 
pitch sports, 
and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth  
Good capacity 
for amenity 
open space 
and allotments 
to 
accommodate 
future 
development  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing for 
the increased 
population    0+ ne w homes triggers 
requirement for nature 
reserves, playgrounds and 
non pitch sports  
117+ new homes triggers 
requirement for sports 
pitches  
8,546+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
amenity open space  
1,282+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
allotments  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current good 
GP capacity to 
accommodate 2,026+ new homes 
triggers required GPs  
40+ new homes triggers Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities  130 levels of  
planned growth  
Currently no 
Dentist in 
Clare. Future 
growth may 
trigger 
requirement  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities results 
in lack of 
adequate 
coverage  required Dentists  
(Before a Dental Su rgery 
could be supported)  
All of the above are 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/  
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accommodate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  72+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded primary 
schools  
319+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools  
1,776+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across southern 
part of the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Current and 
future capacity 
for library 
provision and 
community 
centre 
provision to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned growth  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  386+ new homes would 
trigger requirement for 
expanded/improved 
library facilities in Clare  
1,300+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded community 
facilities  
This is   classified as 
„Required Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  131 Transport   
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  Clare is 
developed 
along the 
A1092 and a 
small amount 
of development 
may have a 
significant 
impact on the 
road network. 
There is a 
reasonable bus 
service to 
Haverhill, 
Sudbury and 
Bury St 
Edmunds  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily vehicle 
movements  Low development tipping 
point for transport works 
to improve existing road 
network  
A growth in population 
could make the bus 
services more viable and 
improve frequency  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary road 
infrastructure 
improvements 
by lead 
agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/  
Potable Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply  
The SFRA and 
Water Cycle 
Study identifies 
that Clare 
WwTW has 
current 
capacity for 
development 
up to 2021 but 
will near 
capacity at this 
time. Limited 
scope to 
expand exist ing 
WwTW and 
new site may 
be required  
Current and 
future capacity 
at Clare 
substation  
Risks:  
Adequate 1,604+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
wastewater upgrade  
500+ new homes triggers 
requireme nt for substation 
upgrade. New 
development will need to 
be phased to ensure 
substation is not 
overloaded  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infrastructure 
improvements 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  132 coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  
Retail and 
Services   
Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  There is one 
main 
convenience 
food shop in 
Clare 
supported by a 
range of 
independ ent 
retailers. 
Ideally homes 
should have a 
convenience 
food shop 
within an 800m 
walk.  
Provision of 
key local 
services is 
good for a 
centre of 
Clare‟s size.  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  2,000+ new homes 
trigger s a requirement for 
new convenience shop  
1,300+ new homes 
triggers a requirement for 
additional local services  
Local Convenience shops 
are classed as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ and Key 
Local Services are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  133  
 
Clare Infrastructure Requirements  
 
  134 Ixworth   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 2,270  
Position in Core Strategy Settlement Hierarchy: Key Service Centre  
Ixworth has a very good network of existing infrastructure for a Key Service 
Centre of its size. Par ticularly it is well served currently by its local services, 
number of sports pitches and community facilities. There is also a good provision 
of GPs in Ixworth. Whilst there is a significant level of capacity within middle 
schools, currently the primary s chool is nearing capacity, although the Suffolk 
Schools Reorganisation may alter capacity if both of these schools become lower 
tier in a two tier system. New provision and improvement of existing provision of 
desirable infrastructure such as non -pitch spo rts facilities, amenity open space and 
playgrounds will all need to be considered. The key infrastructure constraints for 
Ixworth are the provision of dentist which is nearing a tipping point and the 
consideration of transport issues if high levels of grow th are to be accommodated.  
Ixworth   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/ 
Required 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/  
Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports Pitches/  
Amenity Open 
Space/  
Allotments/Play
grounds Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, non 
pitch sports, 
amenity open 
space and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth.  
Some capacity 
for sports 
pitches and 
allotments to 
accommodate 
future 
development  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing for 
the increased 
population    0+ new homes triggers 
requirement for nature 
reserves, amenity open 
space, playgrounds and 
non pitch sports  
557+ new homes triggers 
requirement for sports 
pitches  
95+ new homes triggers 
requirement for  allotments  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current good 
GP capacity to 
accom modate 
levels of 2,577+ new homes 
triggers required GPs  
0+ new homes triggers Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of  135 planned 
growth.  
Currently no 
Dentist in 
Ixworth. 
Current 
population 
could support a 
single Dentist  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities results 
in lack of 
adequate 
coverage  requir ed Dentists  
(Before a Dental Surgery 
could be supported)  
All of the above are 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accommodate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  64+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded primary 
schools  
1,211+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools  
1,361+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across northern 
part o f the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Current and 
future capacity 
for library 
provision and 
community 
centre 
provision to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned growth  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  233+ new homes would 
trigger requirement for 
expanded/impro ved 
library facilities in Ixworth  
This is   classified as 
„Required Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  136 Transport   
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  Ixworth has a 
good existing 
road network 
to Bury St 
Edmunds on 
the A143 and 
Stowmarket on 
the A1088.   
There are good 
bus services to 
Bury St 
Edmunds and 
Diss  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily v ehicle 
movements  Significant development 
may increase congestion 
along the A143  
A growth in population 
could make the bus 
services more viable and 
improve frequency  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary road 
infrastruc ture 
improvements 
by lead 
agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/  
Potable Water 
Supply/  
Foul Sewerage 
and Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply  
The SFRA and 
Water Cycle 
Study identifies 
that Stanton 
WwTW has 
current 
capacity for 
development 
up to 2031  
Current and 
future capacity 
at Ixworth 
substation  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  1,547+ new homes 
triggers requirement  for 
Stanton WwTW upgrade  
500+ new homes triggers 
requirement for substation 
upgrade. New 
development will need to 
be phased to ensure 
substation is not 
overloaded  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infrastructure 
improvements 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Retail and 
Services   
Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  There is one 
main 
convenience 
food shop in 
Ixworth. 
Ideally homes 
should have a 1,130+ n ew homes 
triggers a requirement for 
new convenience shop  
1,130+ new homes 
triggers a requirement for 
additional local services  Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions  137 convenience 
food shop 
within an 800m 
walk. 
Provision of 
key local 
services is 
good for a 
centre of 
Ixworth‟s size.  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  Local Convenience shops 
are classed as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ and Key 
Local Services are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructu re‟ sought on 
application 
basis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  138 Ixworth Infrastructure Requirements  
 
 
  139 Kedington   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 1,915  
Position in Core Strategy Settlement Hierarchy: Key Service Centre  
Kedington has a reasonable network of existing infrastructure for a Key Service 
Centre of its size. Particularly it is well served currently by its local services, 
community facilities and amenity open space. There is also a good provision of 
GPs in Kedington. There is a small amount of capacity in the existing Primary 
School. New prov ision and improvement of existing provision of desirable 
infrastructure such as outdoor sports facilities and playgrounds a will all need to 
be considered. The key infrastructure constraints for Kedington related to 
transport with potential capacity issues  with the road network due to the rurality 
of the settlement, and current bus provision requiring improvement.  
Kedington   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/ 
Required 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports 
Pitches/Amenity 
Open 
Space/Allotmen
ts/Playgrounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, 
sports pitches, 
non pitch 
sports and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth.  
Capacity for 
amenity open 
space and 
allotments to 
accommodate 
future 
development  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing for 
the increased 
population    0+ new homes triggers 
requirement for nature 
reserves, sports pitches, 
non pitch sports and 
playgrounds  
2,186+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
amenity open space  
718+ new homes triggers 
requirement for allotments  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current good 
GP capacity to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned 
growth.  614+ new homes triggers 
required GPs  
0+ new homes triggers 
required Dentists  
(Before a Dental Surgery Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision o f 
new facilities  
Developer  140 Currently no 
Dentist in 
Kedington. 
Current 
population 
could support a 
single Dentist  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities results 
in lack of 
adequate 
coverage  could be supported)  
All of the above are 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/  
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accommodate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  151+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded primary 
schools  
841+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools (across Hav erhill 
catchment)  
1,776+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across southern 
part of the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facil ities 
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Current and 
future capacity 
for library 
provision and 
community 
centre 
provision to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned growth  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  35+ new homes would 
trigger requirement for 
expanded/improved 
library facilities in 
Kedington  
1,300+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
expanded/improved 
community centres  
This is   classified as 
„Required I nfrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Transport   
Road Kedington 
connects via Low development tipping 
point for transport works Necessary road 
infrastructure  141 Network/Public 
Transport  the B1061 to 
the A143 to 
Haverhill and 
Bury St 
Edmunds.   
Limited 
development 
may have an 
impact on 
transport 
infrastructure. 
There are 
reasonable bus 
services to 
Bury St 
Edmunds and 
Haverhill  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily vehicle 
move ments  to improve existing road 
network  
A growth in population 
could make the bus 
services more viable and 
improve frequency  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  improvements 
by lead 
agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/  
Potable Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Current and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply  
Current  and 
future capacity 
at Wratting 
substation  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  500+ new homes triggers 
requirement to improve 
Wratting substation. New 
development will need to 
be phased to ensure 
substation is not 
overloaded  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infrastructure 
improvements 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Retail and 
Services   
Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  There is one 
main 
convenience 
food shop in 
Kedington. 
Ideally homes 
should have a 
convenience 
food shop 
within an 800m 
walk. 
Provision of 1,275+ new homes 
triggers a requirement for 
new convenience shop  
1,275+ new homes 
triggers a requirement for 
additional local services  
Local Convenience shops 
are classed as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ and Key 
Local Services are 
classified as „Required Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  142 key local 
services is 
reasonable for 
a centre of 
Kedington‟s 
size. 
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  Infrastructure‟  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  143  
Kedington Infrastructure Requirements  
 
  144 Stanton   
ONS Population Estimate 2007: 2,696  
Position in Core Strategy Sett lement Hierarchy: Key Service Centre  
Stanton has a very good network of existing infrastructure for a Key Service 
Centre of its size. Particularly it is well served currently by its local services, with 
existing capacity in its primary school and middle sc hool to support a reasonable 
level of development. There is an excellent provision of GPs in Stanton, although 
there are currently no dentists. New provision and improvement of existing 
provision of green infrastructure such as non -pitch sports facilities,  amenity open 
space, allotments and playgrounds may be required, although current sports pitch 
provision is good. Stanton‟s physical infrastructure is good with substantial 
capac ity for Wastewater Treatment and a reasonable transport infrastructure in 
place.  
Stanton   
Theme   Capacity 
Issues/Risks   Fundamental/Essential
/ 
Required 
Infrastructure   How provision 
will be met   
Green 
Infrastructure   
Nature 
Reserves/Sports 
Pitches/Non 
Sports 
Pitches/Amenity 
Open 
Space/Allotmen
ts/Playgrounds  Limited 
capacity. 
Provision of 
nature 
reserves, non 
pitch sports, 
amenity open 
space, 
allotments and 
playgrounds 
required to 
meet further 
growth.  
Capacity for 
sports pitches 
accommodate 
future 
development  
Risks:  Current 
provision will 
not be capable 
of providing for 
the increa sed 
population    0+ new homes triggers 
requirement for nature 
reserves, non pitch sports, 
amenity open space, 
allotments and 
playgrounds  
849+ new homes trigger 
requirements for sports 
pitches.  
All of the above are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Health   
GPs/Dentists  Current good 
GP capacity to 
accommodate 
levels of 
planned 
growth.  3,806+ new homes 
triggers required GPs  
0+ new homes triggers 
required Dentists  
(Before a Dental Surgery Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer  145 Currently no 
Dentist in 
Stanton. 
Current 
population 
could support a 
single Dentist  
Risks:  Loss of 
current 
facilities results 
in lack of 
adequate 
coverage  could be supported)  
Both of the above a re 
classified as Essential 
Infrastructure  contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Education   
Primary/Middle/  
Upper Schools  Current but 
limited future 
capacity to 
accom modate 
growth; 
although the 
impact of 
schools 
reorganisation 
on capacity 
may require 
provision of 
new/expanded 
primary/upper 
schools  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  685+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/exp anded primary 
schools  
387+ new homes triggers 
requirement for 
new/expanded middle 
schools  
1,361+ new homes 
triggers requirement for 
new/expanded upper 
school (across northern 
part of the borough)  
All of the above are 
classified as „Essential 
Infrastructure ‟ Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Community 
Facilities   
Libraries/  
Community 
Centres  Currently no 
library in 
Stanton. 
Served by 
mobile library. 
Existing Villag e 
Hall is dated 
and in poor 
condition. 
Plans for 
refurbishment 
underway 
which will 
accommodate 
future planned 
growth.  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 953+ new homes (to 
support a permanent 
library facility)  
Once the Village Hall has 
been refurbished will 
provide for a community 
of up to 9,840 population  
This is   classified as 
„Required Infrastructure‟  Expansion/  
Upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and provision of 
new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis  146 maintained due 
to increases in 
population  
Transport   
Road 
Network/Public 
Transport  Stanton has a 
good existing 
road network 
along the A143 
to Bury St 
Edmunds and 
Diss.    There 
are reasonable 
bus services to 
Bury St 
Edmunds, Diss 
and 
Stowmarket  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maint ained due 
to increases in 
population and 
high levels of 
daily vehicle 
movements  Significant development 
may increase congestion 
along the A143  
A growth in population 
could make the bus 
services more viable and 
improve frequency  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary road 
infrastructure 
improvements 
by lead 
agencies  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Waste and 
Utilities   
Waste and 
Recycling/  
Potable Water 
Supply/Foul 
Sewerage and 
Treatment/  
Energy  Curren t and 
future capacity 
for potable 
water supply  
Current and 
future capacity 
at Stanton 
WwTW to 2031  
Current and 
future capacity 
at Stanton 
substation  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population  1,547+ new homes 
triggers requir ement for 
wastewater upgrade  
500+ new homes triggers 
requirement to improve 
Stanton substation. New 
development will need to 
be phased to ensure 
substation is not 
overloaded  
Both of the above are 
classified as „Fundamental 
Infrastructure‟  Necessary 
infras tructure 
improvements 
provided by 
lead agencies  
Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on 
application 
basis 
Retail and 
Services   
Local 
Convenience 
Shops/Key 
Local Services  There is one  
main 
convenience 
food shop in 
Stanton. 
Ideally homes 
should have a 
convenience 
food shop Could be scope for 
additional convenience 
food shops  
A population of 2,500 -
5000 would be able to 
support a range of shops 
and services  
Local Convenience shops Expansion/  
upgrading of 
existing facilities 
and/or provision 
of new facilities  
Developer 
contributions 
sought on  147 within an 800m 
walk. 
Provision of 
key local 
services is 
good for a 
centre of 
Stanton‟s size.  
Risks:  
Adequate 
coverage is not 
maintained due 
to increases in 
population   are classed as „Essential 
Infrastructure‟ and Key 
Local Services are 
classified as „Required 
Infrastructure‟  application 
basis  148 Stanton Infrastructure Requirements  
 
  149 Appendix 7 Monitoring Targets and Indicators  
Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
CS1 – St 
Edmundsbury 
Spatial 
Strategy  Annual net dwelling 
completions  East of England Plan 
target in Policy H1 of 500 
per annum between 
2001-2021 SEBC 
(annual)  
Number and 
percentage of 
dwellings 
completed on 
brownfield land  Target 40%  SEBC 
(annual)  
Previously 
Developed land 
that has been 
vacant or derelict 
for more than 5 
years  National Indicato r 170 - 
2009/10 target - 3.40%  
 SEBC 
(annual)  
Geography of 
housing 
completions  Percentage of 
completions by 
settlement (CS1)  SEBC 
(annual)  
Dwellings per 
hectare of net 
developable area  PPS3 Recommended 
minimum of 30dph  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS2 – 
Sustainable  
Development  Change in number 
and area of 
designated 
ecological sites  No net loss  SEBC 
(annual)  
Achievement of 
Habitat and Species 
Action Plan targets  Compliance  SEBC 
(periodically)  
Improved Local 
Biodiversity – 
proportion of Local 
Sites (County 
Wildli fe Sites) 
where active 
conservation 
management is 
being achieved 
(new national 
indicator 197)  Improve  SEBC 
(periodically)   150 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
Reported condition 
of ecological SSSIs  Meet Public Service 
Agreement  SEBC 
(Natural 
England) 
(periodically)  
Reported condition 
of geological SSSIs 
and RIGSs  Improve  SEBC 
(periodically)  
Development 
proposals affecting 
BAP habitats 
outside protected 
areas  Zero SEBC 
(annual)  
Change in amount 
of accessible 
natural green space  Increase  SEBC (Suffolk 
Biological 
Records 
Office) 
(periodi cally) 
Water quality in 
rivers  Improve  SEBC 
(Environment 
Agency) 
(annual)  
Groundwater 
quality  Improve  SEBC 
(Environment 
Agency) 
(annual)  
Flood risk – 
planning 
applications 
approved against 
Environment 
Agency advice  Compliance with ES 
advice  SEBC 
(annual) 
Properties at risk of 
flooding from rivers  Decrease/maintain/stable  SEBC 
(annual)  
Have annual mean 
concentrations of 
any key pollutants 
been exceeded?  Zero exceedences  SEBC 
(annual)   151 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
Conserving soil 
quality – number 
and percentage of 
new dwellin gs 
completed on 
greenfield land  Not identified  SEBC 
(annual)  
Daily domestic 
water use (per 
captia 
consumption, litres) 
for St Edmundsbury  Achieving the equivalent 
of 3 stars under the Code 
for Sustainable Homes 
for water use (105 
litres/capita/day) is a 
desirable target for new 
homes  SEBC (Audit 
Commission) 
(annual)  
Consumption of 
electricity – 
Domestic use per 
consumer and total 
commercial and 
industrial use  Decrease  SEBC (DTI) 
(annual)  
Consumption of gas 
– Domestic use per 
consumer and total 
commer cial and 
industrial use  Decrease  SEBC (DTI) 
(annual)  
Household and 
municipal waste 
reduced  Year on year reduction  SEBC 
(annual)  
Tonnage/proportion 
of household (and 
municipal) waste 
recycled and 
composted  Year on year increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Percentag e of 
buildings achieving 
desired rating 
against national 
building standards 
such as Code for 
Sustainable Homes 
or BREEAM  Desirable targets:  
All new dwellings 
meeting code 3 by 2010, 
Code 4 by 2013 and 
Code 6 by 2016  SEBC 
(annual)   152 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
Number of 
properties re ceiving 
grants to increase 
energy efficiency in 
their homes (e.g. 
from Carbon 
Emissions 
Reductions Scheme 
or the Warm Front 
Scheme)  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Percentage of new 
development which 
sources a 
percentage of 
energy from low 
carbon or 
renewable so urces:  
i. Onsite  
ii. Offsite  East of England targets  
10% (2010)  
17% (2020)  SEBC 
(periodically)  
Number of listed 
buildings and 
buildings at risk  Decrease  SEBC 
(English 
Heritage) 
(annual)  
Areas of historic 
parks and gardens  No net loss  SEBC 
(English 
Heritage) 
(annual)  
Number and area 
of Conservation 
Areas and Article 4 
Directions  No net loss  SEBC 
(English 
Heritage) 
(annual)  
Number and area 
of Conservation 
Area Appraisals 
completed and 
enhancement 
schemes (in 
conservation areas) 
implemented  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)   153 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
Number of 
Scheduled Ancient 
Monuments (SAMs) 
damaged as a 
result of 
development  Zero SEBC 
(annual)  
Number of 
applications 
affecting known or 
unknown 
archaeological site 
but judged of high 
potential and 
approved with 
conditions requiring 
prior excavation or 
recording during 
development  Not identified  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS3 – Design 
and Local 
Distinctiveness  Number of 
approved concept 
statements and 
masterplans  Not identified  SEBC (annual)  
CS4 – 
Settlement 
Hierarchy and 
Identity  
 
 Percentage of all 
new development 
taking place in 
Towns/Key Service 
Centres/Local 
Service Centres and 
Infill Villages  Should meet 
requirements in Policy 
CS1 SEBC 
(annual)  
Percentage of 
residents who are 
happy with their 
neighbourhood as a 
place to live  Increase  (SEBC)  
(Suffolk 
Speaks 
Survey) 
(periodically)  
CS5 – 
Affordable 
Housing  Homeless Numbers  Reduce  SEBC 
(annual)  
Affordable Housing 
completions  30% affordable housing 
target  SEBC 
(annual)  
Average property 
price and Housing 
Affordability ratio  Decrease  SEBC 
(annual)  154 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
CS6 – Gypsies, 
Travellers and 
Travelling 
Showpeople  Provision for gypsy 
and traveller 
pitches  20 pitches by 2011  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS7 – 
Sustainable 
Transport  
CS8 – Strategic 
Transport 
Improvements  Percentage of all 
new residential 
development taking 
place in major 
towns  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Number of 
developments 
where a travel plan 
is submitted or is a 
condition of 
development  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Percentage of 
journeys to work 
undertaken by 
sustainable means  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Percentage  of 
schoolchildren 
travelling to school 
by sustainable 
means  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Car parking 
standards (the 
number of spaces 
per development)  Decrease  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS9 – 
Employment 
and the Local 
Economy  
 Unemployment rate 
- % unemployed 
persons  % reduce SEBC 
(annual)  
Employment land 
availability 
(URBAN)  To maintain a supply of 
available land where 
appropriate  SEBC 
(annual)  
Employment land 
availability (RURAL)  To maintain a supply of 
available land where 
appropriate  SEBC 
(annual)  
Employment 
permissions and 
allocations 
(URBAN)  None identified  SEBC 
(annual)   155 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
Employment 
permissions and 
allocations (RURAL)  None identified  SEBC 
(annual)  
Number of farmers 
markets and farm 
shops  Increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS10 – Retail, 
Leisure, 
Cultural and 
Office Prov ision Percentage of 
vacant units in Bury 
St Edmunds and   
Haverhill town 
centres  Not exceed the national 
average  SEBC 
(annual)  
New retail floor 
space in town 
centres  No target set  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS11 – Bury St 
Edmunds 
Strategic 
Growth  
CS12 – 
Haverhill 
Strategic 
Growth  Annual net dwelling 
completions  East of England Plan 
target in Policy H1 of 500 
per annum between 
2001-2021 SEBC 
(annual)  
Geography of 
housing 
completions  No target set  SEBC 
(annual)  
Dwellings per 
hectare of net 
developable area  PPS3 Reco mmended 
minimum of 30dph  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS13 – Rural 
Areas  Percentage of rural 
households within a 
15 minute walk of 
an hourly bus 
service  Percentage increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
Proportion of 
population with 
access to key local 
services e.g. post 
office and GP Percentage increase  SEBC 
(annual)  
CS14 -
Community 
Infrastructure 
Capacity and 
Tariffs  Proportion of 
population with 
access to hospital 
or GP or dentist 
surgery  Percentage increase  SEBC 
(annual)   156 Policy   Indicators   Targets   Responsible 
Bodies/  
frequency   
CS15 – Plan, 
Monitor, 
Manage  Cumulative number 
of incid ences where 
policies/allocations 
are not being met   Zero SEBC 
(annual)  
 