 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council 
Local Development Framework 
Core Strategy DPD 
March 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you would like this leaflet in large print, on audio tape, in Braille or on 
disk, please contact: 
Planning Policy Team 
Communities, Regeneration & Environment Directorate 
Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council 
FREEPOST 
Stockport 
SK1 3YQ 
Telephone: 0161 474 4395 
Fax: 0161 474 4337  
 Contents 
List of Policies 2 
1 Introduction 4 
1.1 What is the Core Strategy? 4 
1.2 What does it do? 4 
1.3 How has it been prepared? 5 
2 The Need for Change 6 
2.1 Current Picture of the Borough – The Spatial P ortrait 6 
2.2 Challenges for the Future – What are the issues? 19 
2.3 Other Plans, Evidence and Influences 20 
3 The Strategy 31 
3.1 Future Picture of the Borough - Vision 31 
3.2 Objectives 33 
3.3 Strategy 37 
3.3.1 Key Diagram 38 
3.3.2 OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT -
ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE AND INEQUALITIES 42 
3.3.3 PROVIDING A DECENT HOME FOR EVERYONE 58 
3.3.4 ACCESS TO SERVICES 72 
3.3.5 ACCOMMODATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 92 
3.3.6 SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT 101 
3.3.7 TRANSPORT 128 
3.3.8 Stockport Town Centre Strategic Location 140 
3.3.9 Woodford Aerodrome Opportunity Site 145 
A Glossary 149 
B Superseded policies 159 
C Additional Information for Core Policies and Development Management Policies 163 
C.1 Energy Opportunities Plan 163 
C.2 Energy Efficiency Checklist 164 
C.3 Recreational Open Space 165 
C.4 The general distribution of Green Infrastructure 169 2 
List of Policies 
List of Policies 
Location Policy 
Page 43 Core Policy CS1 'OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT -
ADDRESSING INEQUALITIES AND CLIMATE CHANGE' 
Page 44 Development Management Policy SD-1 'Creating Sustainable Communities' 
Page 45 Development Management Policy SD-2 'Making Improvements to Existing Dwellings' 
Page 46 Development Management Policy SD-3 'Delivering the Energy Opportunities Plans 
– New Development' 
Page 50 Development Management Policy SD-4 'District Heating (Network Development 
Areas)' 
Page 52 Development Management Policy SD-5 'Community Owned Energy' 
Page 54 Development Management Policy SD-6 'Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change' 
Page 59 Core Policy CS2 'HOUSING PROVISION' 
Page 61 Core Policy CS3 'MIX OF HOUSING' 
Page 62 Core Policy CS4 'DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING' 
Page 64 Development Management Policy H-1 'Design of Residential Development' 
Page 64 Development Management Policy H-2 'Housing Phasing' 
Page 67 Development Management Policy H-3 'Affordable Housing' 
Page 74 Core Policy CS5 'ACCESS TO SERVICES' 
Page 76 Core Policy CS6 'SAFEGUARDING AND STRENGTHENING THE SERVICE CENTRE 
HIERARCHY' 
Page 77 Development Management Policy AS-1 'The Vitality and Viability of Stockport's 
Service Centres' 
Page 81 Development Management Policy AS-2 'Improving Indoor Sports, Community and 
Education Facilities and their Accessibility' 
Page 85 Development Management Policy AS-3 'Main Town Centre Uses, Hot Food Take 
Aways and Prison Development Outside Existing Centres' 
Page 87 Development Management Policy AS-4 'Visitor Accommodation and Other Tourism 
Development' 
Page 89 Development Management Policy AS-5 'Cemeteries' 3 
Location Policy List of Policies 
Core Policy CS7 'ACCOMMODATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT' Page 94 
Development Management Policy AED-1 'Employment Development in the Town Page 96 
Centre and M60 Gateway' 
Page 97 Development Management Policy AED-2 'Employment Development in District 
Centres' 
Development Management Policy AED-3 'Employment Development in Employment Page 97 
Areas' 
Development Management Policy AED-4 'Employment Development in Rural Areas' Page 98 
Page 99 Development Management Policy AED-5 'Education, Skills and Training Provision' 
Development Management Policy AED-6 'Employment Sites Outside Protected Page 99 
Employment Areas' 
Core Policy CS8 'SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT' Page 102 
Development Management Policy SIE-1 'Quality Places' Page 106 
Page 107 Development Management Policy SIE-2 'Provision of Recreation and Amenity 
Open Space in New Developments' 
Development Management Policy SIE-3 'Protecting, Safeguarding and enhancing Page 113 
the Environment' 
Development Management Policy SIE-4 'Hazardous Installations' Page 123 
Development Management Policy SIE-5 'Aviation Facilities, Telecommunications Page 124 
and other Broadcast Infrastructure' 
Page 129 Core Policy CS9 'TRANSPORT AND DEVELOPMENT' 
Page 130 Core Policy CS10 'AN EFFECTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT NETWORK' 
Page 134 Development Management Policy T -1 'Transport and Development' 
Page 135 Development Management Policy T -2 'Parking in Developments' 
Page 136 Development Management Policy T -3 'Safety and Capacity on the Highway Network' 
Page 137 Development Management Policy T -4 'Protecting Disused Rail Alignments' 
Core Policy CS11 'STOCKPORT TOWN CENTRE' Page 140 
Page 141 Development Management Policy TC-1 'Stockport Town Centre' 4 
Introduction 1 
1 Introduction 
1.1 What is the Core Strategy? 
1.1 The Stockport Core Strategy is part of the Local Development Framework (LDF) for the Borough. 
T
o be prepared in accordance with the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 the LDF will, 
over the next several years, replace the Stockport Unitary Development Plan as the local plan to guide 
development over the next 15 years and beyond. 
1.2 The Core Strategy provides the overall spatial strategy for the LDF .  It sets down why change 
is needed;
 what should be done; and where, when and how it is going to happen, including the provision 
of supporting infrastructure. The Core Strategy covers the period from its adoption to 2026. 
1.3 The document begins by identifying the land use and development issues confronting the 
Borough up to 2026 b
y considering in the Spatial Portrait a range of social, economic and environmental 
characteristics of the Borough. The Council's Core Strategy must conform with national and regional 
planning policies and the principal ones are explained. The Core Strategy should also be the spatial 
expression of the Stockport Strategy (the Sustainable Communities Strategy for the Borough), and 
reflect a range of other plans and strategies of the Council and its partners. These also help to identify 
the issues that the Core Strategy needs to address, and the main strategies are identified in the 
document. 
1.4 3.1 'Future Picture of the Borough - Vision' sets down what a more sustainable Borough will 
look like once the issues identified have been addressed though the Core Strategy and subsequent 
LDF documents
.  Objectives are identified (in 3.2 'Objectives') that need to be met if the Vision is to 
be realised and the issues addressed. 
1.5 Finally the Core Strategy sets down (in 3.3 'Strategy') the Strategy and policies that aim to 
achieve the Objectives.  Covering a range of topics under which the issues that need to be addressed 
f
all, the policies comprise 'Core Policies', of a strategic nature, and 'Development Management Policies' 
of a more detailed nature upon which proposals for development will be assessed. The inclusion of 
these (non-site specific) Development Management Policies avoids the need to prepare a separate 
Document at a later time.  In view of the importance of Stockport Town Centre to the delivery of the 
strategy it has been designated as a 'strategic location' where more detail is provided on the scale, 
type and distribution of proposed land use and development change. 
1.6 To help keep the Strategy succinct it has been written in a way to minimise description, repetition 
of legislation, national guidance and regional planning policy
, and of material that can be found in 
other documents. The Core Strategy will be supported by other Development Plan Documents. The 
current list of such documents proposed by the Council may be found in its Local Development Scheme 
(LDS).  Principal amongst these will be the Allocations DPD which will set out area and site specific 
policies and proposals for the borough. 
1.7 The Stockport LDF when adopted will, together with the Regional Spatial Strategy, become the 
statutor
y development plan for the borough. 
1.2 What does it do? 
1.8 Above all things the Core Strategy is about shaping the future of Stockport as a place to live, 
w
ork, relax and visit - often referred to as 'place shaping'. This means deciding what sort of a place 
the Borough ought to be in 2026. The overall aim is to make it more sustainable, meaning a physical 
pattern of development and land use that is good for the people of the the Borough and visitors, and 5 
1 Introduction 
that protects the local and global environments - both at the current time and in the future. The Regional 
Spatial Strategy sets a clear context for considering this. The regional requirements need to be 
developed at the local level taking full account of the District's very diverse nature. This means 
considering the individual futures of the different urban and rural areas of the borough. The solution 
for one area may well not be appropriate for another so the Core Strategy needs to take care that it 
is locally distinctive in terms of the District as a whole and the individual places within it. 
1.9 Stockport Borough is not an island and it has close links with the rest of the Greater Manchester 
con
urbation and with other areas in Cheshire and Derbyshire. The Core Strategy has regard to 
cross-boundary issues in order to ensure that it is consistent with sub-regional objectives, policies 
and proposals. 
1.3 How has it been prepared? 
1.10 A considerable amount of information has been collected to provide the basis for preparing 
the Core Str
ategy.  Some of this is from existing sources such as the national Census and the Index 
of Multiple Deprivation.  However, much is original research commissioned by the Council. This is 
available through the Council's web site at www.stockport.gov.uk/ldf or can be viewed at the Council's 
offices
. The information, often called the 'evidence base', has been used to help identify the issues 
facing the Borough and to test different solutions, or options.  Reference is made to the evidence 
throughout the Strategy. 
1.11 The Council has consulted representatives from public, private and voluntary organisations in 
the prepar
ation of the Core Strategy. The first stage involved consultation with stakeholders initially 
to establish what issues the Core Strategy should be tackling and the options for addressing them. 
Informally this is known as the "Issues and Options" stage which began with the publication of a paper 
for consultation during the autumn of 2007. This paper set out a vision for the future development of 
the borough and strategic objectives to achieve that vision, put forward issues which the strategy 
might seek to address and suggested options for the general approach that could be taken to the 
distribution of land uses and development (the "Spatial Options").  As well as consulting on the paper 
the Council undertook eight "State of the Area Debates" which allowed communities from across the 
borough to have a say on the issues and options which matter, or would be particularly beneficial, to 
them. The results from this period of consultation are summarised in an outcomes report available 
via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
1.12 The results of the stakeholder consultation and of the various evidence studies were used to 
refine the Issues and Options paper into the LDF Core Str
ategy Preferred Options. The development 
of the Preferred Options also involved a continuous and iterative process of appraisal of the potential 
significant social, environmental and economic effects of the emerging strategy(1) . 
1.13 Extensive consultation then took place on the Preferred Options document in October and 
No
vember 2009, the outcomes of which can be found via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. This, 
together with fur
ther consultation with specific stakeholders on specific aspects of the strategy and 
evidence, and further sustainability appraisal work, has in turn informed the preparation of this 
Publication Core Strategy. 
1 This process has included a number of different assessments and appraisals under the broad heading of the 
Sustainability Appraisal, available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence.  6 
The Need for Change 2 
2 The Need for Change 
2.1 Current Picture of the Borough – The Spatial P ortrait 
2.1 Stockport stretches from the borders of the Peak District National Park and the Pennine foothills 
to the Manchester City boundar
y, and borders the Cheshire plain covering an area of 126km2. The 
Borough lies in the south eastern part of the Greater Manchester conurbation and has the third largest 
population of that sub-region, within England’ s North West.  Over 46% of the Borough is designated 
as Green Belt mainly located (though not limited) to the east of the Borough, with the main urban 
centre, Stockport town centre, in the west and other urban centres spread throughout the Borough. 
2.2 Greenspace is not distributed evenly within the borough.  Open countryside on the eastern and 
souther
n parts of the borough and river valleys extending to the heart of the urban area provide valuable 
‘green lungs’  and opportunities for informal recreation, walking and cycling.  Stockport has a mix of 
urban and semi-rural environments, and is generally perceived as an attractive place in which to live. 
Landscape character designations cover 13 areas in the Borough based on a local assessment (which 
built on the North West Joint Character Areas data) and results in designations of local distinctiveness, 
including biodiversity and heritage elements. The emerging Regional Landscape Character Types(2) 
provide further information for local assessment.   Stockport has 12 Green Flag status parks ranking 
it third highest in the north west region(3). There are two Sites of Special Scientific Interest, one within 
the Compstall Nature Reserve and Ludworth Intake at Mellor which is a Geological Conservation 
Review Site and has good potential for further study of this type of geomorphology. There are also 
12 Local Nature Reserves and 65 Sites of Biological Interest(4) . 
2.3 Stockport has fairly considerable minerals resources but these are often not readily workable 
or are of limited quality
. The main reserves are as follows: 
Sand  / gravel - concentrated in the Etherow and Goyt valleys, with small pockets east of Marple 
Bridge, at Chadkirk and at Bramhall Park.  Sand and gravel are the only minerals currently 
extracted within the borough, at Offerton Sand & Gravel off Marple Road; 
Sandstone  / gritstone - outcrops along upland eastern edge of the borough, east of Compstall, 
Marple Bridge and Mellor; 
Clay / shale - widespread but of limited quality, generally not suitable for brick-making; and 
Coal  - measures lie beneath the eastern part of the borough. Whilst there are no active workings 
or proposals, the eastern part of Stockport has previously experienced mining activities in some 
locations which have left an environmental legacy that needs to be taken into account in the 
consideration of the design/layout of development proposals. 
2.4 Stockport has a rich heritage(5)with 37 conservation areas designated across the Borough 
covering more than 8km2. There are 377 listed buildings across the Borough and 131 locally listed 
buildings as well as six scheduled monuments. Stockport is home to two registered historic parks(6) . 
There are also 3,450 entries for Stockport in the Greater Manchester Historic Environment Record(7) . 
A Greater Manchester Urban Historic Landscape Characterisation Project is underway to inform 
2 Regional Landscape Character Types available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
3 Stockport Annual Monitoring Reports available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
4 Information on Stockport Biodiversity available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
5 Stockport Conservation & Heritage Strategy available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
6 Stockport Historic Environment Database available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
7 Greater Manchester Historic Environment Record available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 7 
2 The Need for Change 
management of the historic environment but has yet to reach Stockport, except for a small pilot scheme 
in Cheadle(8) . 
2.5 Recent draft forecasted figures indicate that Borough population levels have risen slightly, from 
280,000 in 2001 to 282,900 in 2009.
  Of these, more than half are aged over 40 with more than 28% 
aged 40 to 59. The working age population has remained steady, with predicted slight losses over 
the next ten years, rising again slowly after that(9). The population varies between the wards, the 
smallest ward population being just 9,676 and the highest more than 15,000 people.  8.58% of the 
population live in areas classified as rural, according to Government Rural Definitions. These are 
predominantly located in the east of the Borough(10) . 
2.6 Average life expectancy for both male and female populations in Stockport is higher than the 
regional a
verage, with women tending to live longer. Mortality rates are lower than the Greater 
Manchester and regional averages, meaning Stockport has an ageing population and a third of 
households in the Borough house a pensioner. There is evidence of poor health and unemployment 
linked to more deprived areas, with a wide gap between the poorer and wealthier parts of the Borough. 
Access to services is an issue with residents in certain parts of the Borough having further to travel 
to access basic health and lifestyle needs, whilst more heavily populated centres can place a strain 
on service provision(11) . 
2.7 Stockport has areas which fall within the 5% most deprived in England, although it ranks as a 
reasonab
ly affluent Borough nationally, coming 161 out of 354 in the Indices of Multiple Deprivation, 
and ranking second only in affluence to Trafford in the Greater Manchester area(12) .  In 2008 average 
annual household incomes ranged across the wards from nearly £22,000 in the most deprived areas, 
to nearly £42,000 in the most affluent parts of the Borough(13) .  Average house prices are the second 
highest in Greater Manchester, ranging from around £111,000 for a first time buyer terrace property 
to more than £220,000 for detached properties in 2009(14). Based upon a suite of indices of deprivation 
Stockport is the third borough in England in terms of gap between wealthy and deprived areas.(15) 
2.8 The 125,500 homes in the borough are in generally good condition and in high demand. Semi 
detached houses are the most common f
orm of dwelling in Stockport, accounting for 43.1% of the 
existing stock. Terraced homes account for 21.4% of homes in the area, whilst 21.1% are detached 
and 14.3% are flats / maisonettes / bedsits. There is a high proportion of owner-occupation at 77.3% 
of the stock. In 2001 the national percentage of owner-occupied was 66.3%. Privately rented properties 
account for 7.3%, whilst 3.8% are provided by Housing Associations and 10.4% of homes are managed 
by Stockport Homes (formerly Council Housing)(16) .  Stockport Homes have approximately 12,000 
homes but there were 8,559 households on their waiting list in 2009. The high number of households 
on the waiting list is partly due to the 65% of new forming households unable to buy or rent market 
housing(17) . 
2.9 Employment levels remain above the regional and national average. Nearly 47% of the workforce 
are emplo
yed in the professional, managerial and technical occupations, and only 15.9% in manual 
8 Greater Manchester Urban Historic Landscape Characterisation Project available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
9 Greater Manchester Forecasting Model 2009 Data 
10 ONS LA Classification Data, Post April 2009 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
11 NHS Stockport Director of Public Health Annual Report 
12 Indices of Multiple Deprivation, CLG 2007 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
13 Profiling Stockport available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
14 Stockport Council Housing Market Quarterly Bulletin Nov 09 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
15 Stockport Local Area Agreement (LAA) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
16 Stockport Housing Needs Study 2008 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
17 Stockport Housing Needs Study 2008 8 
The Need for Change 2 
and process occupations(18). The Town Centre and M60 Gateway area provide in the region of 30,000 
jobs, which is one quarter of the total of the Borough. There are in excess of 3,000 local jobs in District 
Centres, which accommodate approximately 1,100 retail / service businesses. The District and Local 
Centres provide a community focus, providing a range of services and leisure activities, with some 
having the potential to enhance the tourism sector. A large percentage of the populace commute out 
of the area for work, mainly to Manchester and the Airport but also other surrounding areas, including 
outside of the region(19) .  For every 6 commuters who travel from Stockport to other areas, 4 travel 
from outside Stockport to work in the borough. The workforce reflects high levels of qualifications with 
51.7% equivalent to or above NVQ level 3 and 31.4% NVQ Level 4 and above.  However 9% of the 
workforce have no qualifications(20) .  Stockport has a strong tradition of volunteering(21) and high levels 
of unpaid carers, many over 55 years of age(22). The borough currently has 57.46 hectares of 
employment land identified as available for development in and around existing sites(23) .  Office 
development is available in the town centre, Bredbury, the Heatons, Bramhall and Cheadle with limited 
capacity in Marple and Hazel Grove. 
2.10 Provision for formal sports in the Borough is generally below recommended national standards, 
although there is an o
versupply of senior football pitches.  Several areas continue to experience 
significant shortfalls. The Borough’ s provision currently represents a shortfall of over 100 ha across 
the borough. Specific spatial deficiencies in the provision of indoor sport facilities exist in the northern 
part of the Borough. There is a significant amount of public sector indoor sports provision in the 
Borough, which is well used. However, indoor sports facilities are not evenly distributed with much of 
the current stock ageing and of poor quality.The facilities that are in the poorest condition are situated 
in the most deprived areas of the Borough.  Private sector facilities in and around the Borough are 
increasing and there are numerous voluntary clubs.  Education facilities in Stockport are being 
rationalised. Schools now offer a wide range of educational activities outside the standard school day. 
This results in a greater intensity and duration of use of school sites, particularly where provision is 
also made for dual-use leisure facilities and community use. 
2.11 The borough has an extensive network of public rights of way, particularly outside of the urban 
area and is also situated on se
veral longer distance walking/cycling/bridle routes including the 
Trans-Pennine Trail, the Middlewood Way and the Midshires Way. 
2.12 The Town Centre is well served by public transport with good radial routes to most locations 
within the Borough and regionally
. The current provision for interchange between the train and bus 
stations is poor.  Stockport bus station is situated to the west of the town centre, adjacent to the 
Merseyway Shopping Centre.  Buses connect the Town centre with most locations in the Borough 
and there are bus services linking the town centre with locations outside the Borough. The rail station 
has some access issues in terms of location uphill from the bus station and main shopping areas, with 
the A6 running between the shopping areas and both of the stations.  Although Stockport train station 
has a very frequent service into Manchester and provides decent rail interchange opportunities with 
its good national and regional connections, the station lacks a direct rail link (or alternative off-road 
public transport link) to many parts of the Borough (e.g. Marple, Cheadle).  However the rail network 
provides interchange opportunities for intercity, cross country and most local networks.  Pedestrian 
streets provide access to shops and facilities within the Centre. The steep topography of parts of the 
town centre can pose a challenge for those with limited mobility.  Currently a free town centre shuttle 
18 NOMIS Labour Market Profile available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
19 Census 2001 (Distance travelled to work) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
20 NOMIS Labour Market Profile 
21 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy 2020 
22 Stockport's Annual Public Health Report 
23 Stockport Annual Monitoring Report available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 9 
2 The Need for Change 
bus links the train and bus stations with the main shopping area in the town.  During peak times 
congestion is a problem on the road network, in particular routes off the A6 and M60 motorway.  Poor 
air quality linked to transport emissions is also a problem in most areas of the town centre. 
2.13 Congestion is an issue for many of the major roads in the Borough, including on the M60 and 
three other routes of regional significance which r
un through the borough - the A6, A34 and A523. 
An accessibility assessment of the Core Strategy was undertaken to inform development of policy(24) . 
The areas of best sustainable access are, unsurprisingly, limited to urban centres with a clear focus 
on the Town Centre.  In terms of the full range of services as well as employment sites, the more rural 
eastern and southern areas of the Borough are less accessible.  Access is reflected in levels of social 
exclusion within the Borough, with Bredbury Green, Cherry Tree Lane, Romiley and Marple South 
emerging as areas where there are potential imbalance between service availability and local needs. 
2.14 Carbon emission figures for Stockport in 2007 show it ranks fourth in a list of Greater Manchester 
author
ities in terms of total kilo tonnes of CO2 emitted at a total of 1769 kilo tonnes. The domestic 
sector of Stockport is better only than Manchester and Wigan within Greater Manchester in terms of 
emissions of CO2 with 702 kilo tonnes emitted in 2007 from this sector. Stockport ranks fourth for 
industrial (592 kilo tonnes) and seventh (469 kilo tonnes) for road transport emissions.  Data on carbon 
emissions across Greater Manchester are included within the Annual Monitoring Reports for the 
Borough(25) .  For 2007 Stockport's per capita emissions stand at 6.3 tonnes of CO2 per person per 
annum (UK per capita for 2007 is 8.4 kilo tonnes)(26) . 
Geography of Stockport 
2.15 The built up areas of the borough comprise a number of communities or townships which are 
broadly concentrated around Stockport Town Centre and eight district centres, indicated in Figure 1 
'Stockport Town Centre, District & Local Centres and Existing Employment Centres'. The district 
centres are Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle Hulme, Edgeley, Hazel Grove, Houldsworth Square (Reddish), 
Mar
ple and Romiley. This broad demarcation of the borough's communities is used in the following 
description of characteristics of the different parts of the borough, together with Area Committee 
designations. 
2.16 The geographic area of 'Stockport Town Centre' varies with the type of land use. For retail 
de
velopment designation of the town centre is much more limited in extent than it is for housing 
development. Other development plan documents define the precise boundaries for these different 
uses. 
Urban Areas 
2.17 Stockport Town Centre has a sub-regional influence extending over the whole Borough and 
w
ell beyond in some directions. The District and Local Centres have an important role in serving local 
needs and certain sections of the community, including the elderly and less mobile, could be 
considerably impoverished without them. There are 8 District Centres in Stockport, smaller than 
Stockport Town Centre and their roles are more limited. They vary in size and range of functions, with 
Marple having the highest levels of business premises and Reddish (Houldsworth Square) the least(27) . 
Though most of the trade of each District Centre comes from its surrounding area, to some extent the 
centres are complementary. 
24 Core Strategy DPD: Preferred Options - Accessibility Appraisal available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
25 Stockport Annual Monitoring Report available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
26 DECC Statistics about climate change available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
27 Stockport Annual Monitoring Report available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 10 
The Need for Change 2 
2.18 The 25 Local Centres provide primarily for daily shopping needs although some have better 
convenience availability than others.  However generally they have a more limited role than District 
Centres. 
Figure 1 Stockport Town Centre, District & Local Centres and Existing Employment Centres 
2.19 Stockport Town Centre is defined by regional policy(28) as a town centre within the Manchester 
City Region area, prioritised, with other City Region town centres, after the city centre of Manchester 
in terms of development.  Stockport is identified as one of the areas with particularly strong demand 
for the release of employment land, contributing to driving forward the regional economy. The town 
centre is listed as an area which should be promoted for retail investment and regeneration, ensuring 
a sustainable distribution of high quality retail facilities. The regional target for the Borough in terms 
of housing delivery between 2001 and 2021 is 8,100 houses. With its excellent rail and bus links, 
Stockport has the capacity to contribute to delivery of regional aims to reduce congestion on the 
motorway networks, through promoting sustainable transport options.  Many Stockport residents 
commute to businesses based at Manchester Airport which has associated benefits and impacts in 
terms of employment and congestion.  Stockport is identified as ranking seventh in a list of major retail 
centres in the North West(29) . 
2.20 Stockport Town Centre is defined by its topography and the listed railway viaduct which spans 
the Merse
y river valley articulates this. The core retail area is contained in the river valley with the 
town centre's historic core of winding street patterns rising up to the south of the main retail area. 
28 North West of England Regional Spatial Strategy available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
29 Stockport Shopping & Leisure Study 2009 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 11 
2 The Need for Change 
Retail areas lie to the east of the Viaduct and the A6, comprising of Merseyway, with the Peel Centre 
continuing further east. The linkages north to south are restricted in part due to topography, while 
east to west linkages are restricted by vehicle routes, especially the A6. The river frontage of the 
Mersey, Tame and Goyt rivers within the town centre have been under utilised during the 20th century, 
including being built over. 
2.21 Housing within the Town Centre is mainly social rented housing, is concentrated around the 
edges and gener
ally of two types; high density terraces and small groups of high-density tower blocks 
of flats. There is significant potential for new housing development within the Town Centre and 
surrounding areas. Office blocks are concentrated around the A6 and Piccadilly, the southern 
approaches to the town centre and adjacent to the core retail area, with Stockport College occupying 
a large area of land at the town's southern fringe.There are major opportunities to improve and increase 
the range of office sites available in the town centre, reflecting its accessibility via public transport. 
Despite recent additions, there is a lack of a range of restaurant representation and sufficient quality 
restaurants for its size and there is scope for enhancement of cafés and bars. This is reflected in the 
fact that the Town Centre’ s evening economy is still under-performing. 
2.22 The Town Centre  and the M60 Gateway corridor stretching northwards of the town, are 
identified as a pr
iority area for regeneration.  Regeneration has taken place at locations such as the 
Market-Underbanks and Hillgate. The Town Centre contains several Conservation Areas, with 
regeneration of architectural and historic heritage key to making the area more attractive. The River 
Mersey and lower reaches of the Goyt and Tame feature in this area, where initial reclamation and 
access enhancements have been carried out(30) . 
2.23 The Town Centre is well served by public transport with good radial routes to most locations 
within the Borough, regionally and be
yond. Stockport bus station is situated to the west, adjacent to 
the Merseyway Shopping Centre. The rail station however, has some access issues in terms of 
location uphill from the bus station and main shopping areas, with the A6 running between the shopping 
areas and both stations.  However the rail network provides interchange opportunities for intercity, 
cross country and most local networks. Pedestrian streets provide access to shops and facilities within 
the Town Centre. During peak times congestion is a problem on the road network, in particular routes 
off the A6 and M60 motorway. Poor air quality linked to transport emissions is also a problem in most 
areas of the Town Centre. 
2.24 The recent revitalisation of the Covered Market Hall, a Grade II Listed Building in the Town 
Centre
, highlights the wealth of heritage sites in and around the town centre. The four Conservation 
Areas within the Town Centre area are the Town Hall, St Peters, the Markets/Underbanks area and 
Hillgate. It should also be noted that Vernon Park, a nationally recognised Park of Historic Interest as 
well as Woodbank Park Local Nature Reserve, with its ancient semi natural woodland, lies close to 
the Town Centre on its eastern edge and includes a Site of Biological Importance. 
30 Stockport Town Centre Rivers Development Plan available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 12 
The Need for Change 2 
Figure 2 Key natural environment and heritage assets in and around Stockport Town Centre 
2.25 The Central Committee Area, covering the Town Centre, has a population estimated at over 
56,000 people, 28% of who are aged over 50. The Central Committee Area includes the wards of 
Brinnington, Edgeley & Cheadle Heath, Manor and Cale & Davenport. 
2.26 Bramhall is located to the south of the Borough within the Bramhall & Cheadle Hulme South 
Committee Area which has a population of more than 36,000.
 40% of them are aged over 50. Bramhall 
centre is located close to its railway station and originally developed in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries, focusing on the junction of roads from Stockport, Woodford and Cheadle Hulme. There 
are four Conservation Areas within this area and two Local Nature Reserves both containing Ancient 
Woodland and Sites of Biological Importance (see Figure 3 'Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves 
and Sites of Biological Importance in Bramhall'). Woodford on the southern edge of the area marks 
the change to countr
yside, bordering East Cheshire. Bramhall District Centre is linked to Stockport 
and Manchester via an hourly rail service.  However, high levels of private car use contribute to traffic 
congestion on Bramhall's roads. Bramhall is the most affluent neighbourhood, with the highest property 
prices, some of the best education results, the lowest unemployment rates and good overall health. 
Bramhall retail and restaurant provision is good both in terms of range and accessibility. This residential, 
leafy suburb has mainly large two storey detached and semi-detached housing, dating from Victorian 
and Edwardian eras, with further development during the inter-war and post war years.  Dwellings are 
set back from the road, well screened, with spacious plots.  Affordable housing levels are low and 
under-occupancy of dwellings is high, with good potential for further housing. There are small areas 
of employment land in the area, with some limited potential industrial or commercial sites for future 
development. 13 
2 The Need for Change 
Figure 3 Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Bramhall 
2.27 Cheadle Hulme, located south west of Stockport Town Centre, developed as a railway suburb 
in the 19th century, with further major growth between the 1930's and 50's. There is a Conservation 
Area at Swann Lane / Hulme Hall Road / Hill Top Avenue.  Cheadle Hulme District Centre has excellent 
train links to Stockport and Manchester, and points south. There are good bus services, and, after 
Stockport Town Centre, Cheadle Hulme District Centre is the most accessible location in the Borough. 
The area is principally residential and suburban in character with semi-detached and detached houses 
the main dwellings.  It serves the Bramhall population, a proportion of which use Cheadle Hulme 
District Centre, together with some Cheadle residents.  Neighbourhoods are mostly affluent, in good 
health and provided with services by a vibrant District Centre, with some limited mid to late 20th century 
office employment sites around Station Road. There is further retail and industry concentrated at 
Stanley Green in the south-west close to the Borough boundary, adjacent to the A34. Cheadle Royal 
Business Park on the A34 provides a range of employment sites in the area, with potential for further 
expansion.  House prices are usually high, however there is some opportunity for provision of affordable 
options amongst new housing delivery. There are also concerns around traffic congestion in an area 
which relies heavily on private car use, despite excellent bus and train service provision.  Also 
neighbouring Cheadle and Bramhall represent some of the best and worst availability of open space 
for recreation, with Cheadle Hulme lying between them in the level of provision. Therefore some 
residents will have easier access to open and recreation space than others, dependent on locations. 
2.28 Cheadle Committee Area is located to the far west of Stockport Town Centre, the north of the 
area stretches to the border with Manchester and hosts Cheadle Distr
ict Centre. The centre is linear 
stretching from St Mary's Church in the west to Cheadle Green in the east. There are good rail links 
from Gatley and Heald Green stations into Manchester and the Airport, but no direct rail link to 14 
The Need for Change 2 
Stockport.  Also Cheadle District Centre currently has no rail station.The area has a mixed appearance 
with some attractive Victorian and Edwardian terraces and some villas around the Centre. The rest 
of the area is a wider sprawling suburban form, including Gatley and Heald Green, comprising mostly 
inter and post war detached and semi-detached dwellings. The area has four conservation areas and 
three Local Nature Reserves, two of which are also Sites of Biological Importance (see Figure 4 
'Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Cheadle'). The 
A34 dissects the area lea
ving Gatley and Heald Green isolated from Stockport, often associated more 
as Manchester suburbs. There is a population of 39,895 (38% are over 50) with a few isolated pockets 
of deprivation that are higher than the national average.  Cheadle Hulme North Ward has the fourth 
highest serious crime levels for wards in the Borough and second highest level of poor postcodes in 
Stockport.  In the main this largely residential area is low in deprivation as well as unemployment and 
its residents are generally in good health. Proximity to Manchester Airport and reliance on the private 
car creates problems of heavy traffic volume, noise and air pollution.  Cheadle has a relatively varied 
provision of retail and leisure locally, but lacks a larger supermarket.  House prices are high with 
affordable housing an issue, but future housing provision options are reasonably good. 
Figure 4 Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Cheadle 
2.29 The densely populated Edgeley serves its own and surrounding local areas, including serving, 
in part, the more than 56,000 strong Central Committee Area population.  Edgeley Centre is a part 
pedestrianised linear street in a characteristically urban residential area located to the south and west 
of Stockport Town Centre with the A6 running to the East. The area is dominated by high density, 
red brick, back of pavement terraces. There are five Conservation Areas: Alexander Park, Cale Green, 
Davenport Park, Egerton Road / Frewland Avenue and St Georges, Heaviley  The proximity to the 
town centre saw it grow rapidly during the industrial revolution with most housing being late Victorian 15 
2 The Need for Change 
and Edwardian with the scale of the grid iron pattern of terraced streets unlike any other part of 
Stockport south of the M60.  Nearby Cale Green is of similar style, while Davenport also has some 
areas of later inter-war more suburban dwelling types. The Adswood estate dates between the 1920's 
and 1950's with a mix of public and private housing, giving it its own distinct character.  Cheadle Heath 
in the west is more mixed in character including the Bird Hall Lane industrial development. There are 
relatively significant levels of deprivation in the neighbourhoods reflecting lower than average household 
incomes and the third highest proportion of poor postcode levels in the Borough. Edgeley & Cheadle 
Heath Ward has relatively high levels of crime, being the second highest ward in the Borough, in terms 
of serious crime levels. There are also relatively high levels of unemployment, teenage pregnancy 
and traffic accidents. Educational achievement is slightly below average with potential for improvement, 
and the general health of the residents is poorer than some of the other neighbourhoods in the borough. 
However, the area does have a good range of quality affordable housing, some good social and 
community facilities and two award winning parks.  Despite recent and current enhancement, retail 
service provision requires further improvement in the District Centre, particularly in terms of the quality 
and range of restaurants, cafés and bars.  Retail vacancies have been significantly higher in Edgeley 
over recent years. Provision of affordable housing is comparatively high but there is limited scope for 
further housing development in the Davenport area. There has been substantial employment 
development in the area, including industrial and also some office development.  However little has 
taken place in the District Centre itself. Thanks to its location in close proximity to Stockport Town 
Centre and train station, Edgeley benefits from excellent public transport links and is one of the more 
accessible areas of the Borough. 
2.30 Hazel Grove (in the Stepping Hill Committee Area) serves a population of nearly 40,000, with 
37% aged o
ver 50.  Situated along the A6, Hazel Grove has a linear district centre which funnels 
congestion along the A6, further impacted by through traffic between the M60 orbital motorway and 
Cheshire / Derbyshire through routes. The rail station offers a half hourly service into Stockport and 
Manchester and bus services are good. There are predominantly terraced retail properties located 
at the back of the pavement. The wider areas are quite diverse but mostly residential and suburban 
in character with commercial uses mainly located to the south and west of the A6 close to the railway 
lines. These residential areas are mixed, ranging from Victorian terraced streets with fine urban grain 
located close to the A6 and towards Stockport Town Centre, through to more spacious plots containing 
inter and post war semi-detached and detached dwellings within a more fluid urban structure. Whilst 
most areas are stable with a good range of housing and general health, there are areas with above 
borough average levels of unemployment, teenage pregnancy, crime levels, and very heavy volumes 
of traffic. In Offerton in particular, there are significant areas of high deprivation, reflected in Offerton 
Ward being in the top five poor postcode areas in Stockport.  However Offerton does host the area's 
one Local Nature Reserve at Poise Brook, which has ancient semi natural woodland and is a Site of 
Biological Importance.  Hazel Grove is experiencing substantial difficulties due to its elongated cover 
of the A6 and narrow pavements, however it delivers reasonable non-retail services.  Affordable 
housing is relatively readily available, with a predominance of flats and scope for some further housing 
development. There has been limited employment development of both industrial and office types, 
with no significant development in the District Centre. 
2.31 The Heatons & Reddish Committee Area has a population of more than 56,000, with 31% 
aged o
ver 50. North Reddish and South Reddish, as well as some parts of Brinnington are served by 
Houldsworth Square in Reddish as a District Centre, with a half hourly rail service to Manchester 
from Reddish North Rail Station. The Four Heatons are served by various local centres and have 
higher than average household incomes and lower crime levels. Brinnington has its own local centre 
and is ranked as one of the most deprived areas in the country, reflected in the fact that it has 
significantly lower average household income figures than any other Stockport ward. This area has 
some pockets of stable and active communities, and a good supply of affordable housing. They are 16 
The Need for Change 2 
located north of Stockport Town Centre, within the M60 ring road, and stretch to the borders with 
Manchester and Tameside. Houldsworth Mill is at the centre of a Conservation Area in Houldsworth, 
and four other Conservation Areas exist within the Heatons and Reddish area. There are also three 
Local Nature Reserves within the area (see Figure 5 'Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves 
and Sites of Biological Importance in Heatons and Reddish' ). These neighbourhoods are more densely 
populated and urban in char
acter than most other parts of Stockport, with Reddish an industrial suburb. 
The Four Heatons are predominantly suburban residential areas including leafy, spacious Heaton 
Moor, which developed as a railway suburb in the 19th century and retains access to a regular rail 
service between Manchester and Stockport via Heaton Chapel rail station.  Heaton Moor comprises 
grand Victorian villas and small groups of Victorian terraces around the two local centres, as well as 
some later semi-detached and detached inter and post war properties.  Heaton Mersey has a terraced 
centre built around previous industries and influenced by the area's unique topography, with limited 
access to rail stations at Burnage and East Didsbury, outside of the Borough, serving Manchester, 
the Airport and Cheshire. In Reddish the large area of employment development which stretches from 
Lancashire Hill to the district centre has started to see the development of older sites for new 
employment uses. 
Figure 5 Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Heatons and Reddish 
2.32 Brinnington, with its own local centre, lies north east of the Town Centre and east of Houldsworth 
Square District Centre and developed as a Council estate in the 1950s. It comprises a mix of dwellings 
from tower blocks of flats to low rise terraces and semis.  Brinnington rail station has half hourly 
services into Manchester.  Social rented housing housing predominates in Brinnington. Some areas 
experience significant levels of deprivation. Overall levels of unemployment, income support claimants, 
teenage pregnancy, crime and traffic accidents are high. This situation is exacerbated by the fact that 17 
2 The Need for Change 
it is geographically isolated, with Reddish Vale Country Park (the only Local Nature Reserve in the 
area) and Tiviot Dale to the West and a corridor of green belt and the M60 to the East. Service provision 
could be improved across the area but is reasonable.  House prices are the lowest in the Borough 
reflecting the limited housing choice and high levels of social housing.  Outside of the Town Centre, 
these areas have the greatest housing development potential.  Industrial development has been steady 
in these areas with some office provision, and future potential for further redevelopment. 
2.33 Marple is located to the East of the borough, bordering Derbyshire, surrounded by the Green 
Belt, with a population of more than 26,000 of which 40% are aged o
ver 50.  People reside mainly in 
Marple and Marple Bridge as well as outlying villages such as High Lane. This makes it a gateway to 
the countryside with the wider area more rural in character than the rest of the borough (except for 
the Woodford area).  However it also makes access to some central Stockport services problematic. 
This area grew up around industry, especially Mills, and agriculture, and Marple itself developed as 
a railway suburb, with significant growth in the area in inter-war years with the surrounding river valleys 
and varied topography serving to curtail urban sprawl.  Consequently the area comprises of a 
combination of suburbs or predominantly inter and post war properties and villages which maintain 
much of their original character. The heritage of Marple is rich with 9 Conservation Areas (some of 
which are cross-boundary with other areas and, in the case of Brookbottom, with the neighbouring 
High Peak Borough). The area is quite unique with 16 canal locks, an aqueduct and a viaduct spanning 
the valley over the River Goyt and stone as well as brick readily in use for building.  Additionally the 
area has the borough's only two Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), two Local Nature Reserves 
and a number of Sites of Biological Importance (see Figure 6 'Conservation Areas, Local Nature 
Reserves, Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Sites of Biological Importance in Marple'). The train 
link to Manchester remains
, but not to Stockport Town Centre, contributing to road congestion in the 
area, particularly along the A626 corridor. Social isolation is therefore a problem for some of Marple's 
residents, particularly older people and those experiencing economic deprivation. However, Marple 
is generally seen as a highly desirable area with low crime rates and good schools. Overall, Marple 
has low levels of deprivation and unemployment, as well as good health.  Services are mainly located 
in Marple with good local provision.  Affordability of housing is an issue, with some further potential 
supply, and Green Belt boundaries protect against urban sprawl.The lowest employment development 
levels in the Borough reflect the commuter traffic congestion issues, which are exacerbated by limited 
public transport availability. Retaining remaining local employment is an issue. 18 
The Need for Change 2 
Figure 6 Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves, Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Sites of Biological Importance 
in Marple 
2.34 In the Werneth Committee Area lie Romiley, Woodley and Bredbury which are served by 
Romiley District Centre, with a total population of nearly 27,000 within the area, of which 39% are 
aged over 50. These areas are located to the north east of the borough, stretching to the border with 
Tameside, with good rail links into Manchester (but not Stockport) and have a varied topography. The 
area's settlements range from small villages such as Compstall in the east which is early 19th century, 
to 20th century suburbia for example around the more centrally located Bredbury and Woodley. The 
canals supported early development in Woodley and Romiley with railways accelerating further 
development and spreading to Bredbury.  In particular the railway has impacted on the linear Romiley 
District Centre of Victorian buildings. There is no predominant street pattern, or plot size or dwelling 
form but there is significantly more housing than flats, with terraces located closer to the district and 
local centres. There are seven Conservation Areas across this area as well as a Local Nature Reserve 
and a number of Sites of Biological Importance (see Figure 7 'Conservation Areas, Local Nature 
Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Werneth'). The property market has, until the recent 
economic impacts, increased in both price and demand. However, areas still contain some small 
poc
kets of deprivation higher than the national average, reflected in Bredbury & Woodley Ward being 
in Stockport's top five wards for poor postcode units. Some of Stockport's busiest roads pass through 
these neighbourhoods and consequently some areas suffer from serious congestion issues. Overall, 
there are lower than average rates of unemployment, good general health, and low levels of crime 
and traffic accidents.  Services provision has room for improvement in terms of retail and leisure, with 
low employment availability in the District Centre.  Social housing provision is high in this area and 
housing is relatively affordable. There is good scope for further housing to be developed in these  19 
2 The Need for Change 
areas.  Industrial development has been high with some office development concentrated around 
Bredbury Industrial Estate, close to Junction 25 of the M60. 
Figure 7 Conservation Areas, Local Nature Reserves and Sites of Biological Importance in Werneth 
2.2 Challenges for the Future – What are the issues? 
2.35 In summary, the Core Strategy (through it's vision, objectives and policy directions) needs to 
address the f
ollowing main issues arising from the Spatial Portrait: 
Pockets  of deprivation versus areas of affluence, resulting in inequalities especially in health; 
High  levels of domestic carbon emissions, third behind Manchester and Wigan within the Greater 
Manchester area; 
The Town Centre is not fulfilling its role as the borough's principal focus of development. The 
Town Centre requires improvement across a range of uses in a coherent and comprehensive 
manner; 
Issues  of cross linkages and opening up river frontage must be considered within the Town Centre; 
A need to safeguard and enhance the vitality and viability of the Town Centre, District and Local 
Centres; 
Ageing  population – a third of houses in the borough house a pensioner; 
House  prices are generally high and there is significant local need for affordable housing; 
Accessibility  of some services, especially to the more deprived areas of the Borough; 
Quality  of school buildings and issues of surplus provision; 
Quality  of other community facilities including health care facilities; 20 
The Need for Change 2 
Employment  sectors are predominantly in the highly skilled range with 9% of the workforce with 
no qualifications; 
Formal  sports provision and accessibility needs improvement; 
Uneven  distribution of greenspace; 
Traffic  congestion in the more heavily populated areas and along major road routes, despite there 
being comparatively good public transport availability in many areas; 
Out-commuting  levels are high and for every 6 who commute out 4 commute in; and 
Provision  of cemeteries, in light of predicted need. 
2.36 The Sustainability Appraisal, and other appraisal processes, have also highlighted the following 
issues which the Core Str
ategy needs to take account of in order to ensure mitigation as well as 
managed delivery of the spatial needs of the Borough: 
Ensure  that planning policy contributes to a sustainable development approach in the Borough, 
particularly with regards to low carbon; 
Ensure  that in relieving congestion, that management of emission levels are taken into account 
as well; and 
Ensure  evidence bases from different sources inform spatial policy development including the 
needs of a range of minorities. 
2.37 The issues highlighted cannot be addressed by spatial planning alone and it will be essential 
that other Council ser
vices reflect and have input to spatial policy development as well as building on 
the opportunities spatial policies offers, as a way of delivering services and behavioural change. 
2.3 Other Plans, Evidence and Influences 
2.38 There is a whole series of planning policies at national level and regional levels which Stockport 
will ha
ve to follow in preparing the Local Development Framework.  In addition there are various 
sub-regional and local policies and strategies which provide a framework and context within which 
the Core Strategy and LDF will operate. 
2.39 A full appraisal of relevant international, European, national, regional and local policies, plans 
and prog
rammes is contained within Appendix B of the Core Strategy Sustainability Appraisal Scoping 
Report(31) . 
National Policy 
2.40 National policy is largely provided through a series of Planning Policy Statements (PPSs), or 
Planning P
olicy Guidance notes (PPGs), that set out the Government's national policies on different 
aspects of planning. 
2.41 Sustainable development is the core principle underpinning planning. At the heart of sustainable 
de
velopment is the simple idea of ensuring a better quality of life for everyone, now and for future 
generations. A widely used definition was drawn up by the World Commission on Environment and 
Development in 1987: "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs." 
2.42 The Government set out five principles for achieving sustainable development in its Sustainable 
De
velopment Strategy - Securing the Future (2005)(32). These are: 
31 Core Strategy Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
32 Sustainable Development Strategy - Securing the Future (2005) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 21 
2 The Need for Change 
Living  within environmental limits; 
Ensuring  a strong, healthy and just society; 
Achieving  a sustainable economy; 
Promoting  good governance; and 
Using  sound science responsibly. 
2.43 It also sets out four shared priorities that are identified for immediate UK action: 
Sustainable  production and consumption; 
Climate  change and energy; 
Natural  resource protection and environmental enhancement; and 
Sustainable communities. 
2.44 The Core Strategy needs to be developed in a way that seeks to achieve these broad aims. 
The Government advocates that the pursuit of these aims should be done in an integrated way through 
a sustainable, innovative and productive economy that delivers high levels of employment, and a just 
society that promotes social inclusion, sustainable communities and personal well being, in ways that 
protect and enhance the physical environment and optimise resource and energy use. 
2.45 The Government specifies that planning should facilitate and promote sustainable and inclusive 
patter
ns of urban and rural development by: 
making  suitable land available for development in line with economic, social and environmental 
objectives to improve people's quality of life; 
contributing  to sustainable economic development; 
protecting  and enhancing the natural and historic environment, the quality and character of the 
countryside including landscape considerations, as well as existing communities; 
ensuring  high quality development through good and inclusive sustainable design, and the efficient 
use of resources; and, 
ensuring  that development supports existing communities and contributes to the creation of safe, 
sustainable, livable and mixed communities with good access to jobs and key services for all 
members of the community. 
2.46 Government Planning Policy Statements and Planning Policy Guidance Notes are available 
via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
2.47 A key piece of national legislation is the Climate Change Act 2008. This sets a legal requirement 
f
or the UK as a whole to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions by 2050 to a rate that is at least 80% 
lower than in 1990 and also puts in place requirements relating to adaptation to climate change. 
Spatial planning, through the LDF and (in particular) the Core Strategy, have a clear and important 
role to play in delivering Stockport's requirements under the Act. 
Regional and Sub-Regional Policy and Plans 
2.48 Regional planning policy is contained within the Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS) for the North 
W
est which sets out the broad development framework for the Region and, since September 2004, 
constitutes part of the development plan. 
Regional Spatial Strategy for the North West 
2.49 The North West Plan is a new type of document, which sets out the framework for the 
de
velopment of the North West of England. It has been prepared by 4NW in partnership with a wide 22 
The Need for Change 2 
range of authorities, voluntary groups and individuals, as the Regional Spatial Strategy for the region. 
Government legislation requires a Regional Spatial Strategy to be prepared for each region of England. 
2.50 The Plan sets out the scale, priorities and broad locations for future development across the 
region - pro
viding a framework for where and how much development should take place. It covers a 
broad range of issues including housing, retail and the environment, and includes the Regional 
Transport Strategy. The document tries to ensure that growth and development in the North West 
happens in a way which improves people’ s lives without damaging the environment in which we live. 
2.51 RSS sets out a series of objectives which it seeks to achieve during the lifespan of RSS through 
a whole r
ange of RSS policies and proposals. These objectives are as follows: 
improved,  sustainable economic growth, closing the gap with parts of the country that have the 
highest economic performance; 
a more competitive, productive and inclusive regional economy, with more people in employment 
that uses and develops their knowledge and skills; 
the development of urban, rural and coastal communities as safe, sustainable, attractive and 
distinctive places to live, work and visit; 
the reduction of economic, environmental, educational, health and other social inequalities between 
North West communities; 
the protection and enhancement of the region’ s built and natural environmental assets, its coastal 
areas and unique culture and heritage; 
the active management and prudent use of our natural and man made resources, with fewer 
emissions of key greenhouse gases, and the most efficient use of infrastructure; and 
the introduction of a safe, reliable and effective integrated transport network that supports 
opportunities for sustainable growth and provides better links with jobs and services. 
2.52 RSS recognises that the Manchester City Region is home to the North West’ s largest sub 
regional econom
y and that it represents the greatest potential for boosting economic performance in 
both the North West and North of England as a whole, and for closing the gap that exists with regions 
in Southern England. Whilst it boasts world-class assets like the vibrant City Centre and Manchester 
Airport, and many prosperous areas within the Southern Part of the City Region, it is also the scene 
of marked social and economic inequality and faces the challenge of regenerating communities within 
the surrounding inner areas and northern parts of the City Region. 
2.53 RSS specifies that most new development and investment will continue to be focused on the 
most accessib
le urban centres in the North West. Much of this will be in the cities and towns making 
up the three City Regions of Manchester, Liverpool and Central Lancashire. In the south and the north 
of the city regions, development will be focused in the important regional towns and cities, such as 
Stockport. 
2.54 A notable and particularly important part of RSS is that it sets out the level of housing provision 
that Stoc
kport must plan for under the requirements of national Planning Policy Statement 3: Housing. 
In addition, RSS Policy W5 (Retail Development) seeks to enhance and encourage comparison retailing 
facilities in Stockport as well as at numerous other centres in the North West. 
2.55 Another key element of RSS is that it sets the basis for development of a low carbon economy 
within the region. 
The North West Climate Change Action Plan (2010-2012) is one of a number of 
documents which sit beneath RSS; it aims to stimulate and measure the progress of England's North 
West towards a low-carbon economy, preparing it for the challenges of a changing climate and expected 
future energy demands, whilst protecting and enhancing quality of life and preserving the region's rich 
environment. 23 
2 The Need for Change 
2.56 The North West RSS was adopted in September 2008 and is available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Regional Economic Strategy 
2.57 The North West’ s Regional Economic Str ategy (RES) sets out the framework by which the 
region can continue the transformation of the economy by building on the region’ s assets, tackling 
areas of under-performance and, ultimately, closing the region’ s productivity gap. In doing so, the 
RES seeks to create a dynamic, sustainable international economy which competes on the basis of 
knowledge, advanced technology and an excellent quality of life for all. 
2.58 In seeking to achieve this, the RES highlights three main drivers. These relate to: 
improving  productivity and growing the market; 
achieving  growth in the size and capabilities of the region’ s workforce; and 
creating  and maintaining the conditions for sustainable growth. 
Prosperity for all: The Greater Manchester Strategy 
2.59 The vision for Greater Manchester, as set out in the Greater Manchester Strategy, states that 
b
y 2025 the Manchester city region will be: 
“A world class city-region at the heart of a thriving North”; 
One of Europe’ s premier city regions, at the forefront of the knowledge economy, and with 
outstanding commercial, cultural and creative activities; 
World  class, successfully competing internationally for investment, jobs and visitors; 
An area where all people have the opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, the investment 
and development of their city; 
An area known for, and distinguished by, the quality of life enjoyed by its residents; and 
An area with GVA levels to match those of London and the South East. 
2.60 This is an ambitious vision, which can only be realised in partnership with national government, 
regional bodies, the broad spectrum of Greater Manchester sub-regional agencies and authorities, 
higher education institutions, representative private sector organisations and individual companies, 
as well as local communities. 
2.61 The Greater Manchester Strategy is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Manchester Independent Economic Review (MIER) 
2.62 The MIER resulted from an independent process based on empirical evidence of the economy 
of the Greater Manchester sub-region.
 Amongst other things it examined the sub-region as a single 
functional economy, looking at the changing global context, investment into the sub-region, the skills 
of the population on which it can draw and the prospect of the development of sustainable communities. 
2.63 The Review has a number of recommendations related to the development of the sub-regional 
econom
y. A key message is that agglomeration is vital to the success of the economy. Currently the 
city region is not reaching the potential it has, given its scale and density. The spatial clustering of the 
skilled, the jobs, amenities etc is what can be used to drive the long-term growth of the city region's 
economy. This means focusing on the areas of high skills, whilst also improving the basic skills, 
improving transport connections and traffic management, both within and into the city region, and 
encouraging cross-sectoral partnership building, rather than focusing on sector-based clustering. 24 
The Need for Change 2 
2.64 Key findings and recommendations are available to view via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence . 
Manchester City Region Spatial Strategy (MCRSS) 
2.65 The current version of the Manchester City Region Spatial Strategy (MCRSS) was adopted in 
September 2006.
 It focuses on key policy issues for the economy, housing, environment and transport 
at the sub-regional level. Key Objectives include closing the economic productivity gap, ensuring that 
housing supply supports and contributes to economic growth, improving connectivity of the city region, 
protecting and enhancing the local and global environment and protecting and enhancing open 
countryside and the network of green spaces across the city region. 
2.66 The strategy sets out a spatial policy framework designed to meet these key objectives, with 
an o
verall spatial framework, and focus on distinct geographical areas, including the regional centre 
and inner areas, the southern part of the city region, the northern part, Warrington and Manchester 
Airport. Within that policy framework Stockport is covered by the southern section, which focuses 
employment development in core areas at sustainable, brownfield sites, provides a good range of 
high quality housing to meet expected needs, supports regeneration and supports economic growth, 
ensures good transport connectivity and conserves, improves and develops strategic green corridors. 
2.67 The document is available to view via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Regional Housing Strategy 
2.68 The North West Regional Housing Strategy was published in 2009 by 4NW. The overall vision 
of the str
ategy is "to create balanced housing markets across the North West that support economic 
growth, strengthen social and economic inclusion and ensure that everyone has access to appropriate, 
well-designed high quality, affordable housing in sustainable, mixed and vibrant communities." 
2.69 To achieve this vision, the strategy identifies three equally important and connected objectives, 
namely: 
Achieving  the right quantity of housing 
Continuing  to raise the quality of the existing housing stock 
Connecting  people to the improved housing offer. 
Gypsy & Travellers Accommodation Assessment 
2.70 Under Government Planning Circular 01/06, regional planning boards and local authorities are 
required to under
take assessments to establish what provision needs to be made for Gypsy and 
Travellers' sites. In the North West this has been undertaken on a sub-regional basis. 
2.71 The research into the level of need in Greater Manchester was completed in 2008 and the 
results of this sub-regional study are being used to estab
lish the level of provision that needs to be 
made in Stockport. The LDF process is expected to specifically identify sites to meet the requirement 
identified in RSS, as it will no longer be acceptable for local authorities to simply have a criteria based 
policy to assess planning applications for such provision. If RSS requirements are not clearly met 
within the LDF process, the LDF may not be considered to be in conformity with RSS and therefore 
deemed 'unsound'.  It is clear therefore, that meeting Gypsy and Travellers' needs will need to be 
given the same weight as other housing requirements in RSS. 25 
2 The Need for Change 
Greater Manchester Integrated Transport Strategy (GMITS) and Local Transport Strategy 
(GMLTP) 
2.72 GMITS was jointly developed with the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Authority 
(GMPT
A - now the Greater Manchester Integrated Transport Authority, GMITA), the Association of 
Greater Manchester Authorities (AGMA) and the 10 Greater Manchester Local Authorities, including 
Stockport. 
2.73 The approach it sets out will support regeneration and economic activity as well as reducing 
congestion and pollution, impro
ving safety and supporting a network of services to improve accessibility. 
Investment in public transport on its own will not however lock in the benefits that are envisaged. 
Such investment needs to be complemented by a progressive approach to network and demand 
management and holistic packages of initiatives designed to achieve behavioural change. The 
strategy's proposals in this respect are broadly as follows: 
Public Transport Improvements 
Managing  Demand for Car Travel – Smarter Choices 
Making  the Best Use of What We Have 
Road  Safety and Personal Safety and Security 
Major  Highway Schemes 
Moving  Freight 
Sustainable  Development and Air Quality 
Efficiently  and effectively maintain roads, cycle lanes and footpaths. 
2.74 The current Greater Manchester Local Transport Plan (LTP2) will be replaced by a new LTP3 
b
y April 2011 and will be the key delivery mechanism for the GMITS. 
Greater Manchester Air Quality Action Plan (2004) 
2.75 The plan seeks to deliver improved air quality across the conurbation particularly within the 
locations designated as Air Quality Management Areas b
y: 
Reducing  road traffic emissions; 
Promoting  energy efficiency; 
Enforcing  air pollution legislation; 
Providing  guidance/advice to developers; 
Promoting/supporting  relevant action by other agencies (the Highways Agency, Environment 
Agency, etc). 
2.76 Provision needs to be made within the Core Strategy DPD, and within the wider LDF , to ensure 
that the f
ollowing measures are enabled: 
Appropriate  public transport, cycling and footpath improvements; 
Appropriate  control measures to promote the introduction of journey to work travel plans and 
minimise the environmental impact of freight movement; 
Appropriate  control measures to encourage low polluting, energy efficient development. 
South East Manchester Multi Modal Strategy (SEMMMS) 2001-2021 
2.77 This 20 year strategy was developed to deal with existing and predicted transport problems 
within an area co
vering Manchester, Stockport, Tameside and parts of Cheshire and Derbyshire. The 
aims of the strategy are to: 26 
The Need for Change 2 
Improve  public transport; 
Improve  the use of road space; 
Encourage  transport change; 
Encourage  urban regeneration; 
Improve  highways. 
2.78 The strategy recognises that orbital public transport links are a weakness within the SEMMMS 
area and theref
ore recommends enhancements to the fixed track network, including Metrolink 
extensions to Stockport and Marple, an eastern rail link to the Airport and provision of new rail stations 
on the existing heavy rail network. The strategy also recommended that a Relief Road be built to 
improve access, ease congestion and therefore assist in the regeneration of several areas of the 
Borough.  A key element of the strategy is that, to achieve its aims, it should be implemented as a 
whole. 
North West Landscape Character Framework 
2.79 The NW Landscape Character Framework (NWLCF) is a map and associated database that 
descr
ibes the variation in landscape at a regional scale. It provides a consistent level of mapping for 
all landscapes in the region, including rural, peri urban, urban, coastal and wetland. NWLCF has been 
developed as a key step in the implementation of the European Landscape Convention, which came 
into force in the UK in March 2007. The Convention calls for the integration of landscape into all 
relevant areas of policy, including cultural, economic and social policies. The NWLCF has raised 
awareness of the importance of landscape and provides a resource to facilitate the integration of 
landscape into regional and sub regional policy. 
Local Development Frameworks of neighbouring authorities 
2.80 Stockport is bordered by Manchester City, Tameside Metropolitan Borough, the unitary Cheshire 
East author
ity, Derbyshire County Council / High Peak District Council and the Peak District National 
Park.  Each of these areas has its own spatial plans and strategies which need to be complemented 
by (and in turn complement) the Stockport LDF . 
Key Local Strategies 
2.81 There are numerous strategies and plans that have been produced at the local level and, where 
rele
vant, these will be considered in developing the Core Strategy. Perhaps of most significance, 
however, are those which represent aspirations and direction for the Borough’ s community as well as 
those that have spatial implications. 
2.82 At the heart of these is the Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy which sets out the 
comm
unity’ s ambitions for the future of the Borough. As such, it is vital that the Core Strategy contributes 
towards and enables the delivery of these ambitions; the Core Strategy is often described as the 
spatial expression of the Sustainable Community Strategy. 
2.83 In addition, other plans and strategies are important in informing particular elements of the 
Core Str
ategy. For example, the preferred approach towards regeneration priority areas is informed 
by a number of local strategies including the Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy. 
2.84 The following are considered to be those of particular significance to the content of the Core 
Str
ategy. 27 
2 The Need for Change 
Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy ("The Stockport Strategy 2020") 
2.85 The LDF is often referred to as the "Spatial expression of the Sustainable Community Strategy". 
The Comm
unity Strategy is a statutory requirement and should set down the main priorities for the 
borough for the foreseeable future so that the LDF , and in particular the Core Strategy, can put in 
place the spatial mechanisms for how this might be delivered; both through the provision of infrastructure 
and the control and management of development.  It is, however, an iterative process as the community 
strategy must also recognise the other influences and limitations placed on the LDF (for example by 
national and regional policy) and should share a common evidence base to ensure that common 
objectives are achievable. The priorities of the Community Strategy are to create a Stockport that is: 
Thriving  - with a competitive economy, a vibrant Town Centre complemented by individual District 
Centres, an educated population and an enterprising culture 
Safer  and Stronger - with cohesive and engaged communities, low crime rates and community 
pride 
Healthy  - with active, empowered and independent people with good emotional and mental health 
Greener  - with a unique built environment, excellent parks and open spaces, a sustainable 
approach to the natural environment and good connections with excellent public transport 
2.86 The Community Strategy is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) and Local Area Agreement (LAA) 
2.87 A new statutory Local Area Agreement (LAA) was negotiated during 2008 based on the local 
pr
iorities identified within the new National Indicator Set.The new National Indicator Set was abolished 
as part of the abolition of the Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) from 25 June 2010. The LAA 
runs from 2008 through to 2011 and underpins the delivery of the Sustainable Community Strategy 
and the Council Plan. 
2.88 For 2009/10, the LAA includes a wider range of indicators than those originally agreed with 
centr
al government.The addition of local indicators, reflecting specific local needs, will strengthen the 
agreement and will ensure that the agreement addresses key priorities as set out in the Story of Place. 
2.89 The Council Plan reflects the LAA in so far as the Council is responsible for delivery of specific 
elements
. 
2.90 Further information on the CAA and LAA is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy (January 2009) 
2.91 The Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy aims to to improve the quality of life in neighbourhoods 
in Stoc
kport through partnership working and targeting resources.The Strategy focuses on the Priority 
1 areas of Adswood and Bridgehall, Brinnington, Lancashire Hill and Heaton Norris and the Town 
Centre, which are the most deprived neighbourhoods in Stockport as identified using findings from 
the Index of Multiple Deprivation 2007 (IMD 2007). 
2.92 The Strategy highlights deprivation relating to employment, health and disability, education, 
skills and tr
aining as of particular importance in these Neighbourhood Renewal Areas. The objectives 
of the Strategy are to achieve: 
Safer  places to live 
Stronger  local communities where people feel they can improve their area 
Improved  outcomes for children and young people 28 
The Need for Change 2 
Good  quality local environment 
Quality  housing and housing services 
Improved  economic well-being for local people 
Better  health and mental well-being for local people 
Improved  quality of life for older people 
A positive image 
2.93 The next phase of the Strategy will address the Priority 2 areas and pockets of deprivation. 
Pr
iority 2 areas are: 
Bredbury  Green 
Central  Stockport 
Councillor Lane 
Marbury  Road 
North Reddish 
Offerton 
Queens  Gardens 
Woodley  Precinct 
2.94 The Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Stockport Climate Change Strategy 2008-2010 
2.95 This strategy is a working document of the Stockport Local Strategic Partnership (LSP).  It 
proposes actions which are intended to benefit the local en
vironment as well as the people that live 
and work within it. The Stockport LSP aims to set a standard for future action to alleviate the effects 
of climate change, to raise awareness among local people about the issues at stake and declare its 
intention to work in partnership with the local community to develop a more sustainable future for 
Stockport. The Core Strategy will be a key mechanism for delivering the Climate Change Strategy. 
The intention is that the Climate Change Strategy will be reviewed and updated every other year. 
Stockport Housing Strategy 2010-2015 - A Good Place to Live 
2.96 A summary document of the key housing issues in Stockport and a set of priority objectives 
the Council and its par
tners will undertake to achieve. The priority objectives are: 
Quantity 
To meet the need and aspirations for accommodation, deliver choice, and facilitate economic 
growth 
To provide more affordable housing 
Quality 
To improve the condition of housing in the Borough 
To facilitate regeneration, improvement and investment in targeted neighbourhoods 
To provide more sustainable housing 
People 
To provide accommodation choice and to help match the need and aspirations of residents to 
the housing offer  29 
2 The Need for Change 
To ensure that equality and diversity is integral to all service delivery 
To ensure that community engagement is integral to all service delivery 
To ensure that social inclusion is integral to all service delivery 
Stockport Economic Development Strategy 2002-2012 – T owards a Strong and Responsible 
Economy 
2.97 The vision of the Economic Development Strategy is to unleash Stockport’ s potential as an 
economic f
orce within the region whilst enhancing the social and environmental fabric.  Its five strategic 
objectives (which the Core Strategy will need to assist in achieving) are: 
To develop and improve the fabric of the Town Centre and District Centres; 
To support enterprise, innovation and competitiveness; 
To promote Stockport as an attractive visitor and business location; 
To improve skills and employability; and 
To develop transport solutions. 
Stockport Regeneration Framework 
2.98 This framework sets out Stockport Partnership's future vision for regeneration and renewal 
activity in the Borough.
 Its primary purposes are to clarify priorities, including spatial priorities, in 
achieving the challenges in the Community Strategy and tasks in the Local Area Agreement. It identifies 
spatial priorities for regeneration which comprise neighbourhood renewal areas and areas in need of 
economic and physical regeneration. 
Stockport Town Centre / M60 Gateway Strategy 
2.99 In 2000, 'Gateway to the Future – Regeneration Plan for the Town Centre and M60 Gateway', 
a str
ategy for the regeneration of Stockport town centre over the next twenty years was launched. 
2.100 The strategy seeks to create and maintain an area with a balance of mixed activity to enable 
'm
utual benefit and long-term viability', providing a town centre that will leave a positive and lasting 
impression on its residents and visitors. The themes of accessibility, attraction and amenity serve as 
a footprint for the plan for urban change. 
2.101 Further information on the Stockport Town Centre / M60 Gateway Strategy is available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Stockport District and Local Centres Strategy 2007-2012 
2.102 An important element identified in the issues set out in this paper is in relation to the role 
pla
yed by the Borough's District and Local Centres. This strategy sets a range of objectives for how 
the Council and its stakeholder partners will seek to secure the continuation and enhancement of 
individual centres.  Broadly these objectives deal with the following: 
The need for new and broad ranging attractions to meet actual and potential demand; 
The need for accessibility improvements in order to secure new attractions as well as to improve 
centres for existing and future users; 30 
The Need for Change 2 
That amenity improvements are necessary in order to secure new attractions and to improve 
centres for existing and future users; and 
That the Council will need to continue working in partnership with other key stakeholders to 
resource and implement the strategy so as to ensure that the centres continue to provide a viable 
and vital role within the economic, social and environmental fabric of the Borough. 
2.103 The Core Strategy will need to provide a framework which helps to enable these issues to 
be addressed, ha
ving regards to the effect of the economic recession.The Stockport District and Local 
Centres Strategy 2007-2012 is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Schools Reorganisation 
2.104 Building Schools for the Future in Stockport: Secondary Strategy for Change 2008 (available 
via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence) is a consultation document that provides a background to 
Stoc
kport's vision for secondary schools in the borough. It prioritises the programme on the basis that 
the Council's approach has been to address the needs of students from areas of highest deprivation. 
It identifies themes for Stockport's Building Schools for the Future (BSF) Programme, which is 
abandoned due to the cessation of the Government's BSF Programme on 5 July 2010.The document 
proposes that all secondary schools should become full extended schools providing a range of services 
and activities outside school hours for pupils, parents and the local community. The Government has 
announced the launch of a comprehensive Review of capital investment in pre-university education 
through a Spending Review due in Autumn 2010. This will affect the funds available to the Council to 
address the inadequacy of its failing secondary building stock. 
2.105 A separate project on the reorganisation of provision of primary schools is being undertaken 
b
y the Council. The Council has secured £3 million per year for 12 years from 2011 onwards from 
the Department for Children, Schools and Families (DCSF) for improved primary school facilities 
following a bid for funding from the Government's Primary Capital Programme. The DCSF (now the 
Department for Education) funding, subject to the government's Autumn Spending Review, will enable 
Stockport to deliver its vision to create primary schools which are equipped for 21st century teaching 
and learning. Further information is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 31 
3 The Strategy 
3 The Strategy 
3.1 Future Picture of the Borough - Vision 
3.1 The Stockport Community Strategy 2020 sets out a vision to take Stockport from excellent to 
e
xceptional: exceptionally thriving; exceptionally strong; exceptionally healthy; exceptionally green. 
It highlights that the Council, and its partners, will harness the pride and ambition of the Borough's 
communities to tackle their unique and specific challenges. To achieve this vision it is necessary for 
the Core Strategy, as the "spatial expression of the Sustainable Community Strategy", to set down 
its own, more specific vision.  Building on the Community Strategy vision the Core Strategy has its 
own spatial vision which is as follows: 
"Stockport in 2026 will offer more opportunities for residents to achieve healthy and sustainable 
lif
estyles through delivery of development that is economically, socially and environmentally 
sustainable. With particular focus upon the Borough's Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas, 
development planning will have achieved an improvement in the wellbeing of all by establishing 
the spatial infrastructure to achieve more mixed communities and to allow community programmes 
and projects to be delivered effectively, as well as enabling residents to make the most of 
employment opportunities. There will be a specific focus on Stockport Central Area so as to 
provide new and particular opportunities to meet the Borough's housing, employment and service 
needs and to achieve a revitalised, major centre within Greater Manchester. 
Stockport, within the limits of its environmental capacity, will have maximised its contribution to 
the econom
y of the sub-region, building upon its excellent locational advantages through 
improvements to its transport links to the Regional Centre and Manchester Airport, in order to 
ensure that the borough plays a full and complementary role in the economic development of 
Greater Manchester.  Businesses will be sustained within a low carbon economy which offers 
opportunities for innovation. There will be greater employment prospects available in accessible 
locations, particularly where jobs are needed, reducing poverty across targeted areas. Office 
development will be concentrated in Stockport Town Centre's mixed use areas, the M60 Gateway 
and in or adjacent to District Centres, in particular Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle Hulme and Hazel 
Grove. 
Sufficient additional housing will have been provided in locations accessible to jobs and services 
b
y sustainable modes of travel to ensure that all Stopfordians, including the young and elderly, 
have access to the type of housing they need in an area in which they wish to live. The Central 
Area of the borough will be a particular focus of new housing development reflecting the 
regeneration opportunities and benefits this will bring and its sustainable connectivity to jobs and 
services in the Town Centre and the Regional Centre. The borough will have retained a good 
stock of quality family housing to help meet the requirements of its households. 
Stockport will have increased its levels of affordable housing and will provide diversity of tenure, 
par
ticularly in the higher priced housing areas of Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle Hulme and Marple. 
All residents, including more vulnerable members of society, will have ready access to health 
and comm
unity facilities which will be mainly focused on Stockport Town Centre and District 
Centres. The Town Centre, District and Local Centres will offer a variety of goods and services 
needed by their catchment communities, whilst reflecting unique local opportunities which attract 
visitors and business.  Shop frontages will be safeguarded to enable them to meet retail needs. 
Complementary facilities (such as leisure and cultural uses) will be mainly provided elsewhere 
within centres. 32 
The Strategy3 
The Borough will have retained and enhanced its attractive and leafy character for the 
environmental, social and economic benefits this can bring.  A network of green spaces and 
corridors in the borough linked to neighbouring local authority areas, with the Etherow-Goyt, 
Ladybrook, Mersey and Tame river valleys being at its heart, will serve recreational, biodiversity 
and amenity functions and help the borough adapt to the impacts of climate change.The Borough's 
countryside and natural landscape areas, biodiversity and geodiversity will have been preserved 
and their intrinsic values recognised and enhanced.  Opportunities to use the Borough's 
countryside and urban open space for local food production and as a source of low-carbon 
(biomass) fuel will also be taken advantage of. The historic environment will continue to hold a 
unique place in Stockport’ s cultural heritage, supporting and contributing to the economy, society 
and daily life. The fragile and finite nature of the historic environment as a non-renewable 
resource which needs to be conserved and managed for future generations will be given high 
regard. 
All of this will be achieved whilst striving to ensure that travel options for residents and visitors 
meet their needs sustainably, offering opportunities to exercise and interact in local communities 
and ensuring that walking and cycling or use of an improved public transport network are viable 
and desirable options." 33 
3 The Strategy 
3.2 Objectives 
Objective 1 
Sustainable Development:  Addressing Inequalities and Climate Change 
The Core Strategy will support, enable and encourage development that is environmentally, 
socially and economically sustainable so as to address the key issues of climate change and 
inequalities.  It will achieve this by: 
a. Assisting and enabling the Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy to improve the quality of life in 
the Borough's priority neighbourhoods; 
b. Adopting a sequential approach that makes best use of previously developed and sustainably 
located land; 
c. Ensuring that development is located and designed so as to minimise susceptibility to the 
impacts of climate change, in particular away from areas at risk of flood; 
d. Actively requiring development to contribute to a reduction in the Borough's carbon footprint; 
e. Maximising the economic benefits that economically, socially and environmentally sustainable 
development can bring; 
f. Setting standards for new development in line with the Building for Life, Code for Sustainable 
Homes, Lifetime Homes, BREEAM and CEEQUAL; 
g. Making and enabling the best use of renewable energy resources; and 
h. Promoting the sustainable management of resources, in particular minerals, waste and water. 
Objective 2 
Housing 
The Core Strategy will achieve the key housing policy goal of ensuring that everyone has the 
oppor
tunity of living in a decent home, which they can afford, in a community in which they want 
to live by: 
a. Delivering at least 450 dwellings per annum to match the changing needs of a diverse 
population; 
b. Ensuring an appropriate mix of housing is provided, in terms of tenure, price, type, size and 
location, having regard to the accommodation requirements of specific groups such as families 
with children and older people, in order to achieve sustainable mixed communities; 
c. Increasing the provision of affordable housing (including social rented), especially in high 
priced areas; 
d. Maximising the central, inner urban area’ s potential b y increasing its population through 
appropriate new housing development; 
e. Focusing new housing development in locations that are accessible to services and offer 
opportunities to utilise decentralised energy in urban areas, with particular emphasis upon 
the central, inner urban area, Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas, and in and around the 
District and Large Local Centres especially those readily accessible to the Town Centre and 
the Regional Centre, and other genuinely accessible locations within settlements; 34 
The Strategy3 
f. Focus new housing on previously-developed land to assist regeneration where possible, and; 
g. Set appropriate locational criteria to guide the provision of sufficient sites for Gypsy and 
Traveller, and Travelling Showpeople accommodation to meet RSS pitch requirements. 
Objective 3 
Economic Development 
The Core Strategy aims to create a prosperous and diverse economy with a range of accessible 
and suitable employment sites to attract inward investment, meet the needs of indigenous 
businesses and to assist in achieving the sustainable regeneration of the borough and the 
sub-region by: 
a. Supporting economic development and regeneration in accessible locations, with particular 
emphasis upon further developing key economic growth sectors; 
b. Developing Stockport Town Centre as the principal focus for employment in the office, retail 
leisure and service sectors; 
c. Focusing office development also within the M60 Gateway, with other development in and 
around district centres and on existing employment areas in order to create a sustainable 
economy within the Borough; 
d. Allocating and protecting appropriate land for industrial and warehousing uses in locations 
such as Bredbury Industrial Estate and other sites with good transport connections; and 
e. Ensuring that the jobs which are created within the borough are accessible to the maximum 
number of the borough’ s residents, through appropriate provision of employment sites, 
transport, education and skills training and other services, in particular within the 
Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas. 
Objective 4 
Access to Services and Inclusive Communities 
The Core Strategy will support sustainable and thriving communities that enable people to have 
an enjoyable quality of life, without compromising the environment, by: 
a. Enabling developments which improve the attractiveness and viability of the borough’ s 
neighbourhoods; 
b. Developing the role of Stockport Town Centre as a thriving and accessible sub-regional centre 
for the provision of retail, office, leisure, tourism, community, cultural, education, health and 
other services; 
c. Supporting the hierarchy, vitality and viability of the borough’ s Town, District and Local 
Centres, directing retail and other main town centre uses to the most appropriate centre in 
that hierarchy; 
d. Providing an adequate and accessible network of health facilities to improve health, emotional 
wellbeing and life expectancy; 
e. Restricting the provision of hot food take-aways (A5 use) to appropriate locations with respect 
to safeguarding the retail function of the service centres and the proximity of A5 use to schools 
and parks; 35 
3 The Strategy 
f. Achieving developments which ensure that everyone has equal access to opportunities for 
learning, training, skills and knowledge, including improving the borough’ s schools through 
programmes such as Building Schools for the Future and those to improve further and higher 
education provision within the borough; 
g. Providing and improving indoor sports halls commensurate with identified need; 
h. Enabling cemetery and crematoria development to meet the needs of the local burial authority; 
and 
i. Co-locating services and community facilities to maximise access and efficiencies, including 
e
xtending the hours of operation and dual-use of some facilities. 
Objective 5 
Safeguard and Improve the Borough's Environment 
The Core Strategy will seek to safeguard and improve the borough's natural and built environments. 
It will achieve this by: 
a. Safeguarding and enhancing the character and value of the borough’ s countryside, landscape 
character areas and townscapes, reinforcing their distinctiveness, and safeguarding the 
permanence of the Borough's Green Belt; 
b. Protecting and enhancing the borough’ s biodiversity and geodiversity including its sites of 
national and regional nature conservation importance and the green corridors within urban 
areas; 
c. Assisting improvements in air quality through spatial planning and transport infrastructure 
planning; 
d. Safeguarding residents, occupants and visitors (particularly of sensitive development) from 
unacceptable levels of noise, light, water or ground pollution (including road transport and 
aircraft noise); 
e. Providing green infrastructure, civic spaces and public realm that are well designed, safe and 
accessible, sufficient to satisfy the recreational, leisure, health and amenity requirements of 
the population, which can adapt to the needs of and which help mitigate the impacts of climate 
change and which improve health; 
f. Providing and maintaining high quality open spaces and recreation facilities commensurate 
with the needs of the borough's population; 
g. Ensuring that all development is designed to a high quality, creating buildings and a sense 
of place that reflects and enhances local character and distinctiveness; and 
h. Recognising the unique place that the historic environment holds in the borough's cultural 
heritage and the multiple ways in which it supports and contributes to the economy, society 
and daily life; and 
i. Conserving and managing the historic environment for future generations. 36 
The Strategy3 
Objective 6 
Transport 
The Core Strategy will seek an efficient and extensive transport network which enables services 
and oppor
tunities to be accessible by all, whilst also reducing congestion and minimising the 
environmental impact of transport.  It will achieve this by: 
a. Promoting development which reduces the need to travel, especially by car. 
b. Promoting development which makes the most efficient use of the existing transport network. 
c. Focusing development in locations accessible by public transport, walking and cycling. 
d. Following a sustainable road user hierarchy which prioritises the needs of the most vulnerable 
road users. 
e. Supporting the development of new fixed track infrastructure as identified in the SEMMMS 
Strategy, in order to achieve modal shift away from the car. 
f. Maintaining the existing transport network and associated structures (e.g. retaining walls, 
bridges) to ensure its continued efficient and safe use. 
g. Improving Air Quality, particularly within Air Quality Management Areas. 
h. Implementing the SEMMMS Relief Road, which will remove through traffic from District and 
Local Centres and improve access to Manchester Airport. 
i. Providing and improving a network of safe, good quality walking and cycling routes and 
ensuring provision of appropriate facilities for sustainable transport users. 37 
3 The Strategy 
3.3 Strategy 
3.2 Development will be broadly focused in line with the following statement which is also shown 
pictorially by the 3.3.1 'Key Diagram': 
"A focus of sustainable development principally within Stockport Central Area, within other 
regeneration priority areas and at sites where specific regeneration needs have been 
identified. To a lesser extent, but so as to ensure that the Borough's development needs can 
be met in as sustainable a way as possible, residential development will also be focused in the 
areas surrounding the Town, District and Large Local Centres, as well as in other locations that 
are genuinely sustainably accessible within the urban area.  Service provision will be focused 
similarly, with key facilities being provided in the areas of the Borough most accessible to their 
users; retail development will be focused within the Town Centre Core Retail Area and, where it 
is of an appropriate scale, within District and Local Centres.  Economic development will be 
accommodated in a sustainable manner, the key growth area being in and around Stockport Town 
Centre, mixed use areas and M60 Gateway, whilst recognising in particular the requirements of 
non-office based economic development, the focus will include further development of the Borough's 
existing major employment areas." 
3.3 The Core Policies set out over the following pages show how this broad approach will be taken 
in relation to different issues and different forms of development.  Under each Core Policy is a collection 
of Development Management Policies which will be used to ensure that development contributes 
towards achieving the Core Policy and the overall vision and objectives of the Core Strategy. 38 
The Strategy3 
3.3.1  Key Diagram 
3.4 The Key Diagram shows the areas and broad locations that will be the main focus for development 
in Stoc
kport over the 15 year period of the Core Strategy.  It is important to note that it is a diagram 
and not a map; whilst in some regards it is based upon geographic information it is not intended to 
notate the precise location of any proposals or areas with specific policy requirements or constraints. 39 
3 The Strategy 
40 
The Strategy3 
Notation used on the Key Diagram 
Stockport Town Centre 
M60 Gateway Area 
Centre experiencing 
substantial Centre experiencing 
some difficultyHealthy centre 
requiring more Very healthy 
centre requiring 
difficulties requiring 
major intervention requiring fairly 
substantial 
intervention significant 
enhancement only minor 
enhancement 
District Centres 
Large Local 
Centres 
Other Local 
Centres 
Employment "Centres" 
Neighbourhood Renewal Priority 1 Areas 
Neighbourhood Renewal Priority 2 Areas 
a. Proportion of dwellings in the area / in and around the 
centre likely to be flats, based on the SHLAA. 
b. Proportion of dwellings in the area / in and around the 
centre likely to be houses, based on the SHLAA. 
c. Percentage of the borough's total new dwellings that could 
be accommodated in the area / in and around the centre, 
based on the SHLAA and a strict interpretation of the 
spatial option (i.e. all new housing in the first and second 
spatial priorities of Core Policy CS4 'DISTRIBUTION OF 
HOUSING' ). 41 
3 The Strategy 
Area achieving an accessibility score of >= 50 
but < 60 
Area achieving an accessibility score of >= 60 
Central Housing Area 
1 - Stockport Town Centre Strategic Area 
2 - Woodford Aerodrome Opportunity Site 
(including existing developed area: ) 
Significant bus linkages (existing or to be 
implemented) 
New rail linkages (heavy or light rail) 
Proposed new road linkages 
Existing railway (with station) 
Existing motorway (with junction) 
Existing other main road 
Canals 
Rivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
The Strategy3 
3.3.2  OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - ADDRESSING 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND INEQUALITIES 
3.5 This section seeks to address the following main issues: 
Disparities  in social equity – pockets of deprivation versus areas of affluence, resulting in 
inequalities especially in health; 
High  levels of domestic carbon emissions, third behind Manchester and Wigan within the Greater 
Manchester area; and 
Ensure  that planning policy contributes to a sustainable development approach in the Borough, 
particularly with regards to low carbon. 
3.6 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable Community 
Str
ategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(33): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A competitive economy with a diverse and expanding business base which attracts high earning 
sectors and supports high employment across sectors and skills levels. 
A vibrant Town Centre complemented by individual District Centres which are well used by 
residents and served by retail, leisure and cultural facilities. 
An educated population benefiting from high quality educational facilities. 
A Safer, Stronger Stockport 
Cohesive  communities – where people respect each other, and everyone has similar life 
opportunities 
Engaged  communities – who are empowered to engage and make a positive contribution to 
local well-being 
Community  pride – working together to ensure everyone feels safe and satisfied with their local 
area. 
A Healthy Stockport 
Active  people – with levels of obesity which maintain current rates rather than continuing to rise 
to the extent seen in the last decade 
Empowered  people – who are supported to make positive lifestyles choices, ultimately leading 
to better health outcomes for all Stockport residents 
Independent  people – who benefit from high quality and accessible facilities and services which 
are tailored to their needs and preferences and prevent deterioration of health and well-being 
People  with good emotional and mental health – who are confident, resilient and well-supported 
by family, friends and services to face life's challenges. 
A Greener Stockport 
A unique built environment which preserves our heritage and has high quality new developments 
A sustainable approach to the natural environment, improving air quality, minimising our use 
of natural resources, and maximising recycling 
Good  connections with excellent public transport resulting in less congestion 
33 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 43 
3 The Strategy 
Core Policy CS1 
OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - ADDRESSING INEQUALITIES 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
3.7 In all it seeks to achieve, the Core Strategy will have regard to enabling social progress 
which recognises the needs of everyone, protecting the environment, ensuring the prudent use 
of natural resources and maintaining high and stable levels of economic growth and employment. 
In particular, so as to ensure that the future development of the Borough is economically, socially 
and environmentally sustainable, the Core Strategy will seek to address the key issues of 
Inequalities and Climate Change. 
Inequalities 
3.8 The Council will seek to reduce levels of significant social and economic deprivation in the 
Borough through development policies and proposals, and complementary strategies, that provide 
access for all to housing, employment, education, training, health, social, other services and 
facilities, especially for those living within the Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas identified in 
the Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy. These policies will enable the further development of a 
local low carbon economy through stimulation of the market and development of the varied skills 
needed to deliver them. 
3.9 Use of high quality and inclusive design is an important part of shaping places in a way that 
can assist in addressing inequalities. 
Climate Change 
3.10 The Council will seek to ensure that all development meets an appropriate recognised 
sustainable design and construction standard where viable to do so, in order to address both the 
causes and consequences of climate change.  In particular, all development will be required to 
demonstrate how it will contribute towards reducing the Borough's carbon footprint by achieving 
carbon management standards. 
3.11 It is recognised that a large proportion of the borough's current CO2 emissions are as a 
result of fossil fuel usage; therefore the Core Strategy will seek to identify and enable opportunities 
for low and/or zero carbon developments and to ensure that those opportunities are taken full 
advantage of. The Council considers that, because of the role it plays in reducing the Borough's 
carbon footprint, making and enabling the best use of renewable energy sources is a key objective 
for the Core Strategy.  Energy opportunities identified by the Council are set out on the plan shown 
in C.1 'Energy Opportunities Plan'.   Specific regard should also be given to the significant CO2 
emissions from transport (see 3.3.7 'TRANSPORT'). 
Development Management 
How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy. Please note that policies relating to 
specific sites, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 44 
The Strategy3 
Development Management Policy SD-1 
Creating Sustainable Communities 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.12 Across the Borough as a whole development which is demonstrated to assist in the creation 
of Sustainable Communities will be given favourable consideration so long as it is in compliance 
with other development plan policies. 
3.13 Development within or linked to Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas will be given 
favourable consideration if it is demonstrated to assist in the delivery of the Neighbourhood 
Renewal Strategy or its supplementary action plans or masterplans. 
3.14 The Council will look favourably upon development that seeks to achieve a high rating 
under schemes such as the Code for Sustainable Homes, BREEAM (for non-residential 
development), CEEQUAL (for public-realm development), Building for Life and/or Lifetime Homes, 
especially where the standard attained exceeds that required by the Building Regulations. The 
Council will require a higher rating to be achieved at sites where assessment (through preparation 
of a development brief or similar) indicates that it is feasible and/or viable to do so. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.15 The Borough's Sustainable Community Strategy (Stockport 2020)(34) identifies the need to 
create more socially inclusive, sustainable communities. 
3.16 Stockport is often seen as being affluent but it has a number of neighbourhoods which 
e
xperience relatively high levels of social exclusion, often caused by poor health, family breakdown, 
poor basic skills and a lack of affordable childcare. These problems are often repeated from one 
generation to the next and can lead to unemployment, limited opportunities, crime and a lack of 
self-esteem. The Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy sets out that the English Indices of 
Deprivation 2007 show the Borough to have 22 small areas within the 20% most deprived in England. 
Looking at the range between the ranks of the most and least deprived areas in the borough, Stockport 
has one of the greatest levels of disparity in social equity in the country; a statistic that demonstrates 
the income, employment, health, housing, education and crime inequalities that the Borough faces. 
The Borough's Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy identifies the key priorities for the most deprived 
areas and sets out a phased approach to overcoming the issues within them. 
3.17 A healthy life expectancy has not kept pace with that of life expectancy and the difference is 
widening f
or both men and women, resulting in an increasing proportion of dependent older people 
requiring services and care.  Changes in demographic trend in both genders brings about a key shift 
in the way older people are living in communities. The 2001 census identified 21,436 individuals over 
55 in Stockport providing at least 19 hours of unpaid care, 3,086 of whom provide upwards of 50 
hours.  2,889 people over 65 have a significant role as a carer. 
3.18 Like the rest of England and Wales, Stockport’ s population is ageing mar kedly.  Between 1991 
and 2001 in Stockport the number of people aged 65 and over rose by 3.6%, the number aged 75 
and over by 9% and the number aged 85 and over by 30.6%.  2008/09 AMR states: Stockport’ s 
34 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 45 
3 The Strategy 
population according to the 2001 Census was more than 280,000 people, of which nearly a third were 
aged 50 or over, with nearly 43% aged between 30 and 59. 
3.19 It is important that in creating more socially inclusive, sustainable communities the link between 
affluence and CO2 emissions is broken.  Development of a low carbon economy is key to the long 
term sustainability of the borough as a whole but, in particular, of the Neighbourhood Renewal Priority 
Areas. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.20 The AMR includes a Local Indicator (LI19) which monitors the number of registrations against 
recognised En
vironmental Building and/or Design Standards (e.g. BREEAM, Code for Sustainable 
Homes, CEEQUAL). To some extent these standards are integrated into the building regulations (e.g. 
Code for Sustainable Homes) and, therefore, a target of 100% should be achieved against an increasing 
requirement each year. The target for the Core Strategy, therefore, is a year-on-year increase in the 
number of developments which seek to exceed the standard required by the building regulations up 
until the required standard is the maximum level possible. 
3.21 Whilst the Core Strategy and the wider LDF are not the only mechanisms for tackling the issues 
f
aced by the Borough's least affluent areas they will necessarily play a key role.  A long term measure 
as to the collective success of these mechanisms (lead and co-ordinated by the Neighbourhood 
Renewal Strategy) will be the rating of the borough against key indicators such as the Indices of 
Multiple Deprivation and National Indicator (NI137) Healthy Life Expectancy at age 65. 
Development Management Policy SD-2 
Making Improvements to Existing Dwellings 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.22 The Council recognises the importance of improving the energy performance of Stockport’ s 
existing building stock. Therefore, installation of energy efficiency measures and low carbon and 
renewable technologies is encouraged. 
3.23 Planning applications for changes to existing domestic dwellings will be required, where 
possible and practical, to undertake reasonable improvements to the energy performance of the 
existing dwelling. This will be in addition to the requirements under Part L of the Building 
Regulations for the changes for which planning permission is sought. Improvements will include, 
but not be restricted to: loft and cavity wall insulation, draught-proofing, improved heating controls 
and replacement boilers. 
3.24 Applicants will be asked to complete a checklist (see C.2 'Energy Efficiency Checklist') to 
identify which measures are appropriate to their home. The total cost should be no more than 
10% of the total build cost and payback in less than 7 years.The Council will support homeowners 
in delivering efficiency improvements by identifying financial support initiatives both regionally 
and nationally. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.25 The purpose of the policy is to reduce CO2 emissions from existing residential buildings. 46 
The Strategy3 
3.26 The policy applies to all householder applications for planning permission to extend or materially 
alter a home in all areas across the Borough. The approach aims to make the most of any 
straightforward opportunities for improvement that exist. These might include loft and cavity wall 
insulation, draught-proofing, improved heating controls and replacement boilers. 
3.27 The checklist approach is simple – if any of the measures on the list are applicable, pay for 
themselv
es in energy cost savings in less than seven years and their combined cost does not exceed 
10% of the cost of the building works, they are required. If none of the measures on the list fit the bill, 
none are required. 
3.28 A flexible approach will be applied when dealing with listed buildings or buildings in conservation 
areas
.  In cases where improvements cannot be made to an existing dwelling without causing harm 
to the significance of a heritage asset it may be suitable, as an alternative, to investigate whether 
specific measures could be incorporated that would help safeguard the asset from harm arising as a 
result of climate change (see Development Management Policy SD-6 'Adapting to the Impacts of 
Climate Change' and guidance provided by English Heritage(35)). Ensuring the safeguarding of older 
dwellings can often be a more sustainable option than allowing their demolition and rebuilding of new 
dwellings to modern standards due to the CO2 emissions that would result from the 
demolition/construction process. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.29 Through the Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) process, the Council has a requirement 
to demonstr
ate overall reductions in CO2 emissions. National Indicator (NI) 185 monitors the percentage 
CO2 reduction from local authority operations and NI186 monitors per capita CO2 emissions in the 
borough. 
3.30 The Council intends to maintain a database for planning applications showing the planning 
targets relating to CO2 reductions that have been set and the results reported on completion. This 
approach will record how effective planning policy is in reducing CO2 emissions from development. 
3.31 It is intended that the database is also used to capture information about the microgeneration 
systems installed, allo
wing Stockport to report against regional and national targets for renewable 
energy. 
Development Management Policy SD-3 
Delivering the Energy Opportunities Plans – New Development 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.32 The Council recognises that different energy technologies and CO2 reduction strategies 
will suit different parts of the Borough and different types of development. To reflect this two types 
of spatial area that have distinct energy opportunities have been identified (see C.1 'Energy 
Opportunities Plan'): 
35 Climate Change and your Home available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 47 
3 The Strategy 
Network Development Area: Locations where the proximity of new and existing buildings 
creates sufficient density to support district heating and/or cooling networks (shown as 
"potential district heating areas" on C.1 'Energy Opportunities Plan'); and 
Microgeneration Area: Locations where lower densities and a fragmented mix of uses mean 
that only b
uilding scale solutions are possible (in effect the rest of the Borough). 
3.33 New development should demonstrate how it will contribute to delivery of the opportunities 
identified, in-line with the f
ollowing targets: 
‘Minimum’  tar get: A percentage target reduction in regulated CO2 emissions over and above 
the 2006 Target Emissions Rate (TER). This is the minimum target that a development will 
be required to meet. The percentage target is calculated based on determining the carbon 
reduction of minimum cost ‘onsite’  technologies that meet the current North West Regional 
Spatial Strategy target of 10% contribution from renewable energy plus a notional 5% uplift 
(i.e 15% overall). 
‘Maximum’  target: The maximum carbon reduction target that could be set for a development 
if cheaper opportunities for carbon reduction are identified by the local authority or developer. 
The target is given as a percentage reduction in regulated CO2 emissions over and above 
the 2006 Target Emissions Rate (TER). Higher targets (beyond the minimum) will only be 
specified where the evidence has shown that it is cheaper to meet the minimum target through 
alternative means including near or offsite technologies. 
3.34 The following tables describe the targets that would apply to buildings within each spatial 
area type: 
Target 1 : Network Development Area. 
Development that can connect to an existing heat network or where the developer shows that 
it is viable and technically feasible to develop a heat network. 
Maximum 
(% Beyond 2006 TER) 
(A higher target may be required if the 
Local Authority or developer identifies a 
cheaper solution)(ii) Minimum 
(% Beyond 2006 TER)(i) 
85% 40% Domestic: 
45% 30% Commercial: 
i. 
ii. Minimum target derived from CO2 reduction potential from connection to gas CHP network. Where the Building 
Regulations target is higher, this shall be used in place of the minimum target. 
Maximum target derived from CO2 reduction potential at reduced cost from alternative sources. E.g. biomass 
CHP 
Target 2 : Microgeneration Area. 
Development that is not near to an existing heat network or cannot feasibly and viably connect 
to a network and therefore requires a standalone solution. 48 
The Strategy3 
Maximum 
(% Beyond 2006 TER) 
(A higher target may be required if the 
Local Authority or developer identifies a 
cheaper solution)(ii) Minimum 
(% Beyond 2006 TER)(i) 
100% 40% Domestic: 
75% 30% Commercial: 
i. Minimum target derived from CO2 reduction potential from cheapest microgeneration solution. Where the 
Building Regulations target is higher, this shall be used in place of the minimum target. 
ii. Maximum target derived from CO2 reduction potential at reduced cost from alternative sources. E.g. large scale 
wind 
3.35 Additionally the Council has identified several strategic opportunities for the development 
of rene
wable energy schemes and further specific "strategic opportunities" might be identified in 
the future (following the criteria set out in RSS policy EM17 or any subsequent superseding 
policy).  Development may bring about opportunities to develop those schemes and, in such 
situations, developers will be expected to bring forward proposals linked directly to their 
development.  Alternatively, if strategic renewable energy schemes are being progressed by the 
Council or a third-party, initial feasibility studies into the scheme should identify the potential for 
it to supply renewable energy directly to new developments; if such potential is identified then 
developers will be expected to make financial contributions towards delivery of the scheme as an 
alternative means of meeting (wholly or partially) the Minimum target that would otherwise apply. 
Required contributions will be equivalent to the cost meeting the minimum target, assuming the 
use of on-site technologies. 
3.36 To determine which target applies to a proposed development the flow-chart shown in 
Figure 8 'Which target should be applied to a development?' should be followed: 49 
3 The Strategy 
Figure 8 Which target should be applied to a development? 
3.37 Where applicants can show that achieving the requirements of this policy is unviable on 
a particular site, they will be required to make a payment into a carbon management investment 
fund. This fund will provide financial resources to strategically coordinate and phase the 
infrastructure required to deliver larger scale energy generation technologies and infrastructure 
such as district heating networks, either within Stockport or within the wider City-Region. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.38 Changes to the Building Regulations in 2010, 2013 and 2016 are expected to bring in tighter 
standards f
or CO2 emissions.  After 2016 it will be necessary for all new residential buildings to be 
delivered as zero carbon homes, with the equivalent standard for non-residential buildings due to be 
introduced in 2019. It is suggested that the role of planning in requiring new development to incorporate 
low carbon and renewable technologies should therefore be limited to a supporting one. 
3.39 This policy seeks to accelerate the move towards zero carbon ahead of Building Regulations. 
All ne
w buildings, both residential and non-residential, will be expected to achieve a percentage 
reduction over the 2006 Target Emissions Rate (TER). The targets have been developed based on 
the carbon reductions achievable from the least cost on-site technology to achieve the 10% North 
West Regional Spatial Strategy target for renewable energy in new development plus 5% (i.e 15% 
overall). 
3.40 The policy recognises that different character areas and development types will have different 
oppor
tunities for achieving CO2 reductions. For example, developments in microgeneration areas will 
have different opportunities for delivering CO2 reductions than those in a heat network development 
area. 50 
The Strategy3 
3.41 Where strategic renewable energy opportunities are identified that might be brought about by 
development they will be detailed as far as possible in the separate Allocations DPD. 
3.42 Where applicants can show that achieving the requirements of the policy is unviable on a 
par
ticular site they will be required to contribute to a reduction in the Borough's carbon footprint by 
making a payment into a carbon management investment fund established by Stockport Council or 
at a City-Region level. The amount to be paid will be calculated based upon the cost of CO2 at the 
time the application is decided and the amount of CO2 emitted per square metre of floor area over a 
30 year period. 
3.43 Testing of this policy relative to Stockport’ s situation has been under taken and is detailed in 
the Stockport Climate Change and Energy Study(36) . 
3.44 Developers should demonstrate compliance by submitting a carbon reduction statement setting 
out ho
w the target designation was arrived at including any feasibility studies (e.g. to assess the 
feasibility of a heat network).The statement should set out how the developer will meet the appropriate 
target for the development. 
3.45 In developing schemes to take advantage of the energy opportunities, specific and careful 
consider
ation should be given to minimising any negative impacts upon sensitive landscape areas, 
including the neighbouring Peak District National Park, and upon the Green Belt. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.46 Through the Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) process, the Council has a requirement 
to demonstr
ate overall reductions in CO2 emissions. National Indicator (NI) 185 monitors the percentage 
CO2 reduction from local authority operations and NI186 monitors per capita CO2 emissions in the 
borough. 
3.47 The Council intends to maintain a database for planning applications showing the planning 
targets relating to CO2 reductions that have been set and the results reported on completion. This 
approach will record how effective planning policy is in reducing CO2 emissions from development. 
3.48 It is intended that the database is also used to capture information about the microgeneration 
systems installed, allo
wing Stockport to report against regional and national targets for renewable 
energy. 
Development Management Policy SD-4 
District Heating (Network Development Areas) 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.49 The Council is keen to take advantage of opportunities to install district heating across the 
Borough.
 New development in ‘Network Development Areas’, where technically feasible and 
financially viable, should contribute to this objective by considering district heating for meeting 
the requirements of Core Policy CS1 'OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT - ADDRESSING INEQUALITIES AND CLIMATE CHANGE'. The Council 
recognises that different development types will have different opportunities, therefore: 
36 Stockport Climate Change and Energy Study available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 51 
3 The Strategy 
1. All developments should seek to make use of available heat, biomass and waste heat. 
2. Small developments (less than 100 dwellings or non-residential developments less than 
10,000m2) should connect to any available district heating networks. Where a district heating 
network does not yet exist, applicants should install heating and cooling equipment that is 
capable of connection at a later date and which could serve (or could be easily adapted to 
serve) that wider network if and when required. 
3. Large and mixed-use developments (over 100 dwellings or non-residential developments 
o
ver 10,000m2) should install a district heating network to serve the site.The council's ambition 
is to develop strategic area wide networks and so the design and layout of site-wide networks 
should be such as to enable future expansion into surrounding communities. Where 
appropriate, applicants may be required to provide land, buildings and/or equipment for an 
energy centre to serve existing or new development. 
4. New development should be designed to maximise the opportunities to accommodate a 
distr
ict heating solution, considering: density, mix of use, layout and phasing. 
5. Where investment or development is being undertaken into or adjacent to a public building, 
full consider
ation should be given to the potential role that the public building can have in 
providing an anchor load within a decentralised energy network. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.50 The PPS1 Supplement actively encourages opportunities to be sought to set higher standards 
on specific sites where it can be justified on viability and f
easibility grounds.The purpose of this policy 
is to prioritise district heating in areas where opportunities are the greatest and to take advantage of 
the availability of waste heat in some parts of the Borough. 
3.51 The long-term ambition is to deliver a strategic district heating network across the Borough. 
The council recognises that the oppor
tunities for installing such a network across existing communities 
is, for the most part, beyond the scope of planning. Therefore, the policy requires development to be 
able to connect once such a network is in place and to be designed to be compatible with future 
networks, in terms of layout density and so on. The policy requires larger more strategic new 
developments to install their own network, which can later be connected up to a larger network. This 
has the benefit of reducing CO2 emissions in new development and/or contributing to the longer term 
objective. 
3.52 Where appropriate, applicants may be required to provide land, buildings and/or equipment 
f
or an energy centre to serve proposed or multiple developments. Such a requirement will be important 
for ensuring availability of the necessary space in the right location for an energy centre designed to 
serve more than one development. It is expected that requirements will be discussed in pre-application 
discussions and will be included as part of a planning condition. 
3.53 Criteria that have been used to define the Network Development Areas are set out below. 
New development: 
Residential development of at least 55 dwellings per hectare and at least 100 dwellings 
Large scale mix
ed use development  – enables good anchor load 52 
The Strategy3 
Proximity to high heat density areas of existing buildings – enables extension into existing 
development 
Proximity to existing heat sources 
Existing  development: 
Heat demand density of at least 3,000kW/km2 and residential density of at least 55 dwellings 
per hectare or presence of a public sector building to provide a good anchor load 
Proximity to sources of heat (e.g. industrial processes) – enables zero carbon energy source 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.54 Through the Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) process, the Council has a requirement 
to demonstr
ate overall reductions in CO2 emissions. National Indicator (NI) 185 monitors the percentage 
CO2 reduction from local authority operations and NI186 monitors per capita CO2 emissions in the 
Borough. 
3.55 The Council intends to maintain a database for planning applications showing the planning 
targets relating to CO2 reductions that have been set and the results reported on completion. This 
approach will record how effective planning policy is in reducing CO2 emissions from development. 
3.56 It is intended that the database is also used to capture information about the microgeneration 
systems installed, allo
wing Stockport to report against regional and national targets for renewable 
energy. 
Development Management Policy SD-5 
Community Owned Energy 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.57 The Council recognises the important role that community owned energy generation 
including wind and hydro energy will play in reducing CO2 emissions and increasing installed low 
carbon and renewable energy capacity. While the Council will consider favourably all applications 
for standalone or ‘onsite’  low carbon and renewable energy generation, the Energy Opportunities 
Plan identifies a number of principal opportunities: 
Large wind turbines or hydro energy schemes delivered by community groups and/or 
commercial developers. 
New development that is designated as being in a ‘microgeneration area’  and either a 
community wind priority area, or adjacent to a potential hydro energy scheme  should consider 
wind/hydro energy as their first option for meeting the requirements of Development 
Management Policy SD-3 'Delivering the Energy Opportunities Plans – New Development'. 
Wind Priority Areas have been designated to encourage applications for large and small 
turbines, particularly but not exclusively: 
from community groups, co-operatives and individuals 
related to new domestic and non-domestic developments. Large and mixed-use 
developments in appropriate locations should consider installing a wind turbine or turbines 
to serve the site’ s energy needs. 53 
3 The Strategy 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.58 The primary driver for such a strongly worded supportive policy is to promote the adoption of 
comm
unity owned energy generation in addition to delivery by commercial developers. The PPS1 
Supplement on Planning and Climate Change and PPS22 (Renewable Energy) are both supportive 
of wind power and hydro power and this policy has been worded accordingly. Wind and hydro energy 
in Stockport will be vital if the twin challenges of achieving the national and legally binding 34% 
reduction in CO2  emissions over 1990 levels by 2020 and the equally binding requirement for the UK 
to generate 15% of its total energy from renewable sources, also by 2020 is to be met.The government's 
Renewable Energy Strategy expects a significant proportion of this to be delivered from onshore wind. 
It is evident therefore that every available and suitable opportunity for wind and hydro energy needs 
to be taken advantage of.  'SWMP will also assist with Stockport's Sustainable Communities and 
Green Infrastructure objectives' 
3.59 Despite there being good wind speeds across all parts of the Borough it is recognised that 
commercial oppor
tunities for turbines are likely to be limited. The Stockport Climate Change and 
Energy Study(37) identifies what these constraints are. However, opportunities for individual large 
turbines or smaller turbines exist across the borough and the council is keen to take advantage of 
these and has identified potential Wind Priority Areas based on the following criteria: 
Good  local wind resource, consider hilltops, avoid forested areas. 
Close  to electricity infrastructure (e.g. 10-30kV power lines, substations) to connect to grid. 
Close  to roads, railways for easier transport of components to site. 
Close  to the community involved (but not close enough to cause noise or telecoms interference 
issues). 
Consideration  of environmentally and archaeologically sensitive areas. 
Consideration  of areas of high landscape quality (e.g. due to proximity to the Peak District National 
Park). 
Consideration  of aviation infrastructure and defence structures (e.g. radars and flight paths). 
Consideration  of local residential areas/properties. 
3.60 Clearly some of these criteria are the same as those used by commercial wind developers. 
An impor
tant distinction could be the proximity to the community involved. Here it has been assumed 
that communities investing in their own wind turbine would be keen to be able to see it (although some 
may not), but equally these locations are less likely to be of interest to commercial developers. 
3.61 Developments within wind priority areas or adjacent to potential hydro power schemes will 
need to sho
w in a design and access statement that they have fully considered the potential to deliver 
a reduction in the development’ s CO2 emissions beyond Building Regulations using wind turbine(s) 
or hydro power. Where no opportunities exist, on-site applicants should demonstrate that they have 
considered off-site opportunities. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.62 Through the Comprehensive Area Assessment (CAA) process, the Council has a requirement 
to demonstr
ate overall reductions in CO2 emissions. National Indicator (NI) 185 monitors the percentage 
CO2 reduction from local authority operations and NI186 monitors per capita CO2 emissions in the 
borough. 
37 Stockport Climate Change and Energy Study available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 54 
The Strategy3 
3.63 The Council intends to maintain a database for planning applications showing the planning 
targets relating to CO2 reductions that have been set and the results reported on completion. This 
approach will record how effective planning policy is in reducing CO2 emissions from development. 
3.64 It is intended that the database is also used to capture information about the microgeneration 
systems installed, allo
wing Stockport to report against regional and national targets for renewable 
energy. 
Development Management Policy SD-6 
Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.65 Development should be designed in such a way as to avoid, mitigate or reduce the impacts 
of climate change
. 
3.66 In particular, all development will be required to incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS) so as to manage the r
un-off of water from the site.  Development on previously developed 
(brownfield) land must reduce the rate of unattenuated run-off by a minimum of 50% if it is within 
an identified Critical Drainage Area (CDA).  Until CDAs have been identified in detail the same 
reduction (a minimum of 50%) will be required of developments on brownfield sites in all areas; 
once detailed CDAs have been identified the minimum required reduction of run-off on brownfield 
sites outside of CDAs will be 30%.  Development on greenfield (not previously developed) sites 
will be required, as a minimum, to ensure that the rate of run-off is not increased. 
3.67 Where planning permission is required, areas of hard-standing or other surfaces, should 
be of a per
meable construction or drain to an alternative form of SuDS. 
3.68 Development, particularly within the urban area of the Borough, that takes into account 
the urban heat island eff
ect and incorporates measures to reduce this phenomenon will be given 
positive consideration.  Measures might include: 
Provision of appropriate greencover (shaded green space and tree cover); 
Pro
vision of green roofs, walls and boundaries; 
Urban design that encourages air flow throughout the development; 
Passive cooling that allows natural ventilation to cool the building or development in preference 
to mechanical cooling(38); 
Solar shading designed into buildings to avoid internal overheating; or 
Water features such as lakes, ponds, fountains and watercourses. 
3.69 Measures such as SuDS and those required to reduce the impact of the urban heat island 
eff
ect are key considerations in achieving a high rating within recognised sustainable development 
rating systems such as the Code for Sustainable Homes, BREEAM (for non-residential 
developments) or CEEQUAL (for public realm development). The Council will look favourably 
upon development that seeks to achieve a standard that exceeds the Building Regulations and 
will provide guidance and advice to developers seeking to do this. The Council will require a 
38 Passive cooling is preferential to mechanical cooling because mechanical cooling generates waste heat which 
only serves to worsen the height island effect outside of the building being cooled 55 
3 The Strategy 
higher rating to be achieved at sites where assessment (through preparation of a development 
brief or similar) indicates that it is feasible and/or viable to do so. 
3.70 In all cases where development of listed buildings, development within conservation areas 
or de
velopment involving other heritage assets is proposed, specific regard should be given to 
the inclusion of measures to ensure their long-term safeguarding against the impacts of climate 
change. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.71 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) undertaken for Greater Manchester and, at a 
more detailed le
vel, Stockport Town Centre(39) recommends that all development on 
previously-developed land should include measures that will reduce the rate of run-off of water to the 
extent required by the policy.  It follows, also, that development on non-previously developed land 
should not increase the rate of run-off of water. The SFRA identifies Critical Drainage Areas (CDAs) 
but, due to the uncertainty of Areas Susceptible To Surface Water Flooding (ASTSWF) data and lack 
of sufficient historical flooding data and sewer model data, it is recommended (and agreed with the 
Environment Agency) that a precautionary approach be taken until such a time as more accurate data 
allows more accurate definition of CDAs (either through a future update of the SFRA or through 
preparation of a Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP) covering the borough.  A SWMP would 
also assist with achieving objectives relating to addressing inequalities and the provision of Green 
Infrastructure (see 3.3.6 'SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT')). 
3.72 Since October 2008 planning permission has been required for the laying of new or replacement 
hard surf
aces (above 5m square) at the front of dwellings where they are of impermeable (non-porous) 
construction. The reason for this is to reduce problems caused by heavy rainfall running off private 
properties and inundating highway and other drainage systems. This problem is expected to be 
worsened by increasing incidents of extreme weather as a result of climate change. The use of 
impermeable surfacing, therefore, will not be permitted unless it is designed in such a way as to drain 
into an alternative form of SuDS. 
3.73 The urban heat island effect is responsible for temperature differences of up to 7ºC between 
urban and r
ural areas in the UK(40). This problem will become heightened under future climate change 
scenarios published by the Government(41); based on a low emissions scenario these show a likelihood 
that temperatures in the part of North West of England around Stockport will increase by between 2 
and 4 degrees between the present day and the 2080's, with increases of up to 6 degrees under higher 
emissions scenarios. This means that the cooling of the urban environment is necessarily a priority 
so as to ensure future human comfort and well-being.  Further information is available in the Council's 
adopted Sustainable Design and Construction SPD(42) and also from the UK Climate Impacts 
Programme (UKCIPS)(43) 
3.74 The Stockport Climate Change and Energy Study concludes that, for reason of technical 
f
easibility and/or financial viability it would not be reasonable to place a general requirement on all 
developments to meet a specific level within assessment schemes such as the Code for Sustainable 
Homes or BREEAM beyond that which is (or will be) required by the Building Regulations.  However, 
39 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
40 Smith, C & Levermore, G (2008) "Designing urban spaces and buildings to improve sustainability and quality of life 
in a warmer world" available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
41 UK Climate Projections available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
42 Sustainable Design and Construction SPD available via www.stockport.gov.uk/spd 
43 UK Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIPS) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 56 
The Strategy3 
there are significant benefits to be achieved through improving the overall environmental performance 
of new developments and therefore developers will be encouraged to, and assisted in, attaining a 
higher standard and will be required to meet a higher standard in situations where further evidence 
demonstrates that it is feasible/viable. 
3.75 The inclusion of water features within developments, particularly those on, adjacent to or linked 
to e
xisting watercourses, is a key component of implementing the North West River Basin Management 
Plan (RBMP)(44) which is the Statutory Instrument for implementing the Water Framework Directive. 
Regard will be had to the RBMP in determining planning applications and developers of appropriate 
schemes will be expected to work with the Council and the Environment Agency to achieve its 
objectives. 
3.76 Some of the Borough's historic assets have already experienced and survived significant 
climatic changes in the past and ma
y demonstrate considerable resilience in the face of future climate 
change.  However, many historic assets are potentially at risk from the direct impacts of future climate 
change. Without action to adapt to a changing climate and limit further changes it is likely that these 
will be irreparably damaged and the cultural, social and economic benefits they provide will also be 
lost.  Equally, the significance and integrity of important historic assets can be threatened by poorly 
designed adaptation and mitigation responses. The non-renewable character of historic features and 
the potential for their damage and loss should, therefore, always be taken into account when adaptation 
and mitigation responses are being planned and executed.  Guidance on the adaption of heritage 
assets to ensure their safeguarding against the impacts of climate change is available from English 
Heritage(45) . 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.77 A target of 100% of new developments or redevelopment schemes, where it is technically 
f
easible, incorporating SuDS type systems to the required standard will be set and reported on in the 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR). 
3.78 The AMR includes a local indicator (LI19) which monitors the number of registrations against 
recognised En
vironmental Building and/or Design Standards (e.g. BREEAM, Code for Sustainable 
Homes, CEEQUAL). To some extent these standards are integrated into the building regulations (e.g. 
Code for Sustainable Homes) and, therefore, a target of 100% should be achieved against an increasing 
requirement each year. The target for the Core Strategy, therefore, is a year-on-year increase in the 
number of developments which seek to exceed the standard required by the building regulations up 
until the required standard is the maximum level possible. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy 
When Who & How What 
Infrastructure required to 
deliver the Neighbourhood 
Renewal Strategy, 
identified in area specific The Council with public and private 
sector partners and developers through 
implementation of the Neighbourhood 
Renewal Strategy and its associated 
masterplans and strategies. To be defined by the 
Neighbourhood Renewal 
Strategy and its associated 
area specific masterplans and 
strategies. 
44 North West River Basin Management Plan (RBMP) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
45 English Heritage available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 57 
When Who & How What 3 The Strategy 
masterplans and 
strategies. 
District heat networks. 
Renewable energy 
infrastructure. 
Infrastructure required to 
enable adaptation to the 
impacts of climate change. The Council and private developers 
through (re)de
velopment proposals. 
Private and/or community developers. 
The Council will pla
y an 
advisory/co-ordination role. 
Private developers through 
(re)de
velopment proposals. The 
Council with public and private sector 
partners through (re)development 
schemes, particularly in relation to the 
public realm. Whenever appropriate 
(re)de
velopment proposals are 
brought forward. 
Whenever appropriate 
(re)de
velopment proposals are 
brought forward. 
Whenever appropriate 
(re)de
velopment proposals are 
brought forward. 58 
The Strategy3 
3.3.3  PROVIDING A DECENT HOME FOR EVERYONE 
3.79 Providing new housing is a key national policy objective, to ensure that everyone has the 
oppor
tunity of living in a decent home, which they can afford, in a community where they want to live. 
More new homes are needed to keep up with rising demand brought about by a growing population 
and falling average household size.  Providing good quality housing in suitable locations close to 
community facilities, jobs and transport links can improve affordability, create better communities and 
attract investment and skilled workers. 
3.80 The Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS) sets out the overall level of new housing provision for 
the Nor
th West and how it should be distributed across the region.  Stockport is required to provide 
an average of 450 additional new homes a year.  At least 80% of which should be on 
previously-developed land.  New housing provision in Stockport should support regeneration and meet 
local needs, in sustainable locations which are well served by public transport. 
3.81 Affordable housing is a critical issue to address.  National planning policy seeks to widen 
oppor
tunities for home ownership, ensure high quality housing for those who cannot afford market 
housing, and improve affordability, including by increasing the supply of housing.  Regional planning 
policy acknowledges the greatest need will be in areas of high demand, due to high prices and low 
wages, and states that residential development in this part of the region will be focused on meeting 
local needs, particularly affordable housing. The average house price in Stockport is the second 
highest in Greater Manchester and the ratio of lower quartile house prices to lower quartile incomes 
in 2008 was 7:1(46) .  In 2010 there were 7,626 households on the waiting list for social housing and 
the estimated annual affordable housing shortfall is 519 dwellings(47). There is therefore a significant 
local need for affordable housing in Stockport. 
3.82 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable 
Comm
unity Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(48): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A vibrant Town Centre that is well used by residents 
Transform  the Town Centre and M60 corridor by making it a priority for development 
A Safer, Stronger Stockport 
Support  a diverse population and create cohesive communities 
A Healthy Stockport 
Maximise  opportunities for adults with a disability and support independent living 
Remove  barriers which prevent older people living independent lives 
Address  health inequalities between affluent and priority neighbourhoods 
A Greener Stockport 
Strike an appropriate balance between development and protection 
46 Regional Spatial Strategy Annual Monitoring Report 2010 (Chapter 3 Data Tables) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
47 Housing Needs Study 2008 (section 13.5, page 100) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
48 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 59 
3 The Strategy 
Have a sustainable approach to the natural environment - minimise the use of natural resources 
Invest in affordable housing, particularly social rented housing, to meet demand for a greater mix 
of housing across the borough, and maximise opportunities offered by Council owned land 
Core Policy CS2 
HOUSING PROVISION 
3.83 A wide choice of high quality homes will be provided to meet the requirements of existing 
and future Stockport households. The focus will be on providing new housing through the effective 
and efficient use of land within accessible urban areas, and making the best use of existing 
housing. 
3.84 Provision will be made for a net additional 7,200 homes over the 15 year period from 2011 
to 2026.  Land for new housing will be released in an orderly and managed way based on the 
averages in the following trajectory: 
450 new homes per annum between 2011 and 2013 
495 new homes per annum between 2013 and 2023 
450 new homes per annum between 2023 and 2026 
3.85 The level of provision between 2013 and 2023 equates to a 10% increase on Stockport's 
current annual requirement, for a 10 year period.  Increasing the supply of housing will improve 
affordability, help meet the need for affordable housing and support the delivery of additional 
housing growth in Greater Manchester. The 10% increase will not apply if Stockport's housing 
requirement is increased at the regional planning level. 
3.86 Provision will be made for Gypsy and Traveller pitches and Travelling Showpeople plots, 
equal to the requirements identified in the latest Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment, 
subject to any agreed dedistribution of requirements amongst local authorities within the Greater 
Manchester sub-region. 
3.87 The local previously-developed land target is at least 90%. This applies from 2011 onwards 
when there is a five year deliverable supply.  It does not apply to sites providing 50% affordable 
housing or more. The regional target of at least 80% of housing provision on previously-developed 
land applies to sites providing 50% affordable housing or more.This secondary target also applies 
to all sites when there is less than a five year deliverable supply, from 2011 onwards. 
Existing housing 
3.88 The existing housing in 2011 will make up 95% of the housing stock in 2026.  It is therefore 
important to safeguard and make best use of the existing stock. This will be done by improving 
the condition of housing (including achieving the Decent Homes standard), reducing vacancy 
rates, avoiding the unnecessary loss of housing, safeguarding the residential amenity of housing, 
and protecting the character and quality of predominantly residential areas. 
3.89 The current Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment(49) (SHLAA) includes a potential 
housing supply of 9,195 dwellings from the base date of April 2008 (see Table 1 'Number of additional 
49 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment 2010 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 60 
The Strategy3 
dwellings (net) in the SHLAA (April 2008 base date)' ).  At least 95% of the dwellings in the first 5 years 
of the SHLAA are on previously-developed land (PDL). The vast majority of these dwellings have 
planning permission and they are the most 'deliverable'(50) in the supply. The PDL trajectory for this 
period is therefore 95%. 
3.90 There are over 3,400 dwellings on PDL in years 6 to 10. This is well over a 5 year supply and 
is enough to pro
vide 100% of new housing on PDL.  However, the Core Strategy allows some Greenfield 
development, particularly where affordable housing is being provided. Therefore, the PDL trajectory 
is 95% to take account of this flexibility. 
3.91 There are approximately 1,950 dwellings on PDL in years 11 to 15. This is not enough for a 
5 y
ear supply. The PDL trajectory has therefore been lowered to 85%. The percentage would be 
less but for expected excess completions in earlier years. 
Table 1 Number of additional dwellings (net) in the SHLAA (April 2008 base date) 
PDL 
Trajectory % on 
PDL(i) Number of 
Flats Number of 
Houses Number of 
Dwellings Number of 
Specific 
Sites Time Period 
95% 95 - 96% 1708 686 2394 219 0 to 5 years 
95% 84% 2061 2010 4071 178 6 to 10 years 
85% 71 - 73% 1341 1389 2730 121 11 to 15 
years(ii) 
83 - 84% 5110 4085 9195 518 Total 
21.3 years 17.0 years 19.2 years Supply(iii) 
i. Column contains estimated revisions to the PDL figures in the SHLAA following reclassification of gardens as 
Greenfield land in re-issued PPS3 (June 2010) 
ii. Includes a windfall allowance of 450 dwellings – made up of 180 houses and 270 flats 
iii. At an annual average target of 480 dwellings (7,200 divided by 15) - made up of 240 houses and 240 flats 
3.92 Taking into account actual and projected completions from 2008, there are likely to be 8,295 
dw
ellings in the supply as at April 2011(51). This is enough housing to achieve the trajectory in Core 
Policy CS2 'HOUSING PROVISION'. The SHLAA includes 450 dwellings at Woodford Aerodrome 
Opportunity Site (see 3.3.9 'Woodford Aerodrome Opportunity Site') and 759 dwellings on 20 Green 
Belt sites that do not have planning permission and are not Major Existing Developed Sites. The 
Green Belt sites consist of 8 Greenfield sites (587 dw
ellings) and 12 PDL sites (172 dwellings). 
3.93 Stockport's RSS housing requirement is 6,750 dwellings between 2011 and 2026 (although 
the str
ategy seeks a 10% increase between 2013 and 2023). Without the 20 Green Belt sites referred 
to above the estimated housing supply in 2011 is 7,536 dwellings.  Given that this is only 12% above 
the RSS requirement it may be necessary to release Green Belt land for housing if other sites in the 
SHLAA are not developed at the point envisaged. 
3.94 According to the latest assessment carried out in 2010 there is less than a five year deliverable 
supply of land f
or housing in Stockport.  In order to top up the supply, planning applications for housing 
50 See Planning Policy Statement 3: Housing paragraph 54 
51 See SHLAA report paragraph 5.10 61 
3 The Strategy 
will be considered more favourably through the measures set out in Development Management Policy 
H-2 'Housing Phasing' (paragraph 3.117). 
Core Policy CS3 
MIX OF HOUSING 
3.95 A mix of housing, in terms of tenure, price, type and size will be provided to meet the 
requirements of ne
w forming households, first time buyers, families with children, disabled people 
and older people.  New development should contribute to the creation of more mixed, balanced 
communities by providing affordable housing in areas with high property prices and by increasing 
owner occupation in areas of predominantly social rented housing. 
3.96 The overall strategic affordable housing target is 50% of total provision. The Council will 
aim to achie
ve this challenging target with the assistance of Stockport Homes and developments 
by other affordable housing providers delivering up to 100% affordable housing; by maximising 
opportunities offered by Council owned land, by releasing additional land for housing, and through 
developer contributions. The target will remain in place until it can no longer be justified by housing 
need and a shortage of affordable housing. 
3.97 Support will be given to the provision of specialist and supported housing for older people 
and people with a disability
.  All new housing should enable older people and adults with a disability 
to live independent lives by seeking to achieve Lifetime Homes standards. 
3.98 The supply of land for housing should be flexible enough to provide a balanced mix of 
houses and flats
, so that the type of housing likely to be required in the borough can be provided. 
Over the plan period the aim is to achieve a 50:50 split between the provision of new houses and 
new flats. This is supported by the findings of the Strategic Housing Market Assessment(52) . 
3.99 The mix of housing provided should be based upon the findings of up-to-date evidence. 
The current Housing Needs Study(53) suggests: 
large family market houses and smaller low-cost market houses should both be provided; 
inter
mediate houses should have two-three bedrooms; 
social rented houses should have three-four bedrooms; and 
the majority of new flats of all tenures should have two bedrooms. 
3.100 On sites that are capable of accommodating a range of housing types and sizes, 
de
velopments should contribute to the provision of an appropriate borough-wide mix of housing, 
reflecting the different types and sizes of housing likely to be required over the plan period. 
3.101 Sites in the most central locations, such as the Town Centre areas and within District 
and Local Centres
, are the most suitable for flats.  Here housing densities of 70 dwellings per 
hectare (dph) and above are commonplace.  Moving away from these central locations densities 
should gradually decrease, first to around 50 dph then to around 40 dph, as the proportion of 
houses increases.  Developments in accessible suburban locations may be expected to provide 
52 Greater Manchester Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2008 (section 5.5.3, pages 232-233) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
53 Housing Needs Study section 14.13 page 106 62 
The Strategy3 
the full range of houses, from low-cost 2 bed terraces to executive 5+ bed detached, and contain 
few flats. However, they should still achieve a density of 30 dph. 
3.102 The presumption is that existing family houses will be retained in suburban areas, not 
replaced by new build flats or conversions to flats. 
Core Policy CS4 
DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING 
3.103 New housing development will boost the Town Centre economy, making it a vibrant place 
to be during the day and in the evening.  It will improve the built environment by regenerating 
vacant and under-used sites in and around the centre, and provide homes in a location readily 
accessible to jobs and services within Stockport and Manchester City Centre.  New housing will 
also assist the vitality and viability of District and Local Centres, and support regeneration and 
improve housing choice in Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas. 
3.104 The distribution of housing across the borough should be broadly in line with the following 
spatial priorities: 
firstly, the Central Housing Area containing up to 50% of provision, including up to 2,000 
dwellings in the Town Centre areas(54); 
secondly, Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas and the pedestrian catchment areas(55) of 
District and Large Local Centres, containing at least 35% of provision; 
thirdly, other accessible locations, containing up to 15% of provision. 
3.105 New housing development will be assessed in terms of its accessibility to jobs, community 
facilities, shops and services.  All housing development in the first ten years of the plan period 
will be in locations that are amongst the most accessible in the borough.  Additional land will be 
released within the third spatial priority if necessary to provide the required level and right mix of 
housing.  It should be noted that new development could include measures that are demonstrated 
to improve accessibility to an appropriate degree and could then be considered acceptable. 
Urban Greenfield and Green Belt sites 
3.106 Urban Greenfield and Green Belt sites will be allocated for housing in the Allocations 
DPD if this is necessary to meet the borough's local needs, particularly the need for affordable 
housing, and to provide an appropriate mix of housing, including improving housing choice and 
diversifying tenure in Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas.  Such sites will not be allocated 
solely to achieve the housing trajectory's increased level of provision between 2013 and 2023, 
and any change to the Green Belt boundary must be justified by exceptional circumstances. This 
section of the policy does not apply to Major Existing Developed Sites, or buildings in the Green 
Belt to be re-used for housing. 
3.107 The focus is on making effective use of land within accessible urban areas. The priority 
for development is therefore previously developed land within urban areas. Urban Greenfield and 
Green Belt development should accord with the following sequential approach: 
54 Currently the TCG2 and TCG3 areas shown on the UDP Review Proposals Map 
55 Commonly defined as the areas within a 10 minute walk (up to 800m) of a centre 63 
3 The Strategy 
firstly, the use of accessible urban sites that are not designated as open space, or considered 
to be areas of open space with amenity value; 
secondly, the use of private residential gardens in accessible urban locations where proposals 
respond to the character of the local area and maintain good standards of amenity and privacy 
for the occupants of existing housing, in accordance with Development Management Policy 
H-1 'Design of Residential Development'; 
thirdly, the use of accessible urban open space where it can be demonstrated that there is 
adequate provision of open space in the local area or the loss would be adequately replaced, 
in accordance with Core Policy CS8 'SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE 
ENVIRONMENT'; 
fourthly, and only if it is essential to release additional land to accommodate the borough's 
local needs, particularly the need for affordable housing or to support regeneration strategies 
in Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas, a limited number of the most suitable Green Belt 
sites will be used for housing.  Sites must be accessible, attached to the urban area, maintain 
openness between built-up areas, and there must be no exceptional substantial strategic 
change to the Green Belt or its boundaries. 
3.108 Only local adjustments will be made to the Green Belt and sites will only be released if 
the
y make a significant contribution to meeting local needs, particularly the need for affordable 
housing.  Small infill sites within the Green Belt, for example within residential ribbon development, 
will not be used for housing due to the negligible contribution they would make to meeting local 
needs and the harmful cumulative impact such development would have on the openness of the 
Green Belt. 
3.109 When considering Green Belt release, regard will be had to, amongst other things: 
maintaining openness;
 the purposes of including land in Green Belts (including preventing 
neighbouring towns from merging into one another); the Green Belt land use objectives; and the 
need to provide clearly defensible boundaries. 
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites 
3.110 The criteria below will be used to guide the allocation of sites for Gypsies, Travellers and 
T
ravelling Showpeople. These criteria will also be used to meet unexpected demand.  Sites 
should be regarded as suitable for housing development, and: 
1. reasonably accessible to local services such as shops, health care and schools; 
2. reasonably accessible to employment opportunities; and 
3. sites for Travelling Showpeople should be suitable for mixed residential and business uses, 
and ha
ve safe and convenient access to the Motorway or Strategic Road Network. 
3.111 Sites that meet the above criteria and are within the urban area are preferable and will 
be considered bef
ore Green Belt sites.  If sufficient sites cannot be found within the urban area 
then Green Belt sites that meet the criteria and are well-located to the urban area will be considered. 
Development Management 
How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policies.  Please note that policies relating to 
specific sites, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 64 
The Strategy3 
Development Management Policy H-1 
Design of Residential Development 
What we're going to do or require:. 
3.112 The design and build standards of new residential development should be high quality, 
inclusive, sustainable and contribute to the creation of successful communities.  Proposals should 
respond to the townscape and landscape character of the local area, reinforcing or creating local 
identity and distinctiveness in terms of layout, scale and appearance, and should consider the 
need to deliver low carbon housing.  Good standards of amenity, privacy, safety / security and 
open space should be provided for the occupants of new housing and good standards of amenity 
and privacy should be maintained for the occupants of existing housing.  (For further guidance 
see the Design of Residential Development and Sustainable Design & Construction SPDs.) 
3.113 New Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites should respect the scale of, and 
not dominate the nearest settled community. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.114 To ensure Core Policy CS2 'HOUSING PROVISION' is delivered and new housing is 
well-designed and built to a high standard, and to safeguard and make best use of the existing stock. 
The policy will help to create and maintain attr
active neighbourhoods and encourage environmentally 
friendly residential developments. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
Undertake Building for Life Assessments. 
Monitor
ing the number of registrations against recognised Environmental Building and / or Design 
Standards (E.g. Code for Sustainable Homes). 
Development Management Policy H-2 
Housing Phasing 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.115 The delivery and supply of housing will be monitored and managed to ensure provision 
is in line with the housing tr
ajectory, the local previously-developed land target is being achieved 
and a continuous five year deliverable supply of land for housing is maintained. 
3.116 During the first ten years of the plan period (2011-2021), when there is a five year 
deliv
erable supply: 
the local previously-developed land target will apply; 
planning applications pro
viding additional housing should be on sites within the first and 
second spatial priorities listed in Core Policy CS4 'DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING', or on sites 
achieving a score of at least 50 when assessed against the Council's accessibility model 
(see 3.3.1 'Key Diagram' and the Accessibility Appraisal of the Core Strategy); 65 
3 The Strategy 
in addition, planning applications that are wholly or predominantly for flats should be on sites 
within the first and second spatial priorities and achieve a score of at least 60 when assessed 
against the accessibility model.  Exceptions may be made for Local Centre and edge of centre 
sites, flats above shops, mill conversions, and other sites with particular constraints that 
influence housing type; 
housing developments in other accessible locations will be permitted if they achieve one or 
more of the following regeneration benefits: 
re-use of vacant previously-developed land and / or vacant (typically non-residential) 
buildings; 
re-use of a Listed or Locally Listed Building; 
provision of at least 50% affordable housing; 
provision of specialist and supported housing for older people and people with a disability; 
facilitating the operation of an existing or new community facility (used or to be used for 
education, leisure or social purposes). 
3.117 When there is less than a five year deliverable supply during the first ten years of the 
plan per
iod, Stockport's regional previously-developed land target of 80% will apply to all 
developments. The required accessibility score for sites outside the first and second spatial 
priorities will also be gradually lowered on an annual basis, for example from 50 to 45. The 
required accessibility score for developments consisting wholly or predominantly for flats will be 
gradually lowered in the same way, but they should still be within the first and second spatial 
priorities. These measures will allow the deliverable supply to be topped up by sites in other 
accessible locations.  If sites do not achieve the lowered accessibility score they may still be 
permitted if they achieve one of the regeneration benefits listed above. 
3.118 After the first ten years of the plan period the local previously-developed land target will 
still apply when there is a fiv
e year deliverable supply.  However, the required accessibility score 
for sites outside the first and second spatial priorities will be lowered if necessary to maintain the 
five year deliverable supply. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.119 To ensure Core Policy CS2 'HOUSING PROVISION'is delivered and sufficient housing is 
provided in accessible locations, in a way that makes effective use of land, supports regeneration and 
does not under
mine neighbouring housing markets. 
3.120 To ensure Core Policy CS3 'MIX OF HOUSING'is delivered, to help address the affordable 
housing shortfall, to enable all adults to live independently, and to provide flats in the most accessible, 
appropr
iate locations, where there is an adequate supply to meet the borough's requirements. 
3.121 To ensure Core Policy CS4 'DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING' is delivered and all housing 
development is genuinely accessible by public transport, walking and cycling to jobs, community 
f
acilities, shops and services.  In line with the Regional Spatial Strategy, development is partly focused 
in and around the centre of town. The Sustainable Community Strategy seeks a vibrant Town Centre 
that is well used by residents, and it makes it a priority for development. The evidence(56) also suggests 
encouraging urban living in the Town Centre. The approach will greatly assist Town Centre shops 
and services, help develop the centre's evening economy, and improve housing choice by providing 
56 Strategic Housing Market Assessment section 7.9 page 295 66 
The Strategy3 
low-cost market and intermediate affordable housing for new forming households and existing 
households (including first time buyers) in the borough's most accessible location.  It will also support 
shops and services in the borough's established centres and contribute to the social, economic and 
physical regeneration of the more deprived areas. 
3.122 All of the sites in the SHLAA have been assessed using the Council's accessibility model. 
The model f
ocuses on the journey origin (the home end of the journey) and uses land use data to look 
at the level of accessibility by walking and public transport to the following types of location: 
Employment 
Retail 
Food retail 
Evening economy uses 
Primary  and Secondary Schools 
Health  Centres and General Hospitals 
3.123 Each site in the SHLAA has been given an accessibility score and then ranked in order and 
g
rouped into deciles(57) (see Table 2 'Accessibility of dwellings on specific sites in the SHLAA (April 
2008 base date) Figures exclude the windfall allowance of 450 dwellings'). The deciles relate to areas 
of the borough of equal size and the higher the score the more accessible the sites are. 
Table 2 Accessibility of dwellings on specific sites in the SHLAA (April 2008 base date) Figures exclude the windfall 
allowance of 450 dwellings 
Average 
density 
(dph) Cumulative 
Supply of 
Flats Supply 
of 
Flats Cumulative 
Supply of 
Houses Supply 
of 
Houses Cumulative 
Supply Supply Lower 
threshold 
score Decile 
99 2739 2739 811 811 3550 3550 66.7 10 
59 3159 420 1413 602 4572 1022 60.6 9 
42 3739 580 1770 357 5509 937 55.3 8 
43 4046 307 2384 614 6430 921 50.3 7 
32 4418 372 2560 176 6978 548 46 6 
29 4517 99 2696 136 7213 235 41.4 5 
34 4686 169 3146 450 7832 619 35.7 4 
21 4775 89 3437 291 8212 380 29.2 3 
17 4840 65 3900 463 8740 528 22.3 2 
16 4840 0 3905 5 8745 5 0 1 
3.124 Taking into account actual and projected completions from the SHLAA base date, there are 
approximately 5,500 dwellings from the supply of specific sites to be provided by 2021.  As can be 
seen in the table, this can be provided on sites scoring 55 or above.  However, amongst these sites 
will be some that are unlikely to be developed by 2021.  In contrast there will be some sites scoring 
less than 55 that already have planning permission and are likely to be developed by 2021.  In order 
57 As suggested by the Department for Transport in Technical Guidance on Accessibility Planning for LTPs 2004 section 
10.2.1 page 52 67 
3 The Strategy 
to provide sufficient houses the policy sets an accessibility score of 50 for the first ten years of the 
plan period (provided there is a five year supply). The supply of houses during this period will be 
increased by additional sites that, whilst not achieving a score of 50, are within the first and second 
spatial priorities, and by developments that achieve a regeneration benefit.  Planning applications 
wholly or predominantly for flats are required to be on sites scoring 60 because there are more than 
enough flats on such sites for the first ten years, and exceptions again apply. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
Monitoring annual housing completions - including tenure (market and affordable), type, size, 
location and percentage on previously-developed land. 
Monitoring the annual housing supply including tenure and type. 
Development Management Policy H-3 
Affordable Housing 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.125 To help achieve the 50% overall strategic target, affordable housing will be sought on all 
Council o
wned sites to be developed for housing, regardless of size.  40% of dwellings on Council 
sites should be affordable, or as high a level as is viable, having regard to the creation of mixed, 
balanced communities.  Should any urban open space or Green Belt sites(58) be released for 
housing, at least 50% of the dwellings should be affordable housing. 
DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTIONS THROUGH PLANNING OBLIGATIONS 
3.126 Affordable housing is required on sites providing 15 dwellings (gross) or more and sites 
of 0.5 hectares or more
. The site size threshold is lowered to 5 dwellings (gross) in areas with 
property prices above the Stockport average, such as the following: 
Bramhall / Cheadle Hulme 
Cheadle / Gatle
y / Heald Green 
Hazel Grove / High Lane 
The Heatons (excluding Heaton Norris) 
Marple / Marple Bridge 
Romiley 
3.127 The proportion of affordable housing sought varies across the borough to take account 
of proper
ty prices and economic viability.  Subject to viability, the Council will negotiate to achieve 
the following proportions of affordable housing and these should be reflected in the cost of land: 
5%-15% in the Town Centre areas(59) and the other Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas 
of Adswood and Bridgehall, and Lancashire Hill and Heaton Norris (see below for Brinnington) 
20-25% in the inner urban areas of the borough such as the Central Housing Area, Cheadle 
Heath, Heaviley, Little Moor, Offerton, Bredbury and Reddish. 
58 Excluding Major Existing Developed Sites and buildings in the Green Belt to be re-used for housing 
59 Currently the TCG2 and TCG3 areas shown on the UDP Review Proposals Map 68 
The Strategy3 
30% in areas with above average property prices, for example, those listed in the paragraph 
above and those areas shown as 'hot' on the map(60) . 
40% in areas with the highest property prices, such as Bramhall / Cheadle Hulme (south) / 
Woodford (shown as 'very hot' on the map). 
3.128 The relevant threshold and proportion of affordable housing applicable to specific sites 
will be deter
mined by comparing Stockport's average property price with property prices in the 
immediate locality of the site and the likely sales prices of the completed dwellings. Figure 9 
'Indicative map showing the general variation in property prices across Stockport - Source: GVA 
Grimley, Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010' only gives a broad indication of prices in 
different areas and should not be used to determine the affordable housing contribution on specific 
sites.  It is likely that in certain localities within the 'moderate' areas shown on the map a 30% 
affordable housing contribution will be sought. 
3.129 In the Town Centre areas the proportion of affordable housing sought will be kept towards 
the bottom end of the 5%-15% r
ange until viability improves and a private housing market has 
been established.  In terms of the latter, this will be indicated by property prices comparable to 
the Stockport average and the delivery of a significant proportion of the Town Centre housing 
target of up to 2000 dwellings. To increase choice, the presumption is that private developers 
will only provide intermediate affordable housing in the Town Centre. 
3.130 In Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas, housing development should accord with local 
regener
ation strategies, such as area masterplans.  A choice of quality homes that meet the needs 
of residents should be provided in these areas by increasing the supply of market housing and 
intermediate affordable housing, to create more mixed, balanced communities. In Brinnington, 
developer contributions to affordable housing will not be sought unless the development is of a 
sufficient scale and mass to achieve an uplift in values that makes affordable housing viable 
without grant funding. However, as in other priority areas, intermediate affordable housing to rent 
or part own (with grant), as well as market housing, is still encouraged in order to diversify housing 
type and tenure. 
3.131 In most areas 75% of the affordable housing provided by developers should be 
inter
mediate housing for Stockport residents on average and below average incomes. The 
remaining 25% should be social rented housing.  In areas with above average property prices 
and a particular lack of social rented housing, the affordable housing tenure split sought will be 
50% intermediate housing and 50% social rented housing. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.132 To ensure Core Policy CS3 'MIX OF HOUSING' is delivered, to meet the needs of households 
who cannot afford market housing, and to help people into home ownership. The Sustainable 
Comm
unity Strategy recognises the increasing demand for affordable housing within the borough, 
including social rented housing.  It states that the Stockport Partnership will invest in affordable housing 
and maximise opportunities offered to provide affordable housing, including using its own land. 
3.133 In April 2010 there were 7,626 households on the Stockport Homes waiting list for social 
rented housing. 
The 2008 Housing Needs Study found that 65% of new forming households were 
unable to buy or rent market housing. The study estimated that the annual affordable housing shortfall 
60 See Figure 9 'Indicative map showing the general variation in property prices across Stockport - Source: GVA 
Grimley, Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010' 69 
3 The Strategy 
is 519 dwellings. This reduces to 282 if current need (i.e. backlog) is addressed over a 10 year period 
instead of a 5 year period. The strategic affordable housing target of 50% combined with the 10% 
uplift in housing provision for 10 years from the point at which policies start to impact on the ground 
in 2013 will address the vast majority of the need (i.e. 50% of 495 = 248 affordable dwellings). 
3.134 The Council should set a good example by making the most of the opportunity to provide 
aff
ordable housing on land it sells for housing.  40% affordable housing is sought on Council sites 
because the Economic Viability of Housing Study found 45% to be unviable under 'rising' market 
conditions, except on sites providing less than 5 dwellings(61). There is the opportunity to at least 
match the strategic target on urban open space and Green Belt sites by taking advantage of lower 
land value expectations to assist economic viability. 
3.135 The site size thresholds and the proportions of affordable housing sought through developer 
contr
ibutions are broadly in line with the recommendations of the Economic Viability of Housing 
Study(62) .  40% affordable housing is sought in 'very hot' areas because the study found this to be 
viable under certain conditions and Case Study 1 supports this(63) .  30% affordable housing is sought 
in 'hot' areas because although the study recommends a contribution of 35%, no sites for 5 or more 
dwellings could provide this under 'rising' market conditions with a 50:50 tenure split between 
intermediate and social rented housing. The study found 30% to be viable in 'hot' areas under certain 
conditions and Case Study 2 supports this(64) .  20-25% affordable housing is sought in 'moderate' 
areas because the study found this range to be viable under certain conditions(65) . 
3.136 In the Town Centre there is a more flexible approach to affordable housing to take into account 
both the limited viability that currently e
xists and the future potential of the Town Centre. The 5 to 
15% range sought is supported by the findings and recommendations contained in the addendum to 
the Economic Viability of Housing Study (e.g.Town Centre Case Study 1 and paragraphs 1.41 - 1.47). 
A similar approach is taken in the Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas of Adswood and Bridgehall, 
and Lancashire Hill and Heaton Norris. 
3.137 The affordable housing tenure split follows the recommendation of the Housing Needs Study(66) 
and reflects the findings of the Economic Viability of Housing Study(67) . 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
Monitoring  annual affordable housing completions - including tenure (social rented and intermediate 
housing). 
Monitoring  the number of households on the housing waiting list. 
Carrying  out regular Housing Need Studies. 
61 Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence, figures 6.22 - 6.27, pages 
80 - 84 
62 Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
63 Economic Viability of Housing Study para 6.11 page 54 and figure 6.26 page 84 
64 Economic Viability of Housing Study para 6.18 page 55 and figure 6.26 page 84 
65 Economic Viability of Housing Study figures 6.23 and 6.24 pages 81-82 
66 Housing Needs Study section 1.13 page 14 
67 Economic Viability of Housing Study para 7.18 page 93 70 
The Strategy3 
Figure 9 Indicative map showing the general variation in property prices across Stockport -
Source: GVA Grimley, Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010 
Evidence 
Greater  Manchester Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2008 and update report 2010 
Greater  Manchester Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2008 
Housing  Needs Study 2008 
Strategic  Housing Land Availability Assessment 
Economic Viability of Housing Study 2010 
Regional  Spatial Strategy Annual Monitoring Report 2010 
Local  Development Framework Annual Monitoring Report 2009 
3.138 All of the evidence in this list is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policies 
When Who & How What 
Improved public transport 
where necessary 
Improved walking and 
cycling networks 
Energy, water and 
se
werage Stockport Council, GMPTE, Network Rail and 
b
us operators using public funding and 
developer contributions. 
Stockport Council using public funding and 
de
veloper contributions. 
Utility providers in conjunction with 
house-b
uilders following pre-allocation / 
pre-application consultation. On-going / on 
completion of housing 
On-going 
On completion of 
housing 71 
When Who & How What 3 The Strategy 
District Heating Networks House-builders as an integral part of large On completion of 
developments. housing 72 
The Strategy3 
3.3.4  ACCESS TO SERVICES 
3.139 This section seeks to address the following issues: 
Safeguarding  and enhancing the vitality and viability of the District and Local Centres and Stockport 
Town Centre's core retail area 
Safeguarding  and strengthening the service centre hierarchy 
Improving  indoor sports, community (including health care) and education facilities and their 
accessibility 
Provision  and accessibility of allotments 
Main  town centre uses, hot food take aways and prison development outside existing centres 
Encouraging  visitor accommodation and other tourism development 
Provision of sufficient cemeteries 
3.140 For the purposes of the policies in PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth(68) , 
PPS4 p.2, para4 defines economic development as including development within the B Use Classes, 
public and community uses and main town centre uses. PPS4 defines main town centre uses at p3, 
para7, summarised as follows: 
Retail  development 
Leisure,  entertainment facilities, and the more intensive sport and recreation uses 
Offices,  and 
Arts,  culture and tourism development 
3.141 Stockport Market has operated at the Town Centre's historic core from the late Anglo-Saxon 
per
iod and was granted its formal charter in 1260. Independent operators contribute to the local 
distinctiveness of the District and Local Centres and to their sense of place and also perform this role 
in the parts of the core retail area where they are clustered. 
3.142 Stockport has declined in Experian's retail rankings for the North West from 5th in 2003 to 
7th in 2007.
 Increasing the quality, level and range of A3 and A4 use in the Town Centre and of A1 
use at the core retail area will help to reinforce its role as a sub-regional centre and will help to meet 
identified need. The core retail area of Stockport Town Centre has an identified lack of medium sized 
shops of 465 - 930 sq m(69) that needs to be addressed to help secure a range of quality retailers and 
provide for modern retailer requirements.The Town Centre's core retail area lacks a modern department 
store and middle-order and premium comparison goods shops (particularly fashion).The Town Centre 
lacks a sufficient level of good quality restaurants, bars and cafés and would benefit from the 
development of its cultural and entertainment facilities offer. Such leisure uses would contribute to 
improving the Town Centre's evening economy, encourage the use of the Town Centre and the 
perception of its safety in the evening. 
3.143 The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study recommends that the Town Centre's public realm 
is enhanced. 
The Stockport Town Centre Public Realm and Lighting Guide (EDAW, 2006, revised by 
Stockport MBC 2009) provides practical guidance in this respect(70). Enhancing the quality of the Town 
Centre's public realm will contribute to improving the environmental quality of the Town Centre, which 
is an indicator of the vitality and viability of centres(71) . 
68 PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
69 Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009, paragraph 9.40 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
70 The Stockport Town Centre Public Realm and Lighting Guide available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
71 PPS4 ANNEX D: Town Centre Health Check Indicators A13  
 
 
 73 
3 The Strategy 
3.144  Addressing these deficiencies is important to help reverse the decline of the vitality and 
viability of Stockport Town Centre, and to help reduce leaking market share to Manchester City Centre 
and out-of-centre retail destinations. Focusing A1 use, with some complementary A2, A3 and A4 uses 
in the core retail area will attract footfall and encourage linked trips; tighten the retail circuit; and enable 
focused improvement / maintenance of the public realm, social and civic amenity space and relevant 
transport infrastructure. It is also important to attract a greater diversity of shoppers to the Town Centre 
(e.g. more higher income groups) and to facilitate an evening economy which provides a safe destination 
f
or all, including for a variety of ages, income levels and opportunities for entertainment for families 
and individuals in addition to alcohol driven activity. 
3.145 The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 (para10.15) indicates the 
Core Str
ategy should plan, as a minimum, for the market share of expenditure attracted to the Town 
Centre to be maintained at its 2009 level of 72%. However, the study suggests the attractiveness of 
the Town Centre would increase through the development of a significant level of quality new retail 
(focused in the core) and leisure floorspace in the Town Centre thereby helping to grow Stockport's 
market share of expenditure, possibly up to 5% from the 2009 position. Bringing Town Centre residential 
and office development forward during the Core Strategy plan period will help generate custom for 
main town centre uses in the area, thus boosting operator demand. 
3.146 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable 
Comm
unity Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(72): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A competitive economy with a diverse and expanding business base which attracts high earning 
sectors and supports high employment across sectors and skills levels. 
A vibrant Town Centre complemented by individual District Centres which are well used by 
residents and served by retail, leisure and cultural facilities. 
An educated population benefiting from high quality educational facilities. 
A Safer, Stronger Stockport 
Cohesive  communities – where people respect each other, and everyone has similar life 
opportunities 
Engaged  communities – who are empowered to engage and make a positive contribution to 
local well-being 
Low crimes rates - making all our streets safer at any time of day 
Community  pride – working together to ensure everyone feels safe and satisfied with their local 
area. 
A Healthy Stockport 
Active  people - with levels of obesity which maintain current rates rather than continuing to rise 
to the extent seen in past decades 
Empowered  people - who are supported to make positive lifestyle choices, ultimately leading to 
better health outcomes for all Stockport residents 
Independent  people – who benefit from high quality and accessible facilities and services which 
are tailored to their needs and preferences and prevent deterioration of health and well-being 
72 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy - The Stockport Strategy 2020 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 74 
The Strategy3 
A Greener Stockport 
A unique built environment which preserves our heritage and has high quality new developments 
Core Policy CS5 
ACCESS TO SERVICES 
3.147 The Core Strategy supports Stockport's network and hierarchy of service centres as 
accessib
le hubs of communities situated in distinctive environments. Stockport Town Centre, the 
eight District and twenty five Local Centres will have a predominance of retail use at their core. 
These service centres will contain a range of main town centre uses, with some public and 
community uses, appropriate to their character and position within the Stockport service centre 
hierarchy. 
3.148 An improved range, quality and level of comparison goods retail units and other main 
to
wn centre uses, including quality restaurants, cafés and bars will be provided at the Town Centre 
and the quality of its superstores will be improved. The Core Strategy seeks to retain a high 
proportion of comparison goods shoppers in Stockport, thereby contributing to sustainable shopping 
patterns.This will involve a significant increase to the existing level of convenience and comparison 
goods A1 use floorspace in Stockport Town Centre, in order to help grow and at least maintain 
its market share from the position in 2009. The expansion of existing premises and new facilities 
for arts and cultural uses, exhibition space and conference venues will be encouraged in the Town 
Centre. 
3.149 The District and Local Centres will be anchored by convenience goods development 
meeting local top-up shopping needs
, with the District Centres also servicing bulk convenience 
goods shopping trip opportunities and providing a greater range of main town centre uses than 
the Local Centres.To ensure sustainable shopping patterns and enhance a sustainable, accessible 
distribution of high quality economic development, the Core Strategy will safeguard and enhance 
the vitality and viability of the Town Centre and the District and Local Centres. The Core Strategy 
will facilitate the enhancement of Stockport Town Centre as the principal centre in the borough 
and as an important place for its community, thereby generating an attractive destination for 
people in the borough and for visitors. 
3.150 The individual and cumulative scale, level, clustering and mix of uses in the above centres 
will be controlled to: 
1. Safeguard and enhance the vitality and viability of Stockport Town Centre's core retail area 
and the vitality and viability of the borough's Distr
ict and Local Centres; 
2. Safeguard and enhance the role and function of the service centres in the hierarchy and 
netw
ork; 
3. Safeguard and enhance a high proportion of A1 use in Primary Frontages; 
4. Facilitate a diversity of economic development uses in Secondary Frontages; 
5. Contribute to meeting identified need; 
6. Optimise the unique characteristics of centres within the service centre hierarchy; 
7. Promote improvements to the quality of the public realm, community and civic amenity space, 
the shopping en
vironment and the shopping experience, including the provision of 
complementary uses to retail provision; 75 
3 The Strategy 
8. Safeguard residential amenity; and 
9. Ensure sustainably designed sites as outlined in the Overarching Principles and Safeguarding 
the En
vironment Policies, using design standards (such as BREEAM and CEEQUAL) where 
feasible and viable - see the Sustainable Design and Construction SPD for further information. 
3.151 The Core Strategy sets out the scale of A1 use generally appropriate within the service 
centres with regard to the scale
, role and function of these centres and their position in the Stockport 
shopping hierarchy. Proposals for shops serving day-to-day local convenience needs that exceed 
200 sq m net A1 use floorspace(73) at out-of-centre locations will trigger the requirement for an 
impact assessment from the applicant. 
3.152 The Core Strategy will promote and safeguard a broad range and distribution of accessible, 
quality indoor spor
ts facilities and community uses across the borough. The Core Strategy will 
seek to enable adequate provision to be made for these uses to meet the needs of the borough's 
population through the plan period. Improvements are sought to the condition and modernisation 
of secondary schools in the borough. 
3.153 Indoor sports, community and education facilities will provide sustainably accessible 
ser
vices to relevant communities that respect residential amenity with regard to their scale, 
character and intensity of development. 
3.154 The overall level of indoor sports facility provision across the borough will be safeguarded 
and cr
iteria for the location of any new provision is set out in Development Management Policy 
'Improving indoor sports, community and education facilities and their accessibility'. PPG17 and 
PPS4 indicate that locations in or adjacent to existing centres are considered appropriate for 
indoor sports facilities. Community uses are directed to relevant centres in the service centre 
hierarchy in the first instance, with flexibility of location for new and extensions to existing indoor 
sports facilities allowed in connection with schools, other educational establishments and premises 
providing dual-use facilities. Exceptions are also permitted where the indoor sports facility is 
sustainably accessible to the communities it serves, especially where the proposal would help to 
address inequalities. 
3.155 Indoor sport, community and education facilities will provide integrated service delivery 
and / or be co-located with associated f
acilities where possible and appropriate in order to 
encourage linked trips, reduce the need to travel and facilitate comprehensive and efficient service 
delivery. The Core Strategy will seek to explore and capitalise on any community development 
to ensure the potential for the widest possible community use. 
3.156 Hotel development will be promoted in Stockport Town Centre in order to meet an identified 
deficiency and contr
ibute to the vitality and viability of the Town Centre. Small scale visitor 
accommodation at Marple District Centre, Marple Bridge Local Centre and Romiley District Centre 
will be encouraged. Tourism development will be sustainably accessible and primarily focused at 
the service centres with exceptions being only where locations directly relate to features of interest 
outside of these areas that are sustainably accessible or made so by the development. 
3.157 Marple and Cheadle are targeted for the provision of new allotment plots based on these 
being the areas of Stoc
kport with the greatest demand. 
73 PPS4 Policy EC3 (Planning for Centres), para. EC3.1.d suggests setting floorspace thresholds at the local level 
for the scale of development outside centres which should be subject to an impact assessment against the criteria 
listed in PPS4 policy EC16.1. PPS4: Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth is available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 76 
The Strategy3 
3.158 The Core Strategy will facilitate the provision of an adequate supply of suitable land in 
appropriate locations for cemetery development and ancillary facilities to meet the needs of the 
borough's population through the plan period. This may involve woodland burial, the expansion 
of existing cemeteries and / or the provision of a new cemetery / cemeteries. 
Core Policy CS6 
SAFEGUARDING AND STRENGTHENING THE SERVICE CENTRE HIERARCHY 
3.159 The following hierarchy and centres will be safeguarded and strengthened in order to 
provide a network of accessible main town centre uses, particularly A1 use and including A2 use. 
3.160 Additional main town centre uses(74), with a focus on A1 use, will be provided within the 
identified centres of the following hierarchy, at a scale commensurate with identified capacity for 
development in the borough, the scale, role and function of the centre and in a manner that 
safeguards centres and residential amenity from any adverse impacts: 
1. STOCKPORT TOWN CENTRE: The Core Retail Area of the Town Centre (as shown as the 
Central Shopping Area on the Proposals Map) is sequentially preferable for the purpose of 
A1 use and the Town Centre is sequentially preferable for the purpose of non-A1 main town 
centre uses and A2 use. The Secondary Retail Area of the Town Centre is sequentially the 
most preferred area after the Core Retail Area for the purpose of A1 use and its boundary 
will be defined in the Allocations DPD. The boundary of the Core Retail Area will be defined 
in the Allocations DPD, taking into account PPS4 considerations and the role and function 
of the Core Retail Area described in the Core Strategy; 
2. DISTRICT CENTRES: Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle Hulme, Edgeley, Hazel Grove, Houldsworth 
Square (Reddish), Marple and Romiley; 
3. LOCAL CENTRES: 
Large Local Centres:  Gatley, Heald Green, Moor Top (Heaton Moor), Shaw Road / 
Heaton Moor Road, Heaton Chapel, Davenport, Great Moor, North Reddish and Marple 
Bridge 
Other Local Centres:  Adswood, Brinnington, Cheadle Heath, Heaton Mersey, Berrycroft 
Lane (Higher Bredbury), Hall Street (Offerton), High Lane, Fiveways Parade (Macclesfield 
Road), Offerton, Offerton Green, Woodley, Councillor Lane (Cheadle), Fir Road 
(Bramhall), Smithy Green (Cheadle Hulme), Turves Road (Cheadle Hulme) and North 
Park Road (Bramhall) 
3.161 The boundaries of the District and Local Centres, identified on the Proposals Map, will 
be reviewed and defined in the Allocations DPD, which will be informed by various factors including 
the definition of District and Local Centres and that of Primary and Secondary Frontages provided 
in PPS4. 
74 Cross refer to the Core Policies on the Town Centre Strategic Area and Accommodating Economic Development 77 
3 The Strategy 
Development Management 
How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy. Please note that policies relating to 
specific sites, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 
Development Management Policy AS-1 
The Vitality and Viability of Stockport's Service Centres 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.162 The Allocations DPD will define the Primary and Secondary Frontages of Stockport Town 
Centre
, the District and Local Centres. A high proportion of A1 use will be safeguarded in the 
Primary Frontages, the level of which will be detailed in the Allocations DPD. Where proposals 
comply with any relevant change of use criteria set out in the Allocations DPD, appropriate uses 
in the Primary and Secondary Frontages will include main town centre uses, A2 use and a limited 
level of residential and A5 use. Office development will be acceptable in District Centres as set 
out in the Accommodating Economic Development chapter of the Core Strategy. 
3.163 The Allocations DPD will detail the level of residential and A5 use that will be appropriate 
at street le
vel property within the proportion of non-A1 use permitted in the Primary and Secondary 
Frontages. The Allocations DPD will set out the types and detail of evidence (e.g. marketing 
information) that will be assessed in the consideration of proposals that would result in the loss 
of A1 use at street level units, within the Other Local Centres and within the Primary and Secondary 
Frontages, where such proposals do not comply with relevant policies in the LDF . 
3.164 Outside the Primary and Secondary Frontages, main town centre uses, A2 use, A5 use, 
pub
lic, education uses, children's indoor play centres and community uses will be permitted in 
the Town Centre, the District and Local Centres. Community uses, education facilities and children's 
indoor play centres will be encouraged in and at the edge of the District and Local Centres and 
within the Town Centre. Such community uses, education facilities and children's indoor play 
centres will be acceptable in principle in these locations where they comply with any change of 
use criteria for Primary and Secondary Frontages set out in the Allocations DPD and do not conflict 
with other Core Strategy policies. 
3.165 The following guidelines will apply to the scale of individual A1 use units generally 
considered to be appropr
iate within the service centre hierarchy: -
Up to a sub-regional scale at Stockport Town Centre 
Up to 2,500 sq m net at Distr
ict Centres 
Up to 1,500 sq m net at Large Local Centres 
Up to 280 sq m net at Other Local Centres 
3.166 Where in-centre A1 use proposals exceed these guidelines, material considerations to 
be tak
en into account will include: -
The resultant level of uplift of A1 use floorspace from that existing at the site and the needs 
of estab
lished uses to expand at the site; 
The positive and negative impacts of the proposal with regard to economic and physical 
regeneration in the area including the impact on deprived areas, the environmental quality 
of the centre and social inclusion objectives; 78 
The Strategy3 
The scope for linked trips and footfall attraction within the centre generated by the proposal; 
The extent of long term vacancies in the relevant service centre(s); 
Overriding characteristics and constraints of particular buildings. 
3.167 The guideline for the District Centres will be flexible in the event that future retail capacity 
studies identify adequate le
vels of capacity to support increasing the figure set out in this policy. 
3.168 The scale of future retail development in Stockport needs to respect that 
Manchester/Salf
ord are the primary retail centres within the Manchester City Region. Comparison 
retailing facilities in Stockport should be enhanced and encouraged in order to ensure a sustainable 
distribution of high quality facilities(75) . 
3.169 Outside the core retail area and within the Town Centre the focus of promoting the level, 
enhancement, e
xpansion and diversity of main town centre uses will be on non-A1 use. Within 
the Town Centre, where possible, main town centre uses, A2 use, public and community uses 
(including A1 use where it complies with the Development Plan, RSS Policy W5: Retail 
Development and PPS4) should positively contribute to linked trip opportunities, the integration 
or co-location of service delivery or provide significant regeneration and environmental benefits. 
3.170 The balance of uses in Romiley District Centre would benefit from more A3 uses and the 
introduction of bars
, which together could help the centre develop a tourism role(76). The vitality 
and viability of Edgeley District Centre could be improved through the development of quality A3 
and A4 uses given its limited offer and proximity to Stockport College, Edgeley Park Stadium and 
the proposed St Thomas' Community Hospital at Shaw Heath, which means that footfall has an 
opportunity to be healthy(77). Therefore, A3 and A4 uses will be encouraged within Romiley and 
Edgeley District Centres, in order to enhance the evening economy, the diversity of use in these 
centres and to complement their retail function. 
3.171 Accessibility within and to the borough's service centres by a choice of means of transport, 
including w
alking, cycling and public transport, will be safeguarded and enhanced. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.172 The purpose of the policy is to safeguard and enhance the primary retail function, the vitality 
and viability
, and the accessibility of the District and Local Centres and of Stockport Town Centre's 
core retail area. The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study 2009 (paras10.58-10.59), the Future 
Stockport Town Centre Masterplan (page vi, para.iii.a) and the Stockport Town Centre Strategy Review 
2009 (par
as3.2-3.7 and 3.15-3.17)(78) are in consensus that improving the retail and leisure offer of 
Stockport Town Centre is a key issue that needs to be addressed and that ideally arts and cultural 
facilities in the Town Centre should be enhanced where resources permit. Thus, this approach will 
improve comparison retailing facilities in Stockport Town Centre, consistent with RSS Policy W5 (Retail 
Development), by focusing the majority of retail floorspace growth, medium sized and larger retail 
units in the core retail area.The Development Management policy will contribute to achieving a thriving 
Stockport sought in The Stockport Strategy 2020, which seeks a vibrant Town Centre complemented 
by individual District Centres. It is considered appropriate to focus the majority of retail capacity in the 
Town Centre rather than spread over the service centre hierarchy. This is because the Town Centre 
75 RSS Policy W5 (Retail Development), available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
76 Para12.59, The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 
77 Paras12.47-12.49, The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 
78 Available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 79 
3 The Strategy 
is the priority and presents an opportunity to enhance retail development in both the comparison and 
convenience goods sectors in order to strengthen the retail offer and address identified deficiencies
(79) . 
3.173 As at 2010, there is an identified surplus of approximately £60 million in convenience goods 
e
xpenditure in Stockport's catchment area, rising to approximately £75 million as at 2015(80). This 
gives a net floorspace illustration of approximately 5,000 sq m as at 2010 and 6,500 sq m as at 
2015 (81) . 
3.174 Assuming the current market share, as at 2010, there is an identified surplus of approximately 
£30 million in compar
ison goods expenditure in Stockport's catchment area, rising to approximately 
£200 million in 2015. This gives a net floorspace illustration of approximately 5,500 sq m as at 2010 
and 30,000 sq m as at 2015(82). However, assuming the market share is increased by 5% as at 2015, 
there is an identified surplus of approximately £295 million, i.e. 44,500sq m net(83) . 
3.175 There is capacity for health and fitness facilities and 6 additional cinema screens in the 
borough at 2010, r
ising to 10 screens by 2020. However, the deliverability of such leisure development 
will be strongly affected by the economic climate(84) . 
3.176 PPS4 p.25 Annex B: Definitions, defines the terms Town Centre, District Centre and Local 
Centre
. Stockport's tier of Local Centres is subdivided into the categories of Large Local Centres and 
Other Local Centres. The Large Local Centres have a greater number and diversity of street level 
property in main town centre uses than do the Other Local Centres, which reflects their larger size. 
The policy seeks to guide proposals for A1 use of various scales to the appropriate level of the service 
centre hierarchy, taking into account the findings of the Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study 2009; 
the role and function of the centres; the appropriate distribution of capacity between the centres; the 
accessibility of larger scale retail development to the intended catchment; the effect on overall travel 
patterns and consistency with the network and hierarchy;(85) and the Core Strategy. 
3.177 People who are less mobile are particularly dependent on local shops and services, which 
can help in suppor
ting older people to live independently and provides opportunities for social 
interaction. The network of District and Local Centres is accessible by walking and cycling, thereby 
encouraging active lifestyles, independence and contributing to people achieving and maintaining a 
healthy weight. This is consistent with achieving a stronger and healthy Stockport as sought in The 
Stockport Strategy 2020. 
79 Paras10.58-10.60 main report, pages 11 and 13 Executive Summary, Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study 2009 
80 Appendix 8, Table Convenience 9a: Summary of Capacity (ultra long term growth rate), 2007 Prices, Stockport 
Shopping and Leisure Study
, Drivers Jonas, 2009 
81 Assuming £12,079 per sq m floorspace equiv alent from average of UK's largest 4 supermarket retailers, taken from 
Retail Rankings 2009. Figures are rounded from those provided in the Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study 2009 
82 Appendix 9, tab le comparison 12a: Capacity for new comparison floorspace in Study Area based on ultra-long-term 
trend growth in expenditure - Scenario A (Study Area current market share), 2007 Prices, Stockport Shopping and 
Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009. Figures are rounded from those provided in the Study. Net floorspace equivalent 
figures are based on a Stockport town centre illustration with regard to estimated average turnover of floorspace 
83 Appendix 9, tab le comparison 12b: Capacity for new comparison floorspace in Study Area based on ultra-long-term 
trend growth in expenditure - Scenario B (Study Area market share increased by 5%), Stockport Town Centre 
illustration, Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 
84 Appendix 10 and Executive Summary, Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 both available 
via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
85 Pages 57-58, Planning for Town Centres Practice guidance on need, impact and the sequential approach 80 
The Strategy3 
3.178 The key objectives of the District and Local Centres Strategy(86) include seeking to secure a 
range of attractions at the centres and to facilitate ease of access for all, consistent with this 
Development Management Policy. 
3.179 This approach to the level of residential and A5 use at street level within Primary and Secondary 
F
rontages will help to achieve a balanced mix of non-A1 uses and to optimise the level and coherence 
of active frontages in these key locations. It will also contribute to the quality of the shopping 
environment by controlling the level and clustering and thus the cumulative impact of A5 use with 
regard to issues of noise, litter, odour, nuisance and hours of use.These considerations are important 
in terms of residential amenity and the vitality and viability of the service centres. 
3.180 In terms of the appropriate locations for community uses, education facilities and children's 
indoor pla
y centres, the approach aims to enhance the community cohesion / community foci role of 
the service centres, thus helping to achieve a stronger Stockport, which is a priority of the community 
strategy. In addition it will contribute to the vibrancy of the Town Centre and to the vitality and viability 
of the District and Local Centres, thereby contributing to achieving a thriving Stockport. 
3.181 The focus on non-A1 use main town centre uses within the Town Centre but outside the core 
retail area will reinf
orce the A1 use retail function of the core retail area and Edgeley District Centre. 
Thus this Development Management policy will encourage the occupancy of units within these centres 
and their level of active frontages. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.182 The Council is responsible for assessing the vitality and viability of the Town Centre regularly 
against the indicators in Anne
x D: Town Centre Health Check Indicators of PPS4 (CLG, 2009). In 
order to tailor indicators and targets to Stockport, the performance of the Core Strategy against the 
following indicators and targets will also be monitored: -
3.183 Indicators 
1. Proportion of A1 use in Primary Frontages in Stockport Town Centre's Core Retail Area and at 
the Distr
ict Centres; 
2. Diversity of economic development in Secondary Frontages in Stockport Town Centre's Core 
Retail Area and at the Distr
ict Centres; 
3. Footfall at Primary and Secondary Frontages of the Core Retail Area of Stockport Town Centre 
and the Distr
ict Centres; 
4. Amount of A2, A3, A4 and D2 use floorspace developed annually in Stockport Town Centre and 
the Distr
ict and Local Centres. Amount of comparison retail floorspace developed annually in the 
Town Centre's Core Retail Area and amount of A1 use developed annually in the District and 
Local Centres (Refer to indicator A1, Annex D, PPS4 regarding diversity of main town centre 
uses); 
5. Proportion of vacant street level property and the length of time properties have been vacant in 
the Core Retail Area of Stoc
kport Town Centre and the Local Centres, to be monitored annually. 
Such vacancies may be monitored quarterly in the District Centres as is currently undertaken, or 
annually as resources permit. (Refer to indicator A6, Annex D, PPS4 regarding vacancies); 
6. Size (gross floorspace) of individual new A1 use units in the core retail area of Stockport Town 
Centre and in the Distr
ict and Local Centres; 
86 District and Local Centres Strategy 2007-2012, Stockport MBC, 2007, pages 14-15 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 81 
3 The Strategy 
7. Perception of safety and occurrence of crime in Stockport Town Centre; 
8. State of the environmental quality of Stockport Town Centre and the District Centres. This will be 
monitored b
y the Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study approximately every five years. 
3.184 Targets 
1. Primary Frontages and the level of A1 use within them to be safeguarded will be defined in the 
Allocations DPD; 
2. Secondary Frontages defined in the Allocations DPD. To achieve a range by number and type 
of non-A1 main to
wn centre uses, public and community uses located in the Secondary 
Frontages; 
3. Increase in A2, A3, A4 and D2 use floorspace in Stockport Town Centre and adequate level and 
r
ange of these uses in the District and Local Centres; 
4. An overall reduction in the proportion of street level vacancies within the Town Centre Core Retail 
Area, Distr
ict and Local Centres as compared to the start of the plan period; 
5. Majority of new A1 use units in the service centre hierarchy not to exceed the scale guidelines 
set out in this De
velopment Management policy; 
6. Provision of new medium sized A1 use units in the Town Centre's core retail area, e.g. 465-930sq 
m g
ross; 
7. Aspire to increase Stockport's comparison goods retail market share by 2026 by 5% and as a 
minim
um maintain the 2009 72% market share position; 
8. Significantly increase the quantity and quality of A3 use, A4 use, D2 use and cultural uses in 
Stoc
kport Town Centre; 
9. Increase in the percentage of people feeling safe when out after dark in Stockport Town Centre. 
Development Management Policy AS-2 
Improving Indoor Sports, Community and Education Facilities and their Accessibility 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.185 Sufficient indoor sports, community (including health care facilities) and education facilities 
will pro
vide: 
1. Modernised secondary schools with improvements to the building stock condition through 
v
arious means including new development, redevelopment, extension and refurbishment as 
resources permit; 
2. A modernised and expanded Stockport College Campus in the Town Centre; 
3. Sufficient life long learning and Special Education Needs facilities; 
4. A comprehensive network of childcare provision, infant and primary schools; 
5. Education and community facilities that are well located to serve the relevant population and 
comply with PPS4 and an
y subsequent replacement or amendment, with particular reference 
to PPS4 Policy EC10: Determining Planning Applications for Economic Development (which 
applies to uses including public and community uses); 
6. The development of a Town Centre facility for young people to engage in Positive Activities 
including inf
ormal education, cultural and leisure pursuits, as an integral part of the 'Y outh 
Offer' in Stockport; 82 
The Strategy3 
7. Indoor sports development directed within the service centre hierarchy in the first instance 
followed by edge-of-centre sites (in accordance with PPS4 and PPG17(87)) unless they are 
connected to educational establishments, providing dual-use facilities, or located at other 
sites that are sustainably accessible to the communities they serve, especially where the 
proposal would help to address inequalities; 
8. Large scale new community facilities will be directed within Stockport Town Centre and the 
Distr
ict Centres in locations where they do not conflict with the main town centre uses and 
employment use functions of these centres, followed by the edges of these centres then by 
other sustainably accessible locations. Smaller scale new community facilities will be directed 
to the service centres followed by other accessible locations. Community facilities outside 
the service centres should be co-located with associated facilities and / or provide integrated 
service delivery where possible and appropriate. Exception to this approach will be permitted 
for the modernisation, expansion or extension of community uses at existing sites, for example 
at Stepping Hill Hospital, and where their purpose or local need necessitates their provision 
outside the Town Centre, District and Local Centres; 
9. Safeguarded and enhanced accessibility of allotments - the scope for the redevelopment of 
allotments
, which is a type of Local Open Space, for alternative uses is set out in the 
Safeguarding and Improving the Environment chapter of the Core Strategy. 
3.186 The redevelopment of existing indoor sports facilities will only be appropriate where it is 
sufficiently demonstr
ated that alternative provision of no less quality and of appropriate scale is 
provided elsewhere within the relevant catchment area, or alternative catchment area within the 
borough where this would contribute to addressing inequalities. 
3.187 The redevelopment of existing community uses (excluding children's indoor play centres 
and health care f
acilities) for other uses will be permitted where one or more of the following 
applies: 
It is sufficiently demonstrated that replacement provision of no less quality and of appropriate 
scale is provided elsewhere within the relevant catchment area; 
It is sufficiently demonstrated that replacement provision of no less quality and of appropriate 
scale is provided elsewhere within an alternative catchment area within the borough where 
this would contribute to addressing inequalities; 
It is of no beneficial use; 
There  is an oversupply of the community use involved and therefore no need for replacement; 
Insufficient  resources are available to maintain the operation of the community use or it is 
not viable to retain; 
A lack of interest in occupancy of the site for the existing use is satisfactorily demonstrated 
by marketing information or community engagement; 
A comprehensive and efficient service would remain; 
Special  justification is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council 
3.188 The term community facilities in the Core Strategy excludes education facilities, as 
descr
ibed in the glossary. 
3.189 Marple and Cheadle are targeted for the provision of new allotment plots based on these 
being the areas of Stoc
kport with the greatest demand. Therefore the expansion of existing 
allotments together with the provision and enhancement of ancillary facilities and structures, 
particularly at Marple and Cheadle, will be supported where proposals do not conflict with other 
87 PPS4 and PPG17 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 83 
3 The Strategy 
policies in the Development Plan, for example with regard to design and residential amenity issues. 
There may be scope for ancillary land at occupied or closed school sites to be used by schools 
for the provision of allotments (a form of Local Open Space) and ancillary structures. Temporary 
allotment proposals at school sites will be permitted where they safeguard residential amenity 
and formal sports provision, including playing fields. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.190 The purpose of the policy is to facilitate improvements to the quality of indoor sports, education 
and comm
unity facilities (including health care facilities) and their accessibility, consistent with RSS 
Policy L1: Heath, Sport, Recreation, Cultural and Education Services Provision.The policy also seeks 
to safeguard community facilities from redevelopment or change of use to alternative uses in order to 
enable adequate provision to be made for community facilities, community services and utilities to 
meet the needs of the borough through the plan period. 
3.191  Stockport has recently benefited from health care development, for example at Heald Green, 
the ne
w health centre near Woodley Local Centre, and the relocation of the Central Y outh choices 
clinic and advice centre within the Town Centre. The Wellspring Resource Centre now operate from 
a purpose built premises in the Town Centre, providing health services, training courses, advice and 
support for homeless and disadvantaged people in Stockport and surrounding areas including 
Manchester, Tameside and Salford. A new community hospital was granted planning permission in 
2009 in the south of the Town Centre. NHS Stockport has identified a need to offer a wider range of 
primary care services; to bring services together to offer better, more modern health care for patients; 
and a need to improve the condition and design of existing buildings(88). To tackle these issues, this 
Development Management policy seeks that new and improved health care facilities, such as One 
Stop Centres and Primary Care Resource Centres, are delivered in locations accessible to the 
communities they serve.The modernisation and expansion of Stepping Hill Hospital, which lies between 
Great Moor Local Centre and Hazel Grove District Centre, is given general support in this policy. 
3.192 The Council faces significant issues in addressing the inadequacy of its failing secondary 
school b
uilding stock which has an estimated repairs backlog of £47 million. In addition, the issue of 
excessive surplus places will need to be tackled between the summer and autumn of 2010. 
3.193 The Government is undertaking a comprehensive review of all capital investment in schools, 
ear
ly years, colleges and sixth forms. The review will guide future Government spending decisions 
over the next Spending Review period (2011 - 2012 to 2014 - 2015). 
3.194 Stockport needs more childcare services, particularly in Brinnington and Reddish and to a 
lesser e
xtent at Marple and Romiley. In addition, the market for childcare for disabled children and 
young people should be further developed(89) .  Addressing these issues through the provision and 
enhancement of relevant community facilities as necessary will contribute to fostering cohesive 
communities, thereby contributing to the 'stronger Stockport' promoted in The Stockport Strategy 2020. 
3.195 The PPG 17 study ‘ Indoor facilities’(90)  report identifies an 11½ four court sports hall shortfall 
based on the exclusion of dual-use facilities within Stockport. There is an identified lack of access to 
day time sports hall provision due to schools priority for dual-use and very limited evening access for 
88 NHS Stockport Overview of Estates Investment Strategy available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
89 Stockport Childcare Sufficiency Assessment Action Plan Introduction, Stockport MBC, 2009 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
90 PPG 17 Para1.42, Strategic Leisure, August 2005, available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 84 
The Strategy3 
casual pay and play access to sports hall provision due to club block bookings(91). The flexibility of 
location for the development and extension of indoor sports halls set out in the policy takes into account 
the existing pattern of indoor sports hall provision and that the education sector, subject to available 
funding, is likely to be the major partner in their future development and enhancement.Thus if education 
is the major partner for future sports hall provision then robust usage agreements concerning dual-use 
will be required in order to ensure satisfactory community access. 
3.196 This approach to the co-location / integration of indoor sport, community and education 
f
acilities with associated facilities will reinforce the community cohesion and recreation roles and 
strengthen the vitality and viability of the service centres whilst optimising the accessibility of these 
uses. Consequently, participation in activities at these facilities is encouraged thereby contributing to 
the health, education, cohesiveness and well-being of Stockport's communities, consistent with the 
priorities in The Stockport Strategy 2020 of achieving a stronger and healthy Stockport. 
3.197 It is important that the local community has access to allotments in accordance with demand, 
as a source of fresh, seasonal, aff
ordable, healthy food that helps to reduce food miles. Allotments 
provide opportunities for social interaction and active leisure, thereby fostering community cohesion 
and inclusion, thus contributing to a healthy Stockport, consistent with a priority of the Community 
Strategy. In addition, there may be scope for the Third Sector to play a role in food production through 
the use of allotments as a means to source food for social enterprises and possibly supplying to users 
of some community facilities. Thus this Development Management policy will contribute to a thriving 
Stockport through encouraging an enterprising culture, as sought in The Stockport Strategy 2020. 
There are 38 allotment sites in Stockport and there are about 1,500 allotment plots of which all are 
let. The majority of Stockport's sites are run by allotment organisations. Stockport does not have a 
local standard for the level of allotment provision that should be sought in the borough. £100,000 has 
recently been allocated to create at least 100 plots in the borough. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.198 Indicators 
1. Modernisation and improvement in the quality of health and education facilities; 
2. Provision of a comprehensive and efficient library service; 
3. Number and quality of indoor sports halls; 
4. Level of new and temporary allotments and plots; 
3.199 Targets 
1. Libraries are a statutory service, and the Council will maintain a network of facilities sufficient to 
pro
vide a 'comprehensive and efficient' public library service to the borough population in 
accordance with the spirit of the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964; 
2. Transformation of the quality of secondary school stock through new development, refurbishment 
and e
xpansion; 
3. Health facilities developed and improved so that 98% of residents are within 1.5km and 74% are 
within 1km of a health and w
ell being centre; 
4. Aspire to achieve quality indoor sports hall provision in partnership with the education sector and 
where possib
le and appropriate, with other stakeholders e.g. NHS Stockport etc. As a minimum 
91 Para1.52, PPG17 Study 'Indoor Facilities', Strategic Leisure, August 2005 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 85 
3 The Strategy 
seek no overall reduction in the number or quality of indoor sports halls in the borough, to be 
monitored by future PPG17 Studies. 
5. New allotment plots provided in areas of greatest identified demand. 
Development Management Policy AS-3 
Main Town Centre Uses, Hot Food Take Aways and Prison Development Outside Existing 
Centres 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.200 In terms of PPS4 policy EC3.1.d, an assessment addressing the impacts in PPS4 policy 
EC16.1 will be required for planning applications for A1 use exceeding 200 sq m net floorspace 
at out-of-centre locations and edge-of-centre locations in relation to the District and Local Centres. 
This local impact assessment threshold will not apply to the Secondary Retail Area (as shown as 
the Great Portwood Street Area on the UDP Review Proposals Map or as revised through the 
Allocations DPD) of Stockport Town Centre. 
3.201 Outside the service centres, proposals for hot food take aways and fast food restaurants 
(A5 use) will be required to be located over 300 metres away from schools and parks. Exceptions 
will be permitted where the A5 use would be more than an easy walking distance away from the 
school(s) or park(s) due to physical barriers such as a major road, railway line or river where such 
separation from the A5 use would not be overcome via a pedestrian route. 
3.202 Outside the Town Centre, the District and Local Centres, the loss or change of use of 
main town centre uses will be permitted, but not where existing A1 use is essential to meet local 
convenience needs and alternative facilities are not already or proposed to be sustainably 
accessible to the local community within the catchment. Exception will be made to the loss of A1 
use in such instances where marketing information satisfactorily demonstrates that reasonable 
attempts to let the unit for A1 use have failed.The Allocations DPD will set out the types and detail 
of marketing information that will be assessed in the consideration of such proposals. 
3.203 It is accepted that there may be some instances where A1 use proposals comply with 
PPS4 and RSS Policy W5 with regard to the sequential approach, scale, impact considerations 
and accessibility and therefore demonstrably cannot be accommodated within the relevant service 
centre(s) of Stockport's service centre hierarchy. In such circumstances, such A1 use retail 
development may be required outside the service centres in order to help meet identified retail 
needs and address any local deficiencies in retail provision. In such instances, the mix of 
convenience and comparison goods will be controlled to enable the Council to manage the impacts 
of the development. It is envisaged that such circumstances are most likely to occur in the Town 
Centre outside the core retail area, where such proposals may help enable the viability and thus 
the delivery of mixed use schemes or provide for bulky goods retailing, enhance the vibrancy of 
the Town Centre and may have scope to provide significant regeneration benefits. 
3.204 The National Offender Management Service has identified that there are no current plans 
for a new prison in the borough. However, any new prisons should be in accessible locations, be 
well related as possible to the court catchment area served, be secure and located near centres 
of population. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 86 
The Strategy3 
3.205 Half of the Other Local Centres are suffering vitality and viability difficulties, as are three of 
the nine Large Local Centres and three of the District Centres. The Local Centres generally contain 
a small supermarket or small scale independent convenience goods shops. There has been 
development pressure for edge-of-centre and out-of-centre local shops in Stockport of up to around 
280 sq m net. Three such out-of-centre proposals were recently dismissed at appeal with regard to 
their impact on the relevant nearby centre. Individually and cumulatively, new local shops outside 
service centres, particularly where concentrated in the catchment area of a District or Local Centre 
could potentially significantly adversely impact on the top-up shopping function and vitality and viability 
of the relevant centre. Therefore, this Development Management policy sets out a local impact 
assessment threshold for A1 use proposals at out-of-centre and edge of centre locations in relation 
to the District Centre and Local Centres in order to safeguard the vitality and viability and retail function 
of the service centre hierarchy. Without such a local impact assessment threshold set out in the LDF , 
planning applications for retail and leisure developments outside existing centres and not in accordance 
with an up to date development plan would have to exceed 2,500 sq m gross floorspace for the 
applicant to be required to submit an assessment of the impacts(92) on the vitality and viability of 
centres. 
3.206 The local impact assessment threshold does not apply to the Secondary Retail Area of the 
T
own Centre given it is second sequentially preferable for A1 use after the Core Retail Area and that 
it is likely to accommodate larger retail units where they cannot be accommodated within the Core 
Retail Area. 
3.207 The purpose of the policy includes encouraging children to make healthy food choices through 
the creation of a suppor
tive environment, requiring that A5 use is directed beyond an easy walking 
distance from schools and parks.Therefore the policy helps children to achieve and maintain a healthy 
weight.The definition of easy walking distance for retail purposes in PPS4 (page 26) is used to inform 
the threshold of proximity set out in the Development Management policy. In 2008, 14% of 11 year 
olds in Stockport were overweight and 7% were obese(93). Nationally, around a third of children are 
either overweight or obese. Without action, it is predicted that by 2050 in the UK, 25% of children 
under 16 will be regarded as clinically obese.This policy will contribute to achieving a healthy Stockport 
which is a priority of the Community Strategy and to tackling the level of overweight and obese children 
in the borough in accordance with the Stockport Healthy Weight Partnership Strategy(94) and Healthy 
Weight, Healthy Lives: A Cross Government Strategy for England, January 2008, which both suggest 
managing the proliferation of fast food outlets, particularly in proximity to parks and schools(95) . 
3.208 Stockport's Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy(96) seeks for local people to have access to a 
good range of quality local shops. In the event that proposals would result in the loss of small scale 
local shops outside existing centres and alternative facilities would not be sustainably accessible within 
the catchment, the policy safeguards that communities, particularly in deprived areas, retain satisfactory 
access to fresh food. The approach aims to assist in the equality of access to convenience goods for 
top up shopping purposes, consistent with Stockport's Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy, whilst giving 
priority to the vitality and viability of existing centres in the borough. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
92 PPS4 policy EC16.1 lists these impact considerations; other impact considerations that apply to all economic 
development regardless of its location and scale are set out in PPS4 policy EC10.2 
93 Page 60, Stockport Healthy Weight Partnership Strategy, January 2010 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
94 Objective 5.3, page 37, Stockport Healthy Weight Partnership Strategy 
95 Page 18, Healthy Weight, Healthy Lives: A Cross Government Strategy for England, January 2008 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence Gateway No. 9087 
96 Stockport's Neighbourhood Renewal Strategy, 2009, Stockport MBC, Page 16, Objective 4: Good quality local 
environment, available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 87 
3 The Strategy 
3.209 Indicators 
1. Access to fresh food in areas of deprivation; 
2. Proximity of new hot food take-aways and fast food restaurants to schools and parks; 
3. Vitality and viability of the District and Local Centres measured approximately every five years in 
Stoc
kport's retail capacity study, focusing on convenience goods; 
4. NI175 Access to services and facilities by public transport, walking and cycling. 
3.210 Targets 
1. No greater travel time horizon to access fresh food from deprived areas of the borough as 
measured using the Council's accessibility model; 
2. No new hot food take aways or fast food restaurants provided within easy walking distance of 
schools and par
ks; 
3. No decline in the vitality and viability of the District and Local Centres and no significant impact 
on in-centre con
venience goods turnover likely to undermine the vitality and viability of the relevant 
centres. 
Development Management Policy AS-4 
Visitor Accommodation and Other Tourism Development 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.211 Hotel development will be encouraged in Stockport Town Centre in the first instance, 
followed by edge of centre locations to the Town Centre, then by M60 Gateway sites where those 
sites are, or will be, well served by a choice of means of transport, are closest to the Town Centre 
and have a high likelihood of forming links with the centre where C1 use does not conflict with 
other policies of the Development Plan. Hotel development that also provides conference or 
exhibition facilities will be particularly encouraged. 
3.212 The scale, catchment area, operational and market requirements of proposed hotel 
outside the Town Centre will be key considerations in assessing the relevance of the PPS4 
sequential tests and the impact of such proposals on securing a range of Town Centre hotels. 
3.213 Sustainable and accessible transport to tourism facilities within Stockport Town Centre, 
the District and Local Centres and to out of centre tourism attractions will be sought. 
3.214 Small scale visitor accommodation at Marple District Centre, Marple Bridge Local Centre 
and Romiley District Centre will be encouraged. Tourism development will be focused on the 
service centre hierarchy, with exceptions being only where proposals comply with PPS4 and the 
RSS and where locations directly relate to features of interest outside of these areas that are 
sustainably accessible or made so by the development. Such development, especially when it is 
within the rural parts of the borough, will also afford opportunities for ecological, landscape, 
biodiversity and heritage improvement, for which developer contributions may be sought. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 88 
The Strategy3 
3.215 The purpose of the policy is to direct hotels to the Town Centre in the first instance in order 
to help address the under provision of hotel bed spaces in the Town Centre(97) and associated purpose 
built conference facilities of a sub-regional scale. A Town Centre hotel could help attract more overseas 
visitors and businesses to Stockport given its proximity and accessibility to Manchester Airport. This 
approach will help enhance the role and vibrancy of the Town Centre, consistent with the Community 
Strategy, and further develop tourism, larger conference and exhibition facilities and related visitor 
accommodation in the Town Centre.The corporate sector forms the majority of demand for Stockport's 
hotels(98). Small to medium scale meeting, training and conference facilities are located in and around 
the Town Centre. Exhibition space is provided at venues including Broadstone Mill Gallery, Bredbury 
Hall and Country Club, the Britannia Hotel and Stockport Art Gallery. Existing larger conference 
facilities accommodating between 400 to 600 delegates are located at the Britannia Hotel, Edgeley 
Park and Stockport Town Hall. However, Stockport Town Centre lacks a hotel and any modern 
dedicated conference and exhibition facilities, none of which are proposed of a scale that might attract 
major events. 
3.216 Town Centre hotels could form an overspill function for those attending major events in 
Manchester (e
.g. football matches and large concerts) and locally provide a base to access sporting 
events at Edgeley Park Stadium and passive recreation at the nearby Trans-Pennine Trail(99). However, 
opportunities for business and leisure tourism in Stockport are underdeveloped and do not therefore 
optimise the advantage of Stockport's proximity and accessibility to Manchester Airport, among other 
markets such as weddings and visiting friends and relatives in connection with the student population 
at Stockport College and Manchester(100). It was suggested in 2009 that up to three hotels could be 
accommodated in the Town Centre(101). However, three sites in and around the Town Centre with 
planning permission for a hotel, one of which includes conference facilities, are currently unimplemented 
and two other mixed use schemes each involving a hotel are subject to a legal agreement and are 
not at a stage whereby they could be implemented at present. In addition, a planning application for 
a Town Centre hotel with conference facilities and a leisure suite has recently been submitted to the 
Council. 
3.217 The Macclesfield and Peak Forest Canal towpaths (forming part of the Cheshire Ring), 
Middle
wood Way and the proximity of the Peak District National Park to Marple, present walking and 
cycling opportunities in the Marple area. Such leisure visits and related visitor accommodation 
development would provide a source of trade that would help support the quality food and drink offer 
of centres in the area and could attract visitors to the annual Marple Food and Drink Festival, thereby 
contributing to the vitality and viability of Marple District Centre and Marple Bridge Local Centre. Such 
tourism related development would help to provide local employment opportunities in an area lacking 
in available land for significant growth of employment uses. 
3.218 To optimise its location, Romiley District Centre could function as more of a gateway for 
visitors to the nearb
y Peak District National Park(102). In addition, the Goyt Way and Etherow / Goyt 
Valley Way / Midshires Way situated near Romiley and Marple, are sources of footfall attraction that 
could help to benefit the development of small scale visitor accommodation, A3 use and the bar offer 
(A4 use) in Romiley District Centre. 
97 Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study (Drivers Jonas, 2009) 
98 Page 34, Market Assessment and Development Potential for Hotel Accommodation in Stockport, TRI Hospitality 
Consulting, 2009 a
vailable via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
99 Stockport Visitor Economy Strategy, Locum Consulting, 2006 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
100 Pages 22-23, Market Assessment and Development Potential for Hotel Accommodation in Stockport 
101 Market Assessment and Development Potential for Hotel Accommodation in Stockport, TRI Hospitality Consulting, 
2009 
102 The Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009, para12.59, p153 89 
3 The Strategy 
3.219 The policy applies to tourism development including hotels and other visitor accommodation 
(C1 use) across the borough. The approach aims to ensure that tourism development is sustainably 
accessible, to encourage the development of quality Town Centre hotels to meet the needs of business 
and leisure visitors, and to support complementary tourism development and small scale visitor 
accommodation in the District and Local Centres, particularly at Marple and Romiley, appropriate to 
their location and position in the service centre hierarchy. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.220 Indicators 
1. Number of hotel bed spaces in the Town Centre; 
2. Number of new C1 use bed spaces in the borough at Romiley District Centre, Marple District 
Centre and Mar
ple Bridge Local Centre; 
3.221 Targets 
1. Provision of a range of hotel bed spaces primarily in Stockport Town Centre. 
Development Management Policy AS-5 
Cemeteries 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.222 Provision of sufficient cemeteries, which may also have scope for passive recreation, will 
include: 
1. Demonstration of the scope and feasibility for the expansion of existing cemeteries by the 
developer before alternative sites are considered for cemetery development; 
2. Alternative locations should not conflict with the operation of neighbouring land uses and 
residential amenity; 
3. Sustainable and accessible transport to cemeteries will be sought. 
3.223 Woodland burial locations will be encouraged where proposals meet the above criteria 
and comply with the Safeguarding and Improving the Environment policies of the Core Strategy. 
Particular regard will be had to addressing any relevant natural environment, landscape, biodiversity 
and heritage issues involved in the proposal. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.224 It is anticipated that current cemetery provision in the borough will be full in approximately 
10-15 y
ears time. The purpose of the policy is to facilitate an adequate supply of suitable land for the 
provision of cemeteries and ancillary development. Any specific sites to be safeguarded for cemetery 
provision will be identified in the Allocations DPD and will need to be investigated by the Council in 
terms of their suitability with regard to the water table, water courses, land suitability and any other 
rules and regulations, for example regarding environmental health considerations, as appropriate. 
3.225 The policy applies to existing and proposed cemeteries across the borough. The approach 
aims to mak
e the best use of existing resources, to safeguard the operation of neighbouring land uses 90 
The Strategy3 
and residential amenity and to seek the accessibility of cemeteries by a choice of means of transport, 
including walking and cycling. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.226 Indicators 
1. Supply of land for cemetery provision. 
3.227 Targets 
1. The Council to meet its obligations as a burial authority. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy 
When Who & How? What 
New and / or improved 
indoor sports hall 
facilities 
New and / or improved 
Primary and Secondary 
Schools 
New and improved 
Higher and Fur
ther 
Education facilities Stockport Sports Trust runs and manages 15 sports, swimming By 2026 
and leisure f
acilities in the borough. The education sector is 
likely to be the main partner for future provision. There may be 
scope for delivery / funding through the Government's capital 
investment in schools, colleges and sixth forms which is under 
review and developer contributions. 
By 2026 Delivery of health care facilities via NHS Stockport, the Council 
and other organisations as relevant. Delivery of improvements New and / or improved 
community facilities 
to and new community facilities may involve the Third Sector. 
Developer contributions may be sought. including health care 
facilities 
The Council will gain over £3 million of funding in 2009/10 from By 2026 
the Government's Primary Capital Programme for improvements 
to primary school facilities. Funding allocated is for the first year 
of a fourteen year programme. A further £5.68 million will be 
made available to Stockport for 2010/11, subject to agreement 
by the Department for Children, Schools and Families. Further 
funding will be announced over time, subject to the 
Government's regular spending review(103). Developer 
contributions may also be sought. 
Overprogramming of capital funds by the Learning and Skills By 2026 
Council in 2009 reduced the amounts of funding available to 
support the Stockport College campus redevelopment. The 
college is currently investigating other ways to fund the rest of 
the rebuild. Developer contributions may be appropriate to 
support improvements in infrastructure. 
103 Schools Organisation and Building Schools for the Future available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 91 
When Who & How? What 3 The Strategy 
Additional cemetery To be delivered by the Council which is a burial authority. By 2026 
capacity Appropriate sites for the expansion of existing cemeteries and 
/ or the pro
vision of new cemeteries will be identified in the 
Allocations DPD. Developer contributions may be sought. 92 
The Strategy3 
3.3.5  ACCOMMODATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
3.228 This section seeks to address the following issues: 
Suitable  provision of employment floorspace 
Preferred  locations for employment development 
Overarching  issue of sustainability 
3.229 Stockport is generally a prosperous Borough with a highly skilled workforce but with pockets 
of depr
ivation within its boundaries. Forecasting suggests that there is likely to be a continuation of 
the economic downturn which will not see a recovery to 2008 levels of employment until around 2014. 
3.230 There is no certainty about the economic upturn, either in terms of when it will come or how 
strong that reco
very will be. However it is vital that Stockport plans for growth in order for the Borough 
to benefit from the economic upturn, if and when it does come. This will include ensuring that the 
borough is in a position to benefit from the future development of Manchester Airport, in terms of sites 
for business wishing to take advantage of the airport as an international link and for those sectors 
which will be able to provide services to the airport itself. 
3.231 It is likely that in the future development will be in office based and high-technology industries. 
Stoc
kport's existing representation in various key growth sectors such as computer and software 
services and financial and professional services provide a solid foundation for future economic 
development within the Borough. Growth in the retail and leisure trades is also expected to bring new 
job opportunities and these changes will have an impact upon the scale and location of land and 
premises required. These are dealt with separately within this document. 
3.232 Stockport has been identified in both the Regional Spatial Strategy(104) (RSS) and the 
Manchester Independent Economic Review(105) (MIER) as being a key location for economic 
development in a variety of sectors. Stockport sits below the nearby Regional Centre in a hierarchy 
of economic development areas and the Regional Centre will be a significant provider of jobs for 
residents of the borough. However Stockport is also well placed to reinvigorate its own economy and 
contribute to the wider economic development of the sub-region whilst providing a range of employment 
for residents and non-residents alike. 
3.233 Development of growth sectors in Stockport will help to increase the density of such uses, 
aiding the process of agglomer
ation which has been noted as an important factor in the future economic 
success of the sub-region. MIER highlights Stockport's location and skilled workforce as key factors 
in its future development. However a recent office study has also indicated that there is need for 
Stockport to improve both the quality and quantity of its office provision in order to take account of the 
development opportunities afforded by its location and skilled workforce. This includes design to a 
sustainable standard (e.g. BREEAM) as outlined in the Overarching Principles. 
3.234 In addition to the growth sectors identified Stockport will be focusing on developing the low 
carbon econom
y within the borough. This will cut across the range of employment types, but will 
include small-scale businesses that are likely to be located outside of existing employment areas, 
larger businesses within those areas, including the potential for research and development and 
manufacturing with associated back-office uses. 
104 North West of England Plan, Regional Spatial Strategy to 2021, Policies MCR1 and MCR3 
105 Manchester Independent Economic Review, April 2009 93 
3 The Strategy 
3.235 Within Stockport there is a variety of employment areas that have functioned well historically, 
notwithstanding periods of economic downturn. Outside of the town centre these provide some 354 
Ha of employment land in total and include a range of size from a few hectares up to 110 Ha in the 
case of Bredbury Employment Area. These sites are also located in a variety of areas, some close to 
the M60, others located between areas of predominantly residential development, such as in Reddish. 
3.236 As a result, these areas provide a good choice of land for potential developers of all key 
emplo
yment uses. Stockport’ s employment land availability information(106) indicates that these areas 
have performed well historically and that most of the employment development that takes place within 
the Borough takes place on existing sites within these areas, pointing to a high degree of ‘churn’. 
3.237 As of April 2010 that same land availability information found approximately 67.5 Ha of land 
w
as available, which is a relatively high percentage of the total employment area of 354 Ha 
(approximately 19%). However this figure is relatively high due to the number of permissions which 
are yet to be implemented due to the prevailing economic conditions. In previous years as land has 
been developed the amount of available employment land has been lower yet has generally provided 
sufficient opportunity and choice for developers. 
3.238 Given that the employment areas have generally functioned well and have fulfilled the 
emplo
yment needs of the borough and the sub-region, there is no need to add or subtract employment 
land to any significant degree. As a result of this and the assessment of future job numbers and types, 
Stockport's approach is focused towards floorspace rather than land provision, with much of the B1 
office space to be located in the town centre with high density development. 
3.239 The town centre currently suffers from a lack of high-quality office space, as identified by the 
Stoc
kport Office Study(107) yet is located in a prime position in respect of its transport links and an 
existing highly skilled workforce. The focus of new employment development, particularly B1 office 
space, is a key factor where a change of approach would help to achieve the overall objectives of the 
Core Strategy. 
3.240 Stockport also has a significant level of out-commuting which adds to transport issues that 
are discussed else
where. However as Stockport has some of the best potential outside the Regional 
Centre to attract growth sector employment, providing jobs for residents of the Borough will help reduce 
out-commuting and stress on the highway and public transport networks. 
3.241 The Town Centre and identified employment sites in the M60 Gateway will be the main focus 
f
or economic development within the borough, followed by existing employment areas. However the 
future re-use of Woodford, as highlighted in 3.3.9 'Woodford Aerodrome Opportunity Site', also affords 
new employment opportunities in the growth sectors on what will be a large, vacant site previously 
pro
viding significant employment in the south of the Borough. 
3.242 Forecasts indicate that the recovery will be steady and that the focus for new employment 
floorspace will be f
or B1 uses, particularly office development. In the period 2011 - 2026 approximately 
110,000sqm of B1a/b floorspace will be required. The Town Centre contains a number of sites which 
can contribute significantly to this, providing up to 65,000sqm of floorspace. Other sites in the M60 
Gateway, such as Kings Reach, Chestergate and Gorsey Bank have the potential to provide up to 
30,000sqm, including B1(c) development. Employment areas and sites elsewhere in the borough will 
take up the remainder of the requirement. 
106 Stockport Employment Land Availability Study April 2010 
107 Future Stockport - Creating a Vibrant Town Centre Office Market, DTZ, 2009  
 
 
 94 
The Strategy3 
3.243 Whilst there is forecast to be a significant fall in the overall level of B2 (Heavy Industry) uses 
there will still be the need for such sites in the future and these will be directed to existing employment 
areas. However with the net loss of B2 floorspace there will be a requirement for more B8 (Warehousing) 
floorspace. Given that there is significant overlap in the needs of such uses it is expected that 
warehousing uses will replace those B2 uses lost from employment areas, resulting in no net 
requirement for new employment land. 
3.244 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable 
Comm
unity Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(108): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A competitive economy with a diverse and expanding business base which attracts high earning 
sectors and suppor
ts high employment across sectors and skills levels. 
A vibrant Town Centre complemented by individual District Centres which are well used by 
residents and served by retail, leisure and cultural facilities. 
A Safer, Stronger Stockport 
Cohesive communities – where people respect each other, and everyone has similar life 
oppor
tunities 
Engaged communities – who are empowered to engage and make a positive contribution to 
local well-being 
Community pride – working together to ensure everyone feels safe and satisfied with their local 
area. 
A Healthy Stockport 
Independent people – who benefit from high quality and accessible facilities and services which 
are tailored to their needs and pref
erences and prevent deterioration of health and well-being 
A Greener Stockport 
A unique built environment which preserves our heritage and has high quality new developments 
A 
sustainable approach to the natural environment, improving air quality, minimising our use 
of natural resources, and maximising recycling 
Good connections with excellent public transport resulting in less congestion 
Core Policy CS7 
ACCOMMODATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
B1 Development 
3.245 Development of B1(a) office uses will be focused in the Town Centre, increasing and 
impro
ving the available office space in the Borough's most sustainable location. 
3.246 Office and other types of B1 development will also be encouraged in the M60 Gateway, 
taking adv
antage of the location close to the Town Centre, thus helping to develop an agglomeration 
108 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 95 
3 The Strategy 
of similar sites.This will enable Stockport to develop land for the growth sectors identified in MIER 
and RSS, including taking advantage of the predicted growth at Manchester Airport. 
3.247 Sites such as those at Tiviot Way, Kings Reach, Chestergate and Gorsey Bank, which 
whilst not ha
ving the same high-quality public transport links, are potentially within easy reach of 
the Town Centre and the motorway. In addition, the Town Centre and M60 Gateway area is well 
served by the main road network in Stockport and has good links to both the Regional Centre 
and Manchester Airport. 
3.248 The majority of the forecast 110,000sqm of additional floorspace requirement forecast 
f
or the plan period should be located in this Town Centre/M60 Gateway. The Council envisages 
high density office development, particularly in the Town Centre, which will make best use of the 
available land. 
3.249 B1 office development will also be encouraged on suitable existing employment sites 
and in and around Distr
ict Centres. The employment areas not already mentioned above which 
are most suitable for office use include Cheadle Royal, Bramhall Moor Lane, Bird Hall Lane, 
Stanley Green, Battersea Road. Other sites, such as Shepley Lane, Marple and Melford Road 
are suitable for offices, amongst other employment uses.  Stockport's District Centre office market 
is driven by a local skilled workforce and local amenities and to a lesser extent their existing stock 
of premises. The key centres in this regard are Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle Hulme, and Hazel 
Grove. 
3.250 The Allocations DPD will identify the site and areas appropriate for these uses. 
Industrial (B2) and Warehousing (B8) Uses 
3.251 Whilst it is acknowledged that the net level of heavy industrial uses is likely to decline in 
the Borough, ne
w units are still likely to be required. Consequently such uses will still need to be 
provided for and existing employment areas are considered to be the appropriate locations to 
accommodate these, as well as the moderate rise in warehousing development. 
3.252 B2 and B8 uses, which are likely to generate heavy goods traffic or be otherwise 
incompatib
le with residential areas, will be directed to employment areas with good access to the 
National Strategic Road Network and Local Primary Road Network, or where such access can 
be provided . For example, the Bredbury Industrial Area has the opportunity to provide sites for 
industrial and warehouse uses, due to the size of the plots, the proximity to the motorway network 
and the fact that there are few residential properties near to the core of the site. The Council will 
seek to build upon the benefits that clustering of employment uses can bring, with different areas 
having different roles to play. Those sites identified for employment purposes of this nature will 
be protected for the purposes of employment and related ancillary uses. 
3.253 It is expected that the majority of the heavy industrial uses will be located on the existing 
emplo
yment areas, rather than in the Town Centre/M60 Gateway, although there may be some 
scope for such uses on MEDS sites where there are existing similar uses. An exception to this in 
the M60 Gateway Area would be the development of land at Tiviot Way, which is well located for 
the motorway network. Warehousing uses should be located on employment areas with good 
connections to to the National Strategic Road Network and Local Primary Road Network, such 
as Bredbury Industrial Area. 96 
The Strategy3 
Other Employment Uses 
3.254 PPS4 makes clear that other uses beyond office, industrial and warehousing uses 
constitute economic de
velopment. As such the Council will ensure that where proposals provide 
employment opportunities or contribute positively to the economy as set out in PPS4 and where 
they meet the overarching aims of the Core Strategy, they are assessed accordingly. They will 
be encouraged in those areas where other employment uses are expected to develop. Other 
employment uses which are not B-use class development and which are regarded as 'town centre 
uses', such as retail and leisure will be subject to sequential testing as set out in PPS4 and in 
3.3.4 'ACCESS TO SERVICES'. 
3.255 Small-scale employment development for new premises or uses in other areas, such as 
residential or r
ural locations, will be acceptable provided they meet criteria set out in development 
management policies. 
Development Management 
3.256 How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy. Please note that policies relating 
to specific sites
, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 
Development Management Policy AED-1 
Employment Development in the Town Centre and M60 Gateway 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.257 The Council will encourage development of B1 employment uses in Stockport Town 
Centre and M60 Gateway Area, including the redevelopment of existing office space which is 
currently underused. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.258 Stockport has been identified in MIER as a key area for economic development to help drive 
the econom
y of the wider sub-region and office growth is forecast in the Greater Manchester Forecasting 
Model(109). In particular future office development is vital for a variety of sectors including ICT and 
digital communication, creative and new media industries and financial and professional services. 
Office development will be encouraged in the Town Centre, with all B1 uses being encouraged in the 
wider M60 Gateway area. 
3.259 Town centres have been identified at both national and regional level as being a vital focus 
f
or development, in particular for employment uses. Stockport Town Centre is a sustainable location 
and the development of suitable employment uses in this location is a key element of the Core Strategy. 
The redevelopment of vacant and underused land and premises is key to providing suitable and 
adequate employment floorspace in the growth sectors for Stockport. The Town Centre provides the 
opportunity for high density employment development in an area well served by public transport and 
the road network. There are good links to both the Regional Centre and to Manchester Airport. The 
109 Greater Manchester Forecasting Model available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 97 
3 The Strategy 
development of the latter in particular provides significant opportunity for the development of businesses 
that require good links to an international airport, but do not need to be located adjacent to it. 
3.260 Such development will also enable the resurgence of the Town Centre by bringing people 
into the area who will need and tak
e advantage of retail, leisure and other uses which will be focused 
in the area. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.261 Annual survey of planning permissions for B1 uses granted and implemented in the Town 
Centre and an assessment of the n
umber of jobs created by those developments. 
Development Management Policy AED-2 
Employment Development in District Centres 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.262 The Council will encourage development of office uses in District Centres, including the 
redevelopment of existing office space which is currently underused. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.263 District Centres have the ability to provide office space in sustainable locations, that offer not 
only a v
ariety of transport links but are also close to large areas of population and provide a variety 
of services which would also benefit from their proximity to other employment uses. Major office 
developments are expected to develop in the town centre in line with PPS4, however the Council will 
have regard to all office development, dependent on its scale and catchment. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.264 Annual survey of planning permissions for B1 uses granted and implemented in the District 
Centres and an assessment of the n
umber of jobs created by those developments. 
Development Management Policy AED-3 
Employment Development in Employment Areas 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.265 The Council will protect employment areas for employment generating uses.Within these 
areas the Council will have regard to the requirement for flexibility for employment generating 
uses beyond the traditional employment uses of B1, B2 and B8, based on the criteria set out in 
PPS4. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.266 Existing employment areas have been identified as being the best located in the borough for 
future emplo
yment development. They have an existing employment base and have been shown to 98 
The Strategy3 
be the areas where new employment development has taken place, through the recycling of disused 
employment units and sites.This does not require the release of greenfield or Green Belt land. Although 
in some cases public transport links could be improved, existing employment areas are likely to be 
better served than other areas in this regard. 
3.267 There is limited land available within Stockport for employment development and as previously 
stated the emplo
yment areas have been a vital source of employment land, both in terms of new land 
coming forward and for old sites being re-used for new employment uses. Therefore it is important 
that those areas identified for this purpose are not lost to other uses. Were that to happen it would 
risk employment development opportunities being missed and in the longer-term could result in the 
need for greenfield and Green Belt being released in order to provide additional employment land. 
Furthermore, where local employment land is limited, for example in Marple, the loss of such land 
could have a significant detrimental impact on the overall supply of land in the area. 
3.268 Flexibility is important in recognising that economic benefits can be derived from uses that 
do not f
all within the B-class uses. In some employment areas the forecast decline in heavy industry 
will mean that there will be a net loss of employment land, despite the needs of warehousing 
development. As such, where it is appropriate and the provision of employment land for B-use class 
development is not detrimentally affected, applying a flexible approach to such areas will ensure that 
economic benefit is achieved. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.269 Annual survey of planning permissions for employment uses granted and implemented in 
these areas and an assessment of the n
umber of jobs created by those developments. 
Development Management Policy AED-4 
Employment Development in Rural Areas 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.270 The Council will encourage employment development in rural areas where it is of an 
appropriate type and scale. This will include the encouragement of new economic development 
and the need for existing employment sites to be used for employment purposes rather than 
non-employment uses, thus maintaining the supply of employment sites in these areas. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.271 The rural economy is often overlooked and it is important, given the lack of employment areas 
in these locations
, to ensure that where appropriate jobs can be provided for residents in these areas. 
In addition to providing employment it can have reduce levels of commuting from rural to urban areas. 
The Taylor Review(110) highlights the possibility of live/work units and the need to promote rural 
economic development, including the provision of new employment where an existing site has ceased 
operations. This policy also results from the rural proofing work undertaken for the Sustainability 
Appraisal (111) . 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
110 Living Working Countryside: The Taylor Review of Rural Economy and Affordable Housing, July 2008 
111 Core Strategy DPD: Sustainability Appraisal (Appendix D) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence. 99 
3 The Strategy 
3.272 Annual survey of planning permissions for employment uses granted and implemented in 
these areas and an assessment of the number of jobs created by those developments. 
Development Management Policy AED-5 
Education, Skills and Training Provision 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.273 Where appropriate, viable and feasible, developers of new employment uses will be 
required to provide training or funding to provide education and training, in order to help local 
residents develop the necessary skills to access the jobs being created in the borough. In addition, 
where appropriate end users will be require to recruit a certain percentage of the workforce from 
particular geographical areas, focusing on Neighbourhood Renewal Priority Areas 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.274 It is acknowledged that Stockport suffers from areas of high deprivation and unemployment. 
Ho
wever those areas are either adjacent to existing employment areas or they are well served by 
public transport which would link them to such areas, including the Town Centre. Consequently it does 
not appear that it is the location of employment uses which is the main issue. Instead the key factor 
is ensuring that the residents are sufficiently well skilled and trained in order to be able to take advantage 
of the jobs that exist and will be created. It is proposed that in order to achieve those aims a 
development management policy will be developed which will seek contributions from developers in 
respect of relevant skills and education training. 
3.275 The Council will prepare an SPD setting out in more detail how this is to be achieved. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.276 Monitor number of places or funding provided for training through this policy and the numbers 
obtaining ne
w jobs and being promoted within the company as a result. 
Development Management Policy AED-6 
Employment Sites Outside Protected Employment Areas 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.277 Proposals for the change of use or redevelopment of employment sites outside designated 
emplo
yment areas which result in the loss of that use will not normally be permitted unless: 
a. it can be demonstrated that the site is no longer viable as an employment use; 
b. the proposal will not adversely affect the operations of neighbouring premises; 
c. the loss of employment land would not lead to significantly longer journey to work patterns; 
and 
d. the development does not conflict with other policies. 100 
The Strategy3 
3.278 The extension of existing employment premises will be permitted where it does not conflict 
with other policies. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.279 Employment sites and units outside the allocated employment areas are an important source 
of commercial de
velopment. This includes mills, industrial, warehousing and office uses. Such units 
can often provide space for small and medium sized enterprises and may be located in areas away 
from other employment uses but close to or well connected to residential areas. However other, 
higher-value uses can exert pressure on the land and precipitate the loss of the employment use.The 
policy seeks to protect sites which are still viable for employment uses in order to maintain the stock 
of employment land and sites across the borough. The Allocations DPD will set out the types and 
detail of evidence e.g. marketing information, that will be assessed in the consideration of proposals 
for the change of use or redevelopment of employment sites where such proposals do not comply 
with relevant policies in the LDF . 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.280 Monitor losses of employment units, floor area and land area to non-employment uses. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy 
When Who & How What 
Provision of public transport and other 
passenger services to certain 
employment areas 
M60 Junctions 1 and 27 need to be 
able to accommodate potential 
increased traffic levels GMPTE and developer Before or during development 
contributions of relevant employment sites 
Highways Agency and Before or during development 
developer contributions of town centre and M60 sites  
 
 
 
 
 101 
3 The Strategy 
3.3.6  SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT 
3.281 This section seeks to address the following main issues: 
Uneven  distribution of greenspace 
Ensure  that planning policy contributes to a sustainable development approach in the Borough, 
particularly with regards to low carbon 
3.282 In addition there are a wide-range of matters where national or regional policy require local 
de
velopment management policies to be in place so as to enable the consistent consideration of 
planning applications. 
3.283 Stockport contains a range of physical environmental assets, which can collectively be referred 
to as Green Infr
astructure (GI), which provide multiple social, economic and environmental benefits. 
The Core Strategy recognises the cross cutting function that GI has, and the benefits of integrating 
GI with social and economic priorities, which will help contribute to the development of sustainable 
communities.   A plan showing the general extent of Green Infrastructure is shown in C.4 'The general 
distribution of Green Infrastructure'. 
3.284 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable 
Comm
unity Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(112): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A competitive economy with a diverse and expanding business base which attracts high earning 
sectors and supports high employment across a sectors and skills levels 
A vibrant Town Centre complemented by individual District Centres which are well used by 
residents and served by retail, leisure and cultural facilities. 
An educated population benefiting from high quality education facilities 
A Safer, Stronger Stockport 
Cohesive  communities – where people respect each other, and everyone has similar life 
opportunities 
Engaged  communities – who are empowered to engage and make a positive contribution to 
local well-being 
Low Crime Rates – making all our streets safer at any time of the day 
Community  pride – working together to ensure everyone feels safe and satisfied with their local 
area. 
A Healthy Stockport 
Active  people – with levels of obesity which maintain current rates rather than continuing to rise 
to the extent seen in the last decade 
Empowered  people – who are supported to make positive lifestyle choices, ultimately leading 
to better health outcomes for all Stockport residents 
112 Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020) available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence  
 102 
The Strategy3 
Independent people – who benefit from high quality and accessible facilities and services which 
are tailored to their needs and preferences and prevent deterioration of health and well-being 
People with good emotional and mental health – who are confident, resilient and well-supported 
by family, friends and services to face life's challenges. 
A Greener Stockport 
A unique built environment which preserves our heritage and has high quality new developments 
Excellent 
parks and open spaces 
A sustainable approach to the natural environment, improving air quality, minimising our use 
of natural resources, and maximising recycling 
Good connections with excellent public transport resulting in less congestion 
Core Policy CS8 
SAFEGUARDING AND IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT 
Quality Places 
3.285 Development that is designed and landscaped to a high standard and which makes a 
positiv
e contribution to a sustainable, attractive, safe and accessible built and natural environment 
will be given positive consideration.  High quality design which promotes a sense of place is of 
importance throughout the borough and should be an integral part of all development proposals, 
paying high regard to important local natural and built environment features, including the historic 
environment, and contributing to addressing key issues such as climate change and inequalities 
(see 3.3.2 'OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - ADDRESSING 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND INEQUALITIES'). 
Green Infrastructure (GI) 
3.286 The Council working with local communities, developers and partners, will protect, develop 
and enhance an integ
rated network of high quality and multi-functional GI that will: 
Improve health and well being; 
Impro
ve and enhance cross-boundary connectivity and accessibility through the delivery of 
joint development proposals including specifically the River Valleys; 
Protect and connect existing and potential sites of nature conservation value and historic 
landscape features, and seek to create new wildlife habitats as recommended in the GM 
Ecological Framework (see www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence); 
Protect and pro
vide appropriate natural space to connect landscapes and allow wildlife to 
move through them to adapt to climate change; 
Mitigate the negative effects of climate change and support biodiversity, for example inclusion 
of green roofs, green walls and tree planting; 
Maximise the potential climate change benefits of the network including enhanced flood risk 
management through water storage or run-off protection, integrating mitigation measures 
such as SUDS into the design, controlling temperatures through shade and other cooling 
effects, and reducing air and water pollution; 103 
3 The Strategy 
Create  appropriate access for a wide range of users to enjoy the countryside, including 
improved linkages to formal and informal recreation opportunities; and 
Contribute  to the diversification of the local economy and tourist development through the 
enhancement of existing, and provision of new facilities. 
3.287 The main purpose of GI is to provide a network of green space that connects ecological, 
histor
ic and cultural and landscape assets, which contribute to local distinctiveness and quality 
of life for residents and visitors.   A definition of Green Infrastructure is provided in A 'Glossary'. 
3.288 The Council will identify, protect and enhance GI assets through the Allocations DPD. 
3.289 The requirement to conserve, manage and create new GI is set out in Regional Spatial 
Str
ategy policy EM3.  At a sub-regional level there is an agreed approach to the development of 
a GI framework across Greater Manchester(113) . 
Strategic and Local Open Space(114) 
3.290 In general terms development that does not safeguard the permanence and integrity of 
areas of Str
ategic and Local Open Space will not be allowed. There may, however, be situations 
in which other factors determine that the need to continue to protect existing assets are outweighed 
by the interests of achieving sustainable communities, in particular with regards to delivering 
mixed communities, meeting wider leisure needs, improving participation in the use of recreation 
facilities and improving parks.  In such situations the objective of achieving sustainable communities 
may be best served by the development of limited areas of open space.  Such development must 
be designed to meet a high standard of sustainability and pay high regard to the local environment. 
3.291 In addition there may be circumstances where satisfying overriding community needs 
such as aff
ordable/social housing may justify loss of open space. The Council's Sport, Recreation 
and Open Space Study(115) audits the current level of supply against relevant assessments of 
demand.  Also relevant is the nationally recognised Fields in Trust "6 Acre" standard which 
consultation confirms is an appropriate minimum standard to be applied to the borough(116) .  Such 
circumstances will only be considered acceptable where the study identifies a relative higher 
provision of recreational open space within an Area Committee area compared to other Area 
Committee areas in the borough.  Any development resulting in a loss of open space within an 
area of relative high-levels of provision will be expected to off-set that loss by making improvements 
to existing open space or providing (at least) equivalent new open space in a Committee area of 
relative low provision so as to help not exacerbate the under-supply situation that exists across 
the borough as a whole. 
3.292 Improved public access to these areas would make a valuable contribution towards 
meeting the Natur
al England's Accessible Natural Greenspace Standard (ANGSt)(117). This 
provides a set of benchmarks for ensuring access to places near to where people live. 
Landscape Character Areas, including the River Valleys 
113 Green Infrastructure North West available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
114 Strategic Open Space and of Local Open Space are defined in A 'Glossary' 
115 PPG17 Study available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
116 The standard sets out that for each 1000 residents there should be 2.4 hectares (6 acres) comprising of 1.7 
hectares (4 acres) f
or outdoor sport and recreation space (including parks) and 0.7 hectares (2 acres) for children's 
play, with about 0.25 ha of this equipped playgrounds. 
117 Natural England Green Space Standards for Accessible Natural Greenspace available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 104 
The Strategy3 
3.293 The landscape and character of the borough's countryside will be preserved and enhanced, 
taking into account the distinctive attributes of local areas based on a landscape character 
assessment (including an assessment of the historic landscape character).  Account will also be 
taken of the potential impact of development proposals on the character of areas adjoining the 
borough, including the Peak District National Park. 
3.294 The environmental values and principally informal recreational role of the borough's river 
v
alleys will be safeguarded and enhanced.  Formal outdoor recreation facilities may be permitted 
in river valleys but only where there are limited opportunities within adjacent residential areas to 
meet the essential leisure needs of local communities and where the facilities will play a positive 
role in addressing health and inequalities issues. 
Children's Play 
3.295 Residential developments will be given positive consideration where they satisfy the need 
that the
y create for children's play facilities by the provision of new or improved facilities.  On-site 
provision or developer contributions towards new/improved off-site provision (consistent with the 
provisions of Circular 5/2005 Planning Obligations) will be sought so as to meet communities' 
needs in terms of Local Areas of Play (LAPs), Local Equipped Areas of Play (LEAPs) and 
Neighbourhood Equipped Areas of Play (NEAPs). Where it is shown to be in the best interests 
of the community that it serves, new or improved children's play facilities may be provided within 
an existing park that is within an acceptable walking distance from a new development. 
Biodiversity and Nature Conservation 
3.296 Development will be expected to make a positive contribution to the protection and 
enhancement of the borough's natur
al environment, biodiversity and geodiversity.  Sites, areas, 
networks and individual features of identified ecological, biological, geological or other 
environmental benefit or value will be safeguarded. 
3.297 Proposals which seek to sustainably manage areas of nature conservation value as a 
resource
, including for purposes of recreation, education and/or the small-scale harvesting of 
woody matter as a fuel, will be given positive consideration so long as they are not harmful to the 
environmental value of the area. 
Environmental Protection, Improvement and Safeguarding 
3.298 Development proposals which seek to make environmental improvements and 
enhancements will be giv
en positive consideration, especially where they bring derelict, vacant 
or contaminated previously developed land back into safe, active use.  Development should be 
located and designed in such a way as take account of natural and man-made environmental 
constraints and hazards including: 
Contamination 
Air, water, noise and vibration, light or other pollution (including air-quality management areas) 
Land  stability 
Flood risk 
Hazardous  installations (such as gas holders) 
Operational  requirements of Manchester Airport and other aerodrome and air navigation 
facilities 
Telecommunications and other broadcast infrastructure. 
105 
3 The Strategy 
3.299 The allocation of sites in the Allocations DPD and any other allocating documents will 
take such constraints and hazards into account.  In particular, sites will be allocated following the 
sequential and exceptions tests within PPS25 in relation to flood risk. 
Heritage Conservation 
3.300 The Council recognises the unique place the historic environment holds in Stockport’ s 
cultur
al heritage and the multiple ways in which it supports and contributes to the economy, society 
and daily life. The historic environment is a non-renewable resource and its fragile and finite 
nature will be a particularly important consideration in the allocation of sites in the Allocations 
DPD and in Development Management decision-making.  Conserving and managing this resource 
for future generations is a key component of the wider principle of sustainable development which 
forms an overarching principle of the LDF . 
3.301 Development will be expected to make a positive contribution to the protection and/or 
enhancement of the borough's her
itage assets.  Buildings, sites, monuments, places and areas 
positively identified as having a degree of historic, architectural, artistic or archaeological 
significance (including canals and other transport infrastructure of historic value) will be safeguarded 
for the future. 
3.302 Proposals which seek to sustainably manage or promote the borough's heritage assets 
as an educational and/or recreational resource will be giv
en positive consideration so long as 
they are not harmful to the value of the site/area.  Opportunities afforded by development for 
archaeological investigation will be taken advantage of, particularly at sites and within areas where 
such investigation is likely to reveal material of archaeological importance. 
Waste 
The Council will promote sustainable waste management in accordance with the waste hierarchy, 
w
orking with other Greater Manchester authorities (through preparation of the Greater Manchester 
Joint Waste Development Plan Document (GMJWDPD)) to: 
Identify  and safeguard waste management sites in appropriate locations; 
Ensure  that the Council, as waste planning authority, makes its contribution towards meeting 
sub-regional waste management needs and towards delivering the Greater Manchester 
Municipal Waste Management Strategy; 
Encourage  good design in order to minimise waste and promote the use of recycled materials; 
and 
Encourage  the sustainable transport of waste and promote use of site waste management 
plans. 
3.303 The GMJWDPD will allocate specific sites for future waste management facilities and 
will identify wider areas within which w
aste management facilities would likely be considered 
acceptable if sites were to become available. This allocation/identification will be based on the 
broad principle that built waste management facilities are often akin to many other industrial 
processes and, therefore, allocated sites and other acceptable locations will generally be within 
existing industrial or economic development areas. 
3.304 Sites allocated by the GMJWDPD and other existing waste management sites will be 
saf
eguarded from other uses so as to ensure that Greater Manchester's future waste management 
needs can be met. 106 
The Strategy3 
Minerals 
3.305 The Council will promote and encourage the sustainable and efficient use of minerals 
and alter
natives to their use, ensuring an adequate and steady supply of minerals for the economy 
and society by working with other Greater Manchester authorities (through preparation of the the 
Greater Manchester Joint Minerals Development Plan Document (GMJMDPD)) to: 
Define and safeguard Minerals Safeguarding Areas; 
Ensure the maintenance of an appropr
iate landbank of non-energy minerals; and 
Identify specific sites, preferred areas and/or areas of search which are adequate to meet 
the sub-region's apportionment of aggregates (set out in the Regional Spatial Strategy). 
3.306 The identification of sites or areas at which minerals extraction will be considered suitable 
will be broadly based upon the f
act that minerals can only be worked where they are found and 
upon the need to ensure, as far as possible, that minerals are transported by sustainable means 
(by rail, water or pipeline).  As well as safeguarding specific areas of minerals reserved through 
the GMJMDPD, the Council will seek to safeguard, promote and enable infrastructure required 
for the sustainable transportation of minerals as well as safeguarding existing, planned and 
potential sites for concrete batching, the manufacture of coated materials, other concrete products 
and the handling, processing and distribution of substitute, recycled and secondary aggregate as 
appropriate. 
Development Management 
How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy. Please note that policies relating to 
specific sites, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 
Development Management Policy SIE-1 
Quality Places 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.307 Development that is designed and landscaped to the highest contemporary standard, 
pa
ying high regard to the built and/or natural environment within which it is sited, will be given 
positive consideration.  Specific account should be had of the following: 
1. Use of materials appropriate to the location; 
2. The site's characteristics including landform, landscape, views or vistas (including to/from 
the P
eak District National Park), landmark or gateway features, biodiversity and micro-climate 
as well as the site's context in relation to surrounding buildings and spaces (particularly with 
regard to the height, density and massing of buildings); 
3. Ensuring the safety and security of users whilst not causing harm to the wider environment, 
the char
acter of the building or accessibility; 
4. Provision, maintenance and enhancement (where suitable) of satisfactory levels of access, 
pr
ivacy and amenity for future, existing and neighbouring users and residents; 
5. The potential for a mixture of compatible uses to attract people to live, work and play in the 
same area, f
acilitating and encouraging sustainable, balanced communities; 
6. The potential for enhancement of the public realm; 107 
3 The Strategy 
7. The potential to incorporate appropriate landscaping and nature conservation features; and 
8. The potential to incorporate the qualities and local distinctiveness of the historic environment. 
3.308 Where assessment (through preparation of a development brief or similar) indicates that 
there are specific histor
ic, built or natural environment features of note at a site or within an area, 
development will be required to take this into account. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.309 National policy and guidance, including PPS1, indicate that the design of buildings and the 
spaces betw
een them make an important contribution to the quality of the environment.  PPS1 requires 
that the LDF should include robust policies on design; some elements of this are dealt with elsewhere 
within the Core Strategy (specifically in relation to sustainable design and construction in 3.3.2 
'OVERARCHING PRINCIPLES: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE 
AND INEQUALITIES' and in relation to access in 3.3.7 'TRANSPORT'). 
3.310 Quality design is a key element in meeting the requirements of schemes such as the Code 
f
or Sustainable Homes, BREEAM (for non-residential development), CEEQUAL (for public-realm 
development), Building for Life and/or Lifetime Homes and the Council will look favourably on 
development which meets a high standard within these schemes. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.311 The AMR includes a Local Indicator (LI19) which monitors the number of registrations against 
recognised En
vironmental Building and/or Design Standards (e.g. BREEAM, Code for Sustainable 
Homes, CEEQUAL). To some extent these standards are integrated into the building regulations (e.g. 
Code for Sustainable Homes) and, therefore, a target of 100% should be achieved against an increasing 
requirement each year. The target for the Core Strategy, therefore, is a year-on-year increase in the 
number of developments which seek to exceed the standard required by the building regulations up 
until the required standard is the maximum level possible. 
Development Management Policy SIE-2 
Provision of Recreation and Amenity Open Space in New Developments 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.312 Development will be expected to take a positive role in providing recreation and amenity 
open space to meet the needs of its users/occupants
. 
3.313 Where appropriate in new developments landscaped amenity areas should be provided 
which are necessar
y and fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the proposed 
development. In those parts of the Borough with a deficiency in recreation and amenity open 
space: 
1. Large new residential developments should include provision, within an agreed timescale, 
f
or recreation and amenity open space on or readily accessible to the site, based on the 
following guidelines: 108 
The Strategy3 
Where occupancy levels of 100 people or more are expected, open space at a standard 
of 1.7ha per 1,000 population for formal recreation and 0.7ha per 1,000 population for 
children’ s play and casual recreation should be provided; 
Where occupancy levels between 50 and 100 people are expected, open space at a 
standard of 0.7ha per 1,000 population for children’ s play and casual recreation should 
be provided. In addition, a contribution to formal recreation space will be required. 
2. Small new residential developments will be required to contribute towards the provision of 
open space f
or formal and casual recreation and children’ s play in locations which are 
accessible to future occupiers. Such contributions will be fairly and reasonably related in 
scale and kind to the permitted development. 
3.314 As much as possible of the open space should be within or adjacent to the new 
de
velopment and play provision should incorporate facilities based on the hierarchy set out in the 
table “Play Facilities”  below. However, provision of some or all of the recreational open space off 
site or through contributions to improve and/or expand an existing facility or create a new one will 
be permitted/required where the Council is satisfied that there is no practical alternative or that it 
would be better to do so. Any off site provision should be fairly and reasonably related in scale 
and kind to the development proposal and be in a location where it would be of direct benefit to 
the occupiers of the new development. 
3.315 Where there is a likelihood that a number of different residential developments will be 
carr
ied out in the same area and in the same general time period the anticipated populations of 
those developments will be aggregated if it is appropriate to do so to assess the additional 
demand/requirement for children's play and casual recreation and/or formal recreation. 
3.316 Sheltered Housing or Special Needs Housing for Elderly People will not be expected to 
contr
ibute to the provision of recreation and play space. 
3.317 Where it can be demonstrated that existing provision of recreation and/or play space in 
the vicinity e
xceeds the minimum standards, after allowing for the demand likely to be generated 
by the proposed new residential development, the requirements of this policy will be relaxed 
accordingly. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.318 To play is the indisputable right of every child. The UN convention on the Rights of the Child, 
r
atified by the UK Government 1991, confers on children the right to play (Article 31) and Article 2.1 
confirms that this right applies to all children 'without discrimination of any kind'.  Children ’s play, both 
formal and casual, merits special mention because of the particular problems faced by this age group. 
Overall open space standards are of necessity generalisations and mask detailed issues which are 
of importance in planning for recreation needs. 
3.319 Children’ s pla y takes a variety of forms, frequently unrelated to specific recreational areas or 
facilities. Over time, play fosters children's independence and self-esteem, helps them develop respect 
for others and offers opportunities for social interaction. It supports their well-being, healthy growth 
and development, increases their knowledge and understanding and promotes their creativity and 
capacity to learn. Issues are inevitably local and it is not possible to deal with these in detail. The 
planning process, however, impinges on children’ s play in a number of ways, including the loss of 
cherished “wild”  and undesignated areas through new development. New residential development 
itself brings the need for additional opportunities of children to play. 109 
3 The Strategy 
3.320 A thought from the child’ s viewpoint when land use proposals are made and considered may 
enable the retention or provision of valued opportunities for play and may perhaps reduce the incidence 
of antisocial behaviour resulting from inadequate or inappropriate facilities. 
3.321 This policy will be applied through the use of standards as set out elsewhere in this section, 
through the detailed consider
ation of development proposals and with reference to any available local 
survey information. The views of children and their families will be an important consideration when 
development proposals affect play areas (in their widest sense) and when new play areas are proposed. 
The impact of development on valued “wild”  and undesignated areas used for play will be taken into 
account in addition to the protection of more formal facilities. Where practicable such areas should 
be retained or suitable alternative areas made available. Such areas may also be protected for nature 
conservation reasons. 
3.322 The following factors will be relevant in assessing whether space for children’ s pla y is sufficient, 
suitable and accessible: 
adequate  space is needed within range of children’ s homes 
spaces  should allow for challenging activities 
land should be suitable and usable - not “leftovers” 
where  limited space is available safer street play might be encouraged through Home Zones (see 
Core Policy CS10 'AN EFFECTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT NETWORK'), traffic 
calming and environment enhancement schemes 
children  need access to the natural environment and to indoor play space. 
3.323 The safety and security of children at play will be important considerations in the design of 
both recreational and non-recreational de
velopments. 
3.324 Developers of new housing, excluding those exemptions set out in the policy, will be expected 
to mak
e adequate provision for formal and children’ s/casual recreation either on or adjacent to the 
site or in the form of commuted payments. Recreational Open Space sets out background survey 
information and the basis of the system of commuted payments. 
3.325 PPG17 Planning for Open Space Sport and Recreation Paragraph 33 states that ‘ Planning 
obligations should be used as a means to remedy local deficiencies in the quantity or quality of open 
space, sports and recreation provision. ’ 
3.326 The policy requires that all proposed developments are assessed to establish their open 
space needs
. Larger housing developments likely to accommodate about 100 people or more will be 
expected, in most circumstances, to provide both formal and casual open space on site in accordance 
with the Council's adopted standards. 
3.327 Developments likely to accommodate between 50 and 100 people will be expected, in most 
circumstances
, to provide children’ s/casual open space on site. Contributions will be required towards 
the provision of formal recreation space which is fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the 
development. This is only applicable where such contributions would secure provision in a location 
close to and easily accessible from the new development, and where it would be of direct benefit to 
the occupiers of the new development. 
3.328 In the case of smaller developments (those likely to be occupied by less than 50 people) 
contr
ibutions will be required: 110 
The Strategy3 
towards  formal recreation space where a scheme for the provision of new facilities or the 
enhancement of existing facilities can be identified; and 
towards  children’ s/casual provision under the terms of the three tiered structure for children’ s 
play, i.e. LAP within 100 metres, LEAP within 400 metres or NEAP within 1000 metres (see the 
table “Play Facilities”  below). 
3.329 THE THREE TIERED STRUCTURE - With regard to children’ s pla y, of great importance is 
the ease of access to play areas; if access is problematic then open space will remain under used. It 
is considered more important to take account of the time taken to reach play areas rather than only 
considering the actual distances involved. Provided that open space is properly designed and well 
located it is less likely to be a maintenance liability and thereby open space can be provided more 
frequently. Proper consideration of open space should lead to more secure and varied play opportunities 
for different age groups. Table 3 'Play Facilities' sets out three categories of play provision: 
1. Local Area for Play (LAP) 
2. Local Equipped Area for Play (LEAP) 
3. Neighbourhood Equipped Area for Play (NEAP) 
3.330 Where a new development is not of a size to require all categories of facilities it will be 
necessar
y to provide as much as possible of the standard. A development accommodating 
approximately 50 people would be required to provide a LAP . All houses should be within the safe 
prescribed walking time of each type of playground. Users should not have to cross busy main roads 
or other hazards. Opportunities to combine a LEAP and a NEAP in the same locality can achieve 
considerable savings in the amount of land needed for the buffer zone, and marginal savings in activity 
zone land use. 
3.331 However, a LAP should not be combined with a LEAP or a NEAP because combining the 
diff
erent age groups and their facilities is not appropriate. The play areas need to be of suitable shape 
and topography to permit the activities outlined in Play Facilities. This may not be practicable in all 
cases and the requirement will be relaxed where adequate justification can be given, for example 
where the development proposed is unlikely to generate demand for play areas (e.g. sheltered housing). 
3.332 AMENITY OPEN SPACE - The provision of amenity open space has little active recreational 
benefit, b
ut is important in enhancing the environment of local communities and the Borough as a 
whole. Since it is so often associated with recreational open space provision, it is appropriate to include 
reference to it here. Whilst it is not proposed to subject amenity areas to any minimum standard of 
provision, it is important that existing areas be maintained and the policy of landscaping new sites be 
continued. Developers will be required to provide appropriate amenity areas and landscaping within 
new residential and non-residential development schemes.These areas should be designed positively 
as an integral part of the scheme, not added as an afterthought or made up of residual and inappropriate 
pieces of land. 
3.333 THE APPROACH FOR COMMUTED PAYMENTS - Many residential developments during 
the plan per
iod will be small-scale. In cases where it would be impractical or unreasonable for a 
development to accommodate useful areas of open space at the above rates, which is particularly the 
case with regard to formal open space, and the Council accept that provision of some or all of the 
recreational open space is to be covered by contributions, they shall be calculated on the following 
basis. 
3.334 It is clear that, if any system of open space provision is to be equitable and effective in keeping 
pace with de
velopment, it will, where appropriate apply to new residential developments including 
those likely to be occupied by less than 50 people. Where appropriate it shall apply to net increases 111 
3 The Strategy 
in accommodation such as in the case of conversions and redevelopment and also where applications 
are made to renew existing residential planning permissions. However, contributions will only be 
required where they are fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development proposal 
and where such contributions would secure provision in a location close to and easily accessible from, 
and where they would be of direct benefit to, the occupiers of the new development. It shall not apply 
to minor extensions. 
3.335 The standard for open space provision is based on population. In the past the amount of open 
space required has been calculated on an a
verage household size of persons per dwelling. A problem 
with using one occupancy rate for all types of housing is that it fails to distinguish between the sizes 
of dwellings so that the requirements for, say, a 20 dwelling scheme of one bedroom flats would equal 
that of a 20 dwelling scheme of 5 bedroom housing. It is therefore more appropriate to use a standard 
based on the capacity of each dwelling. The total population per dwelling is arrived at by assuming 2 
persons in the first bedroom and only one in each of any additional bedrooms.The following population 
per dwelling is used for calculating the contribution: 
1 Bedroom dwelling = 2 persons 
2 Bedroom dwelling = 3 persons 
3 Bedroom dwelling = 4 persons 
4+ Bedroom dwelling = 5 persons 
3.336 Where a single dwelling house is to be converted to two or more self-contained dwellings or 
flats a calculation shall be made to assess the net increase in population.
 Using the above table it will 
be necessary to assess the occupancy of the existing dwelling/s and subtract this from the population 
which will be generated by the proposal. A contribution will be required for each additional person. 
This “trade off ” can only apply where the building remains at the time the planning application is made 
and is either converted or is to be demolished to make way for the development. 
3.337 The Council will require developers to maintain or pay commuted sums for the maintenance 
of open space only where this is consistent with par
agraph B19/B20 of Circular 05/2005. In cases 
where it is agreed between the developer and the Council that the Council will carry out the maintenance 
of open space on the developers' behalf it will be necessary for the developer to pay a sum covering 
the maintenance for a set period based on the finished area. 
3.338 USE OF FUNDS - It is necessary to use the funds in a way that they are directly related to 
the funding de
velopment. 
3.339 FORMAL OPEN SPACE - It is established by the Council's PPG17 study(118) that a gross 
shortfall of formal facilities exists. The Council is aware that all existing facilities are already overused 
and are capable of being improved so as to cater for any additional demand. Although people travel 
some distance for formal sports, funds can only be used within the area and if easily accessible from 
the funding development, thereby ensuring a direct relationship between a facility and the funding 
development. 
3.340 CASUAL/CHILDREN’S PLAY SPACE - With regard to funds raised in lieu of physical provision 
f
or children’ s play these can only be used within 100m (on a LAP), 400m (on a LEAP) or 1000m (on 
a NEAP) of the funding development, so as to ensure a direct relationship between the new 
development and the future investment of the contributions. 
118 PPG17 Study available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 112 
The Strategy3 
3.341 It is clear that some commuted payments, in themselves, are not adequate to bring about 
improvements immediately. When funds are added to by other commuted payments and thresholds 
are reached monies will be employed as soon as possible to improve facilities. It is necessary for the 
Council to hold the funds for a reasonable period of time to allow this process to take place. The 
Council accepts that it will refund any monies which remain unspent after 8 years from the date of 
payment.The Council, resources permitting, may use some of its own money to supplement commuted 
payments. 
3.342 Further information on the implementation of this policy is currently provided in the related 
Supplementar
y Planning Guidance - Recreational Open Space Provision and Commuted Payments(119) , 
which includes more detailed information such as the commuted sum cost in respect of provision (per 
person) and the maintenance cost. The intention is that this will be updated to reflect changes to 
political boundaries within the borough and to the cost of provision as well as to reflect the adoption 
of the Core Strategy. 
Table 3 Play Facilities 
Population 
(approx) Characteristics Nearest 
House 
(Property 
Boundary) Minimum Size 
Straight-line 
Distance Walking 
DistanceTime Facility Total 
(Including 
Buffer) Activity 
Zone 
50 Small, low-key 
games area 5m from 
Activity 
Zone 400m2100m260m 100m1 
minute LAP 
(Local Area for 
Play) (may include 
“demonstrative” 
play features) 
510 About 5 types of 
equipment.20m from 
Activity 
Zone 3600m2400m2240m 400m5 
minutes LEAP 
(Local Equipped 
Area for Play) Small Games 
Area 
1210 About 8 types of 
equipment. 30m from 
Activity 
Zone 8500m21000m2600m 1000m15 
minutes NEAP 
(Neighbourhood 
Equipped Area 
for Play) Kickabout and 
cycle play 
opportunities 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.343 The AMR includes a Local Indicator (LI8) which monitors the amount of children's play and 
casual recreational f
acility provided from new development. The indicator sets a target of seeking to 
achieve 1.7 hectares of formal facilities per 1000 population and 0.7 hectares of children's play facilities 
per 1000 population. 
3.344 The Council will endeavour to establish monitoring of the performance of accessible natural 
g
reenspace in line with the Accessible Natural Greenspace Standard (ANGSt). 
119 Available via www.stockport.gov.uk/spd 113 
3 The Strategy 
Development Management Policy SIE-3 
Protecting, Safeguarding and enhancing the Environment 
What we're going to do or require: 
A) PROTECTING THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
3.345 The borough's varying urban and rural landscapes, biodiversity, geodiversity and soils 
combine to create a unique and distinctiv
e local character of considerable value to residents and 
visitors alike.This locally distinctive sense of place and character will be maintained and enhanced 
as follows: 
The Borough's urban and rural landscape will be conserved and enhanced in line with the 
borough's Landscape Character Assessment. The current preliminary assessment detailed 
in the Stockport UDP Review will be reviewed so as to inform the Allocations DPD and the 
future consideration of development proposals.This will ensure that the landscape as a whole 
can be managed, protected and enhanced; 
Net loss of biodiversity and geodiversity will be prevented by applying a hierarchical approach 
to conserving and enhancing the network of nationally, regionally and locally designated sites 
and habitats; 
Applications  for developments that would result in harm to the borough's biodiversity and 
geological conservation interests will be determined in accordance with the key principles 
set out in PPS9 (Biodiversity and Geological Conservation) and in particular sub-paragraph 
1(vi); and 
Opportunities  and locations for biodiversity enhancements will be identified and pursued by 
the creation, protection, enhancement, extension and management of green corridors through 
the development of green infrastructure networks in urban and rural areas to improve 
connectivity between habitats. 
3.346 Planning applications should identify mitigation measures that keep disturbance to a 
minim
um and provide alternative habitats to sustain at least the current level of population as well 
as setting out a long-term management plan for the site. Proposals to create new Local Nature 
Reserves (where resources merit the designation) and other areas of ecologically beneficial natural 
habitat will be welcomed. Development should provide access to nature conservation areas for 
recreational and educational purposes, where appropriate. 
3.347 Development proposals affecting trees, woodland and other vegetation which make a 
positiv
e contribution to amenity should make provision for the retention of the vegetation unless 
there is justification for felling, topping or lopping to enable the development to take place.  Even 
where there is a strong justification for a proposal the design should maximise the potential for 
retaining some mature planting, and replacement planting of appropriate species and covering a 
similar area should be provided within the site or nearby.  Proposals that will result in an increase 
in the woodland cover of the borough (including planting of trees as a bio-fuel crop) will be given 
positive consideration as long as it is not harmful to existing habitats or eco-systems.  Proposals 
that involve the multi-purpose use of woodland, such as amenity, recreation, wildlife, education 
or bio-fuel or timber production will be permitted provided that: 
Proposals are accompanied by a woodland management plan; 114 
The Strategy3 
The woodland is of a scale capable of absorbing the proposal without damage; and 
There  is no adverse effect on the integrity of an Ancient Woodland. 
B) CONTROLLING POLLUTION 
3.348 New development that seeks to reduce air, noise, light, water or ground pollution in areas 
or locations where acceptab
le standards are already exceeded will be given positive consideration. 
New housing or other environmentally sensitive development will not be permitted where existing 
pollution levels are unacceptable and where there is no reasonable prospect that they can be 
satisfactorily reduced through specific measures or action programmes.  In particular: 
AIR QUALITY: An Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) has been declared under the 
provisions of the National Local Air Quality Strategy and is subject to revision on a biennial 
basis.  All development should be designed so as to ensure that adequate levels of air quality 
are achieved within buildings.  Development that assists in reducing the existing levels of 
poor air quality within the declared AQMA will be given positive consideration.  Development 
that would exacerbate the existing poor air quality levels within the AQMA will be permitted 
only where it is demonstrated that that exacerbation will be mitigated. 
NOISE  AND VIBRATION - In order to safeguard recreational and other activities within river 
valleys and other areas that are dependent on quiet conditions for their proper enjoyment 
development that introduces unacceptable noise levels will not be allowed.  Development 
that will result in an unacceptable impact on the occupiers of dwellings or other environmentally 
sensitive properties in terms of vibration will also not be allowed.  In some parts of the borough 
constraints will be placed upon development so as to avoid unacceptable levels of noise from 
aircraft using Manchester Airport. 
1. In areas where day-time (7am - 11pm) noise levels are in excess of 72 Leq or night-time 
(11pm - 7am) levels are in excess of 66 Leq planning permission will be refused for new 
dwellings and conversions to residential accommodation will only be permitted provided 
that the proposal incorporates noise attenuation measures that would result in a night-time 
noise level within the building (with windows closed) of less than 35 dB(A) Leq. 
2. In areas where day-time noise levels are between 66 and 72 Leq or night-time levels are 
between 60 and 66 Leq or where individual noise events of aircraft regularly exceed 
82dBLA Max (S time weighting) several times in any one hour during the night, planning 
permission will not be granted for new dwellings unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise (in such cases conditions will be imposed to ensure a commensurate level of 
protection against noise within the dwelling).  Conversions to residential accommodation 
will be permitted but the requirement for protection against noise within the dwelling will 
be the same as that for any new dwellings. 
3. In areas subject to day-time noise levels between 57 and 66 Leq or night-time levels 
betw
een 48 and 60 Leq, planning permission for new dwellings will be granted subject 
to other planning policies and to conditions (where appropriate) to ensure an adequate 
level of protection against noise in dwellings. 
4. Planning permission for other noise sensitive development under the flight path to 
Manchester Air
port, such as offices, hospitals and schools will only be granted where it 
has been demonstrated that the proposed development would not be subject to 
unacceptable levels of aircraft noise. This will be assessed having regard to the aircraft 
noise contours, the nature of the use or uses, the time of day or night when noise sensitive 
elements of the use operate and the standards of proposed noise insulation within 
buildings. Account will also be taken of the extent, if any, to which the proposed 115 
3 The Strategy 
development is required to replace existing facilities which serve the existing local 
community and the availability of alternative sites. 
LIGHT  - Development involving floodlighting or other significant external lighting will only be 
permitted where the proposed lighting is the minimum necessary for its purpose and where 
appropriate landscaping measures to screen lighting installations from view cannot ameliorate 
any detrimental effect on: 
1. residential amenities or the users of commercial or other premises; 
2. areas of nature conservation interest; 
3. the night-time environment of Landscape Character Areas or areas of Strategic Open 
Space; 
4. the visibility of the night sky; or 
5. users of nearby highways or flightpaths through dazzling or distraction. 
WATER  - New development will only normally be permitted where foul sewers and sewage 
treatment works of adequate capacity and design are available or will be provided in time to 
serve the development. Maintaining or enhancing the water quality of rivers, canals, lakes, 
ponds and other water bodies is important to protect the wide range of benefits and uses that 
such features have. Groundwater resources are an essential source of water for public supply, 
industry and agriculture as well as sustaining the base flow of many rivers; development that 
is likely to lead to an adverse impact on groundwater resources in terms of their quantity, 
quality and the ecological features they support will not be granted planning permission. 
GROUND  - Development of contaminated land will be permitted provided that it can be clearly 
demonstrated that there is no remaining risk from contaminants or that satisfactory measures 
can be taken to make the site suitable for its proposed use. Those seeking to develop in 
proximity to contaminated land will also be required to demonstrate that the development will 
not be adversely affected by contaminants. The reclamation of derelict and vacant land will 
be permitted so long as: 
1. they remove any risks to personal safety; 
2. they use sites in the urban area for appropriate built end purposes, or as open space; 
3. they provide benefits to the character and appearance of the area and/or to biodiversity; 
and 
4. they re-use suitable land for recreational purposes. 
ODOUR  AND LITTER - Development that results in the production of litter or unacceptable 
levels of odour will not be permitted. 
C) MANAGING FLOOD RISK 
3.349 All development will be expected to comply with the approach set out in PPS25 Annex 
D or an
y superseding national policy. 
3.350 Development within Critical Drainage Areas (CDAs) will be expected to have floor levels 
at a minim
um of 300mm above road level so as to reduce the risk of damage being caused by 
surface water flooding.  Achievement of this requirement must be without detriment to accessibility 
or high quality design. 
3.351 Where planning permission is required, areas of hard-standing or other surfaces, should 
be of a per
meable construction or drain to an alternative form of SuDS. 116 
The Strategy3 
D) PROTECTING THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
3.352 Development which preserves or enhances the special architectural, artistic, historic or 
archaeological significance of her
itage assets will be welcomed.  Heritage assets include buildings, 
sites, places, areas or landscapes positively identified as having a degree of significance meriting 
consideration in planning decisions. 
3.353 Loss or harm to the significance of a heritage asset, through alteration, destruction or 
de
velopment within its setting, will require clear and convincing justification. Substantial harm or 
loss to designated heritage assets will only be permitted if: 
1. there is clear evidence that there is no viable means of securing its preservation and that no 
viab
le alternative use can be found; or 
2. that the benefits to the community resulting from redevelopment would decisively outweigh 
the loss resulting from demolition. 
3.354 New uses will be permitted for statutorily or locally listed buildings if: 
1. the use for which the building was designed is no longer viable in economic terms or cannot 
eff
ectively be carried out without harming the architectural or historic interest of the building; 
2. the proposed use would preserve the architectural or historic interest of the building, its fabric, 
inter
ior and setting; and 
3. the proposal would not detract from the amenities of the surrounding areas or cause traffic 
danger
. 
3.355 Where a new use is acceptable the Council may relax controls over land use, density, 
plot r
atio and other matters of detail where this facilitates the preservation of the listed building. 
3.356 Development will not be permitted if it would significantly alter, damage or destroy a 
Scheduled Ancient Mon
ument or other important archaeological site, its setting or amenity value, 
unless overriding justification is demonstrated commensurate with the importance of the site. 
3.357 Prior to determining applications for development proposals where a site is expected to 
re
veal material of archaeological importance prospective developers will be required to carry out 
an archaeological field evaluation. Where that evaluation indicates that remains of archaeological 
importance are likely to be present and where it is not considered essential or feasible to preserve 
remains in situ developers will be required to excavate and record archaeological evidence prior 
to the development commencing. Where remains of archaeological or heritage value are preserved 
in situ opportunities should be sought to provide interpretive information explaining the significance 
and context of the remains. 
3.358 Innovative regeneration proposals will be welcomed for the reuse and retention of mill 
b
uildings which are of historic value.  Re-use will be considered acceptable in situations where 
there is no current use or where retention of an existing use is either no longer viable or cannot 
continue without causing harm to the historic value of the building. 
E) LAND STABILITY 
3.359 Development involving the excavation of land or the extraction of materials from the 
g
round will be permitted where it is demonstrated that the stability of surrounding land (and 
buildings or structures upon it) is not compromised. 117 
3 The Strategy 
3.360 On land which is known to be unstable, or where there is a reasonable likelihood of 
instability, development will be permitted only where the developer has undertaken thorough 
investigation and assessment of the ground to ensure that it is stable or that any actual or potential 
instability can be overcome by appropriate remedial, preventive or precautionary measures. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
A) PROTECTING THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
3.361 The following features are considered to be important for their linear and continuous structure 
or function as stepping stones
, their contribution towards a Borough-wide network of natural greenspace, 
the role they play in providing essential habitat for Biodiversity Action Plan species, their migration 
and dispersal and, also, the contribution they make towards protection against pollution, flooding, 
climate change and other environmental change: 
hedgerows; 
ditches and banks; 
dry stone walls; 
verges; 
tree belts and individual trees; 
plantations and small woods; 
unimproved/semi-improved grassland; 
heathland; 
river corridors; 
canals; and 
lakes, lodges, ponds and reservoirs, 
3.362 Appropriate management of these features will be encouraged generally and particularly by 
the imposition of conditions and/or planning agreements and by entering into management agreements 
with the landowners and developers where appropriate. 
3.363 Significant ecological losses are defined as those species and habitats listed within Greater 
Manchester
’s and Stockport's Biodiversity Action Plans (BAPs) as being a priority or of conservation 
concern. Where appropriate the Council will require development proposals to include measures to 
create new features of nature conservation value, having particular regard to BAP targets. 
3.364 The Council is committed to protecting and enhancing biodiversity and local distinctiveness 
and this can only be achie
ved if development is carried out in such a way as to recognise the value 
of the wider environment and those natural features and habitats that give local distinctiveness and 
character. Where development that adversely affects such features, habitats or species is permitted, 
the siting and layout of buildings and any associated landscaping schemes will be required to retain 
and protect existing habitats.Where retention is not feasible alternative habitats should be established. 
3.365 Where proposals seek to create new areas of habitat, either as Local Nature Reserves, areas 
of w
oodland or other areas of ecologically beneficial natural habitat, it should be designed within the 
context of the Greater Manchester Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP)(120), the Stockport Action Plan for 
Nature(121) and any other relevant plans, strategies or guidance. 
120 Greater Manchester Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
121 Stockport Action Plan for Nature available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 118 
The Strategy3 
3.366 A detailed landscaping scheme will normally be required for significant development schemes. 
The appropriate form of landscaping and habitat provision will vary according to the location and nature 
of the particular site. Proposals might however, involve: 
Tree planting and shrub planting, using appropriate locally native species; 
Creation  of hedgerows and shelter belts; 
Creation  of ponds and other wetland features; and 
Creation  of species rich grassland or meadow areas. 
3.367 Landscaping schemes should include an indication of intended planting times and the 
arr
angements that are to be made for maintenance, replacement and ongoing management. 
3.368 The promotion of public access will take account of the need to maintain the wildlife value of 
sites
.Wildlife refuges or sanctuaries free from recreational pressure will be provided where necessary. 
Where recreation use is appropriate, particular attention will be paid to ways of improving access for 
people with disabilities. 
3.369 It is necessary wherever protected species may be affected by development, for a full and 
proper sur
vey to be undertaken prior to the determination of an application. The developer must also 
submit a detailed mitigation package. Where development is permitted which is likely to affect protected 
species or their habitat (including the potential of trees and woodlands to provide roosts or nesting 
sites for bats and/or birds) planning conditions or agreements will be used, where it can be demonstrated 
by the applicant that these could mitigate any impact and secure the protection of the species. Where 
additional planting is required under such conditions or agreements it must be carried out at the same 
time as the development, insofar as seasonal and operational considerations permit. 
3.370 Trees and woodlands are vital in maintaining and improving the quality of life for the inhabitants 
of the Borough. 
Within the town they enhance urban amenity by providing a pleasant natural contrast 
to the built environment, screen unsightly structures and activities and assist in ameliorating the urban 
heat island effect (see Development Management Policy SD-6 'Adapting to the Impacts of Climate 
Change'). In the countryside trees make an important contribution towards the rural landscape. 
Throughout the Borough trees and w
oodlands provide rich habitats for flora and fauna. Many are 
ancient woodlands and are recognised as having Special Nature Conservation Interest. In addition 
they may be of value as areas for recreational and educational pursuits. Trees play an important part 
in maintaining the vital supply of oxygen in the atmosphere, in “locking-in”  carbon dioxide and combating 
climate change. 
3.371 The Council will, wherever necessary and appropriate, use its powers to control development 
and mak
e Tree Preservation Orders in order to protect the Borough’ s trees and woodlands. 
B) CONTROLLING POLLUTION 
3.372 The Council, the Environment Agency and other bodies have powers to control pollution and 
license emissions under en
vironmental health and other legislation. It is not the function of this policy 
to duplicate these powers. However, the planning system has an important role to play in determining 
the location of potentially polluting development as well as controlling other development in proximity 
to any sources of pollution.This policy is therefore concerned with the pollution effects of development 
or the use of land.  In assessing development proposals regard will be had to available scientific 
evidence and the advice of relevant pollution control authorities and Environmental Health officers will 
be sought. Where required to safeguard planning interests which lie outside the scope of the relevant 
pollution control authority, planning conditions or obligations to control pollution aspects of development 119 
3 The Strategy 
will be used. Examples may include restrictions on the hours of operation, measures to attenuate 
noise levels or to ensure the proper restoration of contaminated sites. 
3.373 AIR QUALITY: The corr idors of the M60 and A6 are the principal concentration of air pollution 
in the Borough (nitrogen dioxide, NO2, being the principal problem), though other key routes (including 
the A34) are included within the Air Quality Management Area. It is required that development is 
designed so as to ensure that adequate levels of air quality are achieved within buildings, pending 
improvements in the wider environment. The prime consideration, however, is that air quality in these 
corridors should be improved, rather than that development should be constrained because of current 
air quality problems. Further information on the type or scale of development which might so exacerbate 
pollution levels within the AQMA that air quality would fail acceptable standards is contained within 
the Greater Manchester Air Quality Action Plan(122) . With regards to air quality this policy should be 
read in close conjunction with Core Policy CS10 'AN EFFECTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT 
NETWORK'. 
3.374 NOISE AND VIBRATION: Obtrusive noise and unacceptable levels of vibration are 
consider
able factors in the enjoyment of tranquil areas of the borough, most notably the river valleys 
and other areas used for (informal) recreational purposes, but also in the enjoyment of residential 
amenity. The policy seeks to control obtrusive noise unacceptable levels of vibration so as to not 
detract from tranquillity and/or residential amenity. 
3.375 The borough has specific noise issues relating to its position under the flight-path in/out of 
Manchester Air
port.  It is therefore necessary to control the type of land uses and the level of noise 
insulation in development within those areas that are particularly affected. The policy, in this regard, 
is intended to limit the impact of aircraft noise on residents, workers and other building occupants in 
accordance with national policy. The noise levels in the policy are adapted from the Noise Exposure 
Categories in Annex 1 to PPG24 and reflect the Council's concern to protect the amenity of occupiers 
of new dwellings affected by aircraft noise. For explanations of the terms “Leq”, “dBLA”  and “S time 
weighting”  see Glossary. 
3.376 The World Health Organisation advises that for night-time: “ based on limited data available 
a level of less than 35 dB(A) is recommended to preserve the restorative process of sleep”. Where 
appropriate therefore the Council will require sound insulation of dwellings, including conversions, 
sufficient to achieve this level. The Council will advise on sound insulation measures but the onus will 
be on the applicant to demonstrate that the requisite noise attenuation will be achieved. 
3.377 LIGHT: PPS23 “ Planning and Pollution Control”  Appendix A, 2004, indicates that light pollution 
is an appropriate environmental consideration for development plans.The benefits of properly designed 
lighting for security, heritage and environmental enhancement are recognised. Ill-considered, excessive 
or poorly designed lighting can, however, cause a range of problems including sleep disturbance, 
damage to visual amenity, impaired astronomy and ecological effects. It can also be wasteful of energy. 
A combination of proper design and the use of appropriate technology can generally overcome light 
pollution problems without conflicting with the principles of crime prevention and safety. 
3.378 Many lighting installations are not subject to planning permission. In carrying out its street 
lighting function the Council tak
es account of best practice on reducing light pollution, though safety 
and security must also be considered. Where planning permission is required, applications should be 
accompanied by full details of any external lighting. Careful attention should be paid to siting, shielding, 
the direction of light, height of installations and brightness. Conditions will be used to control light 
122 Available at www.stockport.gov.uk/airquality 120 
The Strategy3 
intensity, spillage and hours of use (for example at sports facilities).  Developers are advised to refer 
to best practice guidance including that produced by the Institute of Lighting Engineers(123) . 
3.379 WATER:  Control of potential pollution threats to w ater is largely a matter for the Environment 
Agency and other (non-planning) statutory functions of the Council.  In considering planning applications 
the Council will consult with the Environment Agency, Environmental Health officers and other authorities 
with a legitimate interest so as to determine whether or not there may be an unacceptable level of 
risk.  Particular attention will be paid to potential increased flows and pollution effects in proposals 
relating to previously developed land. 
3.380 GROUND: The Council remains committed to reducing dereliction, and v acant land and 
buildings in the Borough, and the policy sets down the broad criteria to be applied in selecting priorities 
for action. Within the land use policy framework of the Core Strategy the Council will encourage the 
private sector in its important role in the reclamation of land and buildings and where appropriate will 
seek to work in partnership with the private sector. 
3.381 The Council will seek to retain existing wildlife habitats where possible and opportunities will 
be sought to create wildlif
e habitats in the reclamation of contaminated derelict and vacant land, with 
natural regeneration being generally encouraged. Woodland creation can have an important role in 
land reclamation and decontamination. 
3.382 ODOUR AND LITTER: Control of odour and litter from developments will be controlled so 
as to not har
m amenity, particularly in relation to the natural environment, residential properties or 
other sensitive locations. The control of odour and litter is particularly important so as to minimise the 
likelihood that problems will arise relating to birds or vermin. 
C) MANAGING FLOOD RISK 
3.383 The effect of flooding on development, and the impact which new development may have on 
flood r
isk, is an important issue in making land use decisions. Flood risk is expected to increase as a 
result of climate change. The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)(124) clearly defines flood zones 
for the Borough in line with the approach set out in PPS25 and provides the necessary evidence to 
support applying the approach in PPS25 Annex D when considering applications for planning 
permission. 
3.384 Where development in flood risk areas is permitted following consultation with the Environment 
Agency
, appropriate flood protection or mitigation measures will be required as part of the development 
unless existing flood defences can be shown to be adequate. Funding of such measures will be the 
responsibility of the developer, either directly or through contributions secured by a Section 106 
agreement. Without such provision, applications will be refused, in line with the approach set out in 
PPS25. 
3.385 The requirement for all new development within Critical Drainage Areas to have a finished 
floor le
vel a minimum of 300mm above road level is a direct recommendation of the SFRA.  Such 
measures are essential so as to reduce the likelihood that properties will be inundated by surface 
water in the event of a flood event. 
3.386 Since October 2008 planning permission has been required for the laying of new or replacement 
hard surf
aces (above 5sqm) at the front of dwellings where they are of impermeable (non-porous) 
construction. The reason for this is to reduce problems caused by heavy rainfall running off private 
123 Institute of Lighting Engineers available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
124 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 121 
3 The Strategy 
properties and inundating highway and other drainage systems. This problem is expected to be 
worsened by increasing incidents of extreme weather as a result of climate change. The use of 
impermeable surfacing, therefore, will not be permitted unless it is designed in such a way as to drain 
into an alternative form of SuDS. 
3.387 This part of the policy is of specific relevance to Development Management Policy SD-6 
'Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change'. 
D) PROTECTING THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
3.388 In January 2008 the Council adopted A Conservation & Heritage Strategy for Stockport(125) . 
This sets out a comprehensive and integrated approach forming the basis for conservation and heritage 
activities in the Borough 2008-2011. The aims of the strategy were to identify and raise awareness of 
Stockport’ s heritage assets, promote the opportunities for those assets to contribute to the wider 
regeneration and development of the Borough, and foster their continued use, enjoyment and access 
for present and future generations. 
3.389 In accordance with Government advice in PPS5 the Council considers that there should be 
a presumption in f
avour of the conservation of designated heritage assets. In considering the impact 
of a proposal on any heritage asset, the Council will take into account the particular nature of the 
significance of the heritage asset and the value that it holds for this and future generations. This 
understanding shall be used to avoid or minimise the conflict between the heritage asset’ s conservation 
and any aspect of the proposals. In this regard the Council will be guided by the advice given in PPS5 
and the associated Historic Environment Practice Guide (or subsequent, superseding national policy 
or guidance). Where the loss of the whole or a material part of a heritage asset’ s significance is 
justified, the Council will require the developer to record and advance understanding of the significance 
of the heritage asset before it is lost. 
3.390 The Council maintains data to assess the type, numbers, distribution, significance and condition 
of her
itage assets within the Borough. The Stockport Historic Environment Database(126) contains 
publicly accessible information on heritage assets and this is supplemented by archaeological data 
contained within the Greater Manchester Historic Environment Record database maintained by the 
Greater Manchester Archaeology Unit and English Heritage Heritage at Risk Registers. 
3.391 The Council will seek to retain the use of a listed building for the purpose for which it was 
designed.
 However, it recognises that often continuation of the original use is no longer a practical 
proposition and retention and enhancement of the building may depend on finding an appropriate 
alternative use for it. In considering whether a proposed use is appropriate, the Council will pay 
particular attention to the extent to which the significance of the building and its setting would be 
preserved. 
3.392 A flexible approach to planning applications for changes of use of listed buildings will be 
adopted b
y the Council, where necessary, subject to the above. In addition the Council will need to 
be satisfied that the proposed change of use and any associated works would not unduly detract from 
the local environment, for example, annoyance to neighbouring residents through noise, or danger to 
users of the highway through significant additional traffic on inadequate roads. 
3.393 There are many fine heritage assets which, whilst not justifying statutorily designated status, 
are of local or regional significance and which, as f
ar as possible, should be retained and enhanced. 
Although there may be no statutory protection for heritage assets of local or regional interest, their 
125 A Conservation & Heritage Strategy for Stockport available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
126 Stockport Historic Environment Database available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 122 
The Strategy3 
identification will ensure that owners, developers and other interested parties are aware of their 
significance. In this way the Council, through the control of development or by giving advice, will seek 
sensitive treatment wherever proposals may impact upon them. 
3.394 In line with the advice given in PPS5 (or subsequent, superseding national policy), the Council 
will seek to preser
ve archaeological remains identified and scheduled as being of national importance 
and also other unscheduled archaeological remains of local or regional importance. Development 
which would threaten their preservation in situ will be opposed unless, after balancing the need for 
the development and any mitigating measures against the importance of the archaeological remains, 
the Council concludes that an overriding case for the development has been established. Under these 
circumstances the Council will seek recording of archaeological evidence. 
3.395 There are six Scheduled Monuments (SAMs) in the Borough.These are subject to the statutory 
pro
visions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act, 1979. These sites are identified 
on the Proposals Map. 
3.396 In reconciling the need for development with the interests of archaeology it is important that 
the best possib
le information is available on the location and value of archaeological remains to guide 
decision making. The Greater Manchester Historic Record (HER) is maintained by the Greater 
Manchester Archaeological Unit for use in the planning process. Only the nationally important Scheduled 
Monuments are shown on the Proposals Map but there are other, locally important, sites that need to 
share the presumption against destruction or damage accorded to the scheduled sites. In some 
situations it may be possible to design development schemes to satisfactorily safeguard archaeological 
remains. Maintenance and development of the HER will better inform decision making in respect of 
archaeological remains. The HER and additional information from field evaluations associated with 
development proposals will facilitate consideration of the weight to be attached to archaeological 
interests where development would affect unscheduled sites and monuments. 
3.397 In situations where it is suspected that important archaeological remains exist on a site of 
proposed de
velopment, developers will be required to arrange for an archaeological field evaluation 
to be carried out before any decision on the planning application is taken. Such an evaluation should 
assess the archaeological potential of the site and the likely nature of any remains. It should, as far 
as practicable, provide information on their character and condition, the likely impact of the proposed 
development, and any mitigating measures that may be employed. Evaluations should be commissioned 
from an appropriately qualified independent consultant. 
3.398 Nationally important sites should be preserved in situ, whether or not they are Scheduled 
Mon
uments. For other sites it is preferable for sites and remains to be preserved in situ. Where the 
Council considers that this is not essential or reasonably feasible it will seek the prospective developer's 
agreement to carry out an excavation of the site in order to enable the archaeological evidence of the 
site to be recorded prior to development commencing. Publication of the archaeological evidence 
resulting from the excavation will be required. The Council regards preservation by record as a less 
satisfactory option. 
3.399 Where archaeological remains are discovered after planning permission has been granted 
and de
velopment has begun, for example during site preparation works, the Council will seek evaluation 
of the remains. Where these are shown to be of importance the Council will seek the developer's 
agreement to accommodate the remains within the scope of the development. If agreement cannot 
be reached between the Council, the developer and archaeologists, the Council will, if the archaeological 
remains so warrant, seek the advice of the Secretary of State with regard to the scheduling of the 
remains. 123 
3 The Strategy 
E) LAND INSTABILITY 
3.400 PPG14 (Development on Unstable Land) sets out that: 
"The effects of ground instability vary in their nature, scale and extent. At their most extreme, 
the
y may threaten life and health or cause damage to buildings and structures, so generating 
public alarm. Whilst such alarm may or may not be justified, public perception of the risk is such 
that it cannot be ignored." 
3.401 The approach set out in PPG14 (or subsequent, superseding national policy or guidance) 
should be f
ollowed in relation to all development on unstable land or land where there is a reasonable 
likelihood of instability and also in relation to development which has the potential to cause instability, 
such as mineral extraction or the excavation of land.  In the case of mineral extraction particular regard 
should be had to guidance set out in the suite of Minerals Planning Statements / Guidance (MPS/G) 
notes produced by the Government. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.402 The AMR includes the following Core Indicators: 
E2 - which records changes in areas of biodiversity importance. The target within the Core 
Str
ategy is to ensure no net loss occurs as a result of development. 
E1 - which records the number of permissions granted contrary to the Environment Agency on 
flooding and water quality grounds. 
3.403 The AMR will monitor the number of developments where permission has been granted 
contr
ary to the advice of Environmental Health Officers with regards to air quality and noise pollution. 
3.404 The AMR includes the following Local Indicators: 
LI20 Proportion of the area of developed land that is vacant or derelict for more than 5 years. 
LI23 Number and siz
e of Conservation Areas. Target: no loss 
LI24 Number of listed buildings / historic parks and gardens / scheduled monuments / buildings 
of local interest / HER entries. Target: no loss. 
Development Management Policy SIE-4 
Hazardous Installations 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.405 Only if it is demonstrated that the risks to people and the environment are acceptable 
and that there are no viable alternative with a lesser risk will positive consideration will be given 
to: 
1. New establishments where hazardous substances are present or are likely to be present; 
2. Modifications at existing establishments where hazardous substances are present; and 
3. New developments in the vicinity of existing establishments, installations or infrastructure 
where hazardous substances are present, where the siting of the proposed development is 
such as to increase the risks or consequences of a major accident. 124 
The Strategy3 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.406 Certain sites and pipelines are designated as notifiable installations by virtue of the quantities 
of hazardous substance present. 
The siting of such installations will be subject to planning controls 
aimed at keeping these separated from housing and other land uses with which such installations 
might be incompatible from the safety viewpoint. The presence of hazardous substances above 
specified quantities requires consent under the Planning (Hazardous Substances) Act 1990 and 
associated Regulations. Pipelines are subject to the Pipelines Act 1962 and associated Regulations. 
3.407 Borough already contains a number of installations handling notifiable substances, including 
pipelines
. Whilst they are subject to stringent controls under existing health and safety legislation, it 
is considered prudent to control the kinds of development permitted in the vicinity of these installations. 
For this reason the Council has been advised by the Health and Safety Executive that they should be 
consulted upon any planning applications within a given specific distance of each of these installations. 
3.408 Existing notifiable sites in Stockport are: 
Gas Holders, Mersey Street, Portwood (British Gas Transco) – consultation distance 60m; and 
Br
amhall Oil Terminal (Conoco, Poynton) – consultation distance 250m. 
3.409 Existing notifiable pipelines in Stockport are: 
18 inch Partington/Stockport (gas) – consultation distance 16m; 
18 inch Stoc
kport/Denton (gas) – consultation distance 16m; 
8 inch Stockport/New Mills (gas) – consultation distance 47m; and 
24 inch Stretford/Kingsway/Denton (gas) – consultation distance 16m. 
3.410 In addition to the above notifiable installations the following pipeline routes within the Borough 
are subject to saf
eguarding: 
High pressure Government oil pipelines serving Bramhall Oil Terminal - new development should 
not interf
ere with these pipelines. Access for maintenance must be afforded at all times without 
any obstruction and no works whatsoever including landscaping, tipping, or lowering or raising 
of ground levels shall take place within a distance of 10 feet on either side of a pipeline without 
the prior consent of the Secretary of State; and 
Goyt-Audenshaw Water Pipeline. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.411 The AMR will report on the percentage of applications requiring consultation with the Health 
and Saf
ety Executive which are determined in line with their consultation response. Target: 100%. 
Development Management Policy SIE-5 
Aviation Facilities,Telecommunications and other Broadcast Infrastructure 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.412 Development which would adversely affect the operational integrity or safety of Manchester 
Air
port, Manchester Radar or Woodford Aerodrome will not be permitted. 125 
3 The Strategy 
3.413 Proposals for telecommunications development which would improve existing operational 
facilities or a new development which would improve present service provision will be permitted 
provided that, having due regard to operational efficiency: 
1. The proposal would not have an unacceptable effect on the character or appearance of the 
locality
, the visual amenities of residential occupiers or the free and safe flow of traffic on 
adjoining highways; 
2. The siting and external appearance of apparatus, including any landscaping, have been 
designed to minimise the visual impact of the appar
atus, taking into account the landscape 
or townscape context of the site; 
3. There is no reasonable possibility of sharing existing facilities or, in the case of masts, of 
erecting antennae on an e
xisting building, mast or other structure; 
4. Applicants have considered the need to include additional structural capacity to take account 
of the g
rowing demands for network development, including that of other operators; and 
5. Applicants can demonstrate that the proposal will meet current Government guidelines with 
regard to possib
le health impacts. 
3.414 Proposals involving large structures that might be harmful to existing telecommunications 
or other broadcast signals will be required to demonstr
ate what harm, if any, will occur and bring 
about any necessary remedial action (either at the structure or at the point at which the signal is 
received). 
3.415 Where telecommunications development by or on behalf of a telecommunications code 
system oper
ator falls within permitted development rights the Council will require that approval 
of the details of siting and appearance is obtained if it appears to the Council that changes to one 
or both of these, or other reasonable measures such as landscaping, are necessary in order to 
minimise the effect of the proposal on visual amenity. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.416 Safeguarding zones around airports and aerodromes are established by the Secretary of 
State and defined on saf
eguarding maps issued by the Civil Aviation Authority and the Secretary of 
State for Defence.They define certain types of development which, by reason of their height, attraction 
to birds or inclusion of or effect on aviation activity require prior consultation with the airport or 
aerodrome operator. Safeguarding zones around air navigation facilities are established by National 
Air Traffic Services Ltd (NATS) and defined on safeguarding maps issued by them.They define certain 
types of development which because of their height or effect on aviation activity require prior consultation 
with NATS. Government advice in ODPM Circular 01/2003 sets out detailed guidance on how the 
safe and efficient operations can be secured.These areas are neither the responsibility nor the proposal 
of the Council as local planning authority. 
3.417 The safeguarding zones for Manchester Airport and Woodford Aerodrome cover significant 
areas of the Borough. 
The main implications for types of development which will require consultation 
are: 
Any proposal likely to attract birds, such as proposals involving significant tree planting, minerals 
e
xtraction or quarrying, waste disposal or management, reservoirs or other significant areas of 
surface water, land restoration schemes, sewage works, nature reserves or bird sanctuaries in 
any part of the Borough; 
Applications connected with an aviation use in any part of the Borough; 126 
The Strategy3 
All development in the western part of Heald Green; in the immediate vicinity of Woodford 
Aerodrome, including the Bridle Road area; and in the Mellor Moor area, including part of Mellor; 
Buildings  and structures over 15 metres (49.2 feet) in the eastern part of Heald Green; the southern 
part of Gatley; western parts of Bramhall and Cheadle Hulme, including Cheadle Hulme District 
Centre; most of Woodford village; Ludworth Moor and Mellor Moorend; and high ground east of 
Wybersley Road, High Lane; 
Buildings  and structures over 45 metres (147.6 feet) in most of Gatley; the western part of Cheadle 
including the District Centre; the Kitts Moss and Pownall Green areas of Bramhall, including 
Bramhall District Centre; the Jacksons Lane area of Hazel Grove and the Ladybrook Valley to 
the south; High Lane, Hawk Green, Marple Ridge and the central areas of Marple; and parts of 
Mellor, Mill Brow and Lane Ends; and 
Buildings  and structures over 90 metres (295.3 feet) in all remaining parts of the Borough with 
the exception of North Reddish and the Northern part of Woodley. 
3.418 In the control of development reference will be made to the detailed safeguarding maps 
supplied b
y the Civil Aviation Authority, the Secretary of State for Defence and NATS. The forms of 
development listed above are those specified by the safeguarding maps. However, on a precautionary 
basis, consultations should be made for any proposals involving: 
the propagation of radio or microwaves in locations which might affect avionics equipment, e.g. 
close to the aerodromes or flight paths (note: consultation is required by the GPDO on masts 
erected under permitted development rights within 3km of aerodrome perimeters); and 
street  lighting, floodlighting, searchlights, illuminated advertising or laser displays which may 
present a confusing image to pilots on the approach to a runway . 
3.419 Consultations in respect of Manchester Airport, Manchester Radar, Manchester DVOR (NATS) 
and 
Woodford Aerodrome (Defence Estates) will be carried out in respect of all wind turbine 
development where planning permission is required. 
3.420 The Council recognises the importance of modern communications to the life of the local 
comm
unity and to the economy and that a balance must be struck between making reasonable 
provision for telecommunications development and the need to protect and enhance the environment. 
The impact of telecommunications development can be minimised by the sharing of installations, such 
as masts, and by providing facilities underground on large new developments, such as housing estates. 
The impact of telecommunications apparatus can also be reduced by careful siting and design, for 
example siting an antenna against a backdrop of buildings and by colouring it to merge with that 
backdrop. 
3.421 In situations where there is special concern for visual amenity or heritage protection, the 
Council will apply more str
ingent control over the siting and design of telecommunications installations; 
refusing proposals likely to demonstrably harm interests of acknowledged importance, unless there 
are overriding circumstances which justify approval. In the latter situation the Council will seek mitigating 
measures. Within urban and rural areas in general the Council will oppose telecommunication 
installations which would be visually obtrusive and would detract from amenity unless it can be 
demonstrated that there is an overriding need and technical constraints prevent a more favourable 
proposal being chosen. 
3.422 Public concern over the possible health effects of mobile phone base stations is recognised. 
While pub
lic perceptions can be a material consideration in determining planning applications, 
Government advice is that the planning system is not the appropriate mechanism for determining 
health safeguards. Consideration of health aspects in processing planning applications for 
telecommunications development should not be necessary, provided that a proposed development 127 
3 The Strategy 
meets the guidelines set by the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP). Applicants for planning permission will be expected to submit evidence that this is the case. 
Applications should also be accompanied by details of antenna height and the frequency, modulation 
and power characteristics of the proposal. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.423 The AMR will report on the percentage of applications requiring consultation with Manchester 
Air
port, Manchester Radar or Woodford Aerodrome which are determined in line with their consultation 
response. Target: 100%. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy 
When Who & How What 
Recreational and 
amenity open space 
to keep pace with the 
needs of 
development. 
Flood 
alleviation/mitigation 
measures. 
Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS) Developers through new provision integrated 
into development schemes. The Council 
through the collection of financial contributions 
for provision of new facilities and, where 
appropriate, the improvement of existing 
facilities. 
Developers may be required to include 
measures in (re)development schemes so as 
to ensure that developments are safe.  Any 
measures must be provided in liaison with both 
the Council and the Environment Agency. The 
Council may implement measures where 
required in relation to the public realm or 
Council assets and the Environment Agency 
may implement measures as part of their 
ongoing programmes. 
Developers through integration of SuDS within 
wider de
velopment proposals. Whenever appropriate 
(re)development proposals 
are brought forward. 
Whenever required by 
appropriate (re)development 
schemes. 
Whenever required by 
Page 115 of Development 
Management Policy SIE-3 
'Protecting, Safeguarding 
and enhancing the 
Environment' 128 
The Strategy3 
3.3.7 TRANSPORT 
3.424 This section seeks to address the following issues: 
Reducing  the impact of transport on the environment. 
Reducing  the need to travel, especially by car. 
Promoting  modal shift. 
Transport  infrastructure requirements of development. 
Managing  congestion. 
Improving  road safety. 
Accessibility. 
Using  the transport network more efficiently. 
3.425 Transport acts as both a constraint on and facilitator of development for all land uses.  An 
efficient and e
xtensive transport system is vital for a strong economy.  At the same time however, this 
needs to be balanced with the requirement for the transport sector to reduce its environmental impact, 
particularly its contribution to CO2 emissions. Traffic emissions also impact negatively upon health. 
Several parts of the Borough, located along major road corridors are designated as Air Quality 
Management Areas due to exceeding national and European targets on nitrogen dioxide levels. 
3.426 Reducing the need to travel, especially by car, is one of the key principles at the heart of 
PPG13. 
This addresses both the impact of transport on the environment, and the need to promote 
social inclusion by enabling all residents to access services and opportunities, including those who 
do not have access to a car. 
3.427  Although Stockport benefits from a well developed heavy rail network, extensive bus network, 
and good access to the national motorw
ay network and Manchester Airport, lack of capacity and 
subsequent congestion are nevertheless key issues for rail, road and bus modes within the Borough 
at both peak and off-peak times.  Stockport's location, between more outlying areas in Derbyshire and 
Cheshire East, and employment opportunities in the Regional Centre, Manchester Airport and elsewhere 
in Greater Manchester, results in additional congestion on the Borough's road and rail networks, as 
recognised in the SEMMMS Strategy(127) . 
3.428 The Borough benefits from good rail connections, with Stockport station enjoying three services 
an hour to London, a v
ery frequent service into the Regional Centre, and direct services to many other 
parts of the country. The majority of the Borough's 19 stations benefit from frequent direct services 
into the Regional Centre.  However, on what is predominantly a radial rail network focused on the 
Regional Centre, orbital links are poor, with Stockport lacking direct rail links with a number of District 
Centres in the Borough (e.g. Marple, Cheadle). 
3.429 Currently lack of capacity is a factor which constrains the potential to increase frequency of 
ser
vices both within the Borough and more generally in the North West of England.The 2010 Network 
Rail Manchester Hub Study Report(128) outlines measures to increase capacity and improve performance 
on the rail network in Manchester from 2014 onwards, which potentially provide benefits in terms of 
increased reliability and frequency for rail services in Stockport. 
3.430 A significant proportion of the Borough's population do not have access to a car, and the 
accessibility assessment highlights se
veral areas, particularly in the south and east of the Borough, 
where accessibility levels by public transport and walking to key services and amenities are low. 
127 Available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
128 Network Rail Manchester Hub Rail Study available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 129 
3 The Strategy 
3.431 This section will assist in delivering the following priorities of the Stockport Sustainable 
Community Strategy (The Stockport Strategy 2020)(129): 
A Thriving Stockport 
A competitive economy with a diverse and expanding business case which attracts high earning 
sectors and suppor
ts high employment across sectors and skill levels. 
A vibrant town centre complemented by individual district centres which are well used by residents 
and well served by retail, leisure and cultural facilities 
A Healthy Stockport 
Active people - with levels of obesity which maintain current rates rather than continuing to rise 
to the e
xtent seen in past decades. 
Independent people - who benefit from high quality and accessible facilities and services which 
are tailored to their needs and preferences and prevent deterioration of health and well-being. 
A Greener Stockport 
A sustainable approach to the natural environment, improving air quality, minimising our use 
of natur
al resources, and maximising recycling. 
Good connections with excellent public transport resulting in less congestion. 
Core Policy CS9 
TRANSPORT AND DEVELOPMENT 
3.432 The Council will require that development is in locations which are accessible by walking, 
cycling and public transport. 
3.433 The Council will support development which reduces the need to travel by car. 
3.434 Development will be required to consider the needs of the most vulnerable road users 
first, using the following road user hierarchy: 
Pedestrians 
Cyclists 
Public transport 
Goods traffic 
Powered two wheelers 
Private car traffic 
Long-distance freight and private car traffic. 
129 Available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 130 
The Strategy3 
Core Policy CS10 
AN EFFECTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT NETWORK 
Transport and Inequality 
3.435 The Council and its partners will manage development and seek to implement strategies 
which ensure that no section of the comm
unity suffers unnecessary inequality as a result of their 
transport needs not being sustainably met.  Local services, employment opportunities, education, 
community and cultural facilities will be provided in a way that is accessible to all by walking, 
cycling and public transport. 
Walking and Cycling Network 
3.436 The Council will continue to provide a network of safe, good quality walking and cycling 
routes and other Rights of 
Way. 
3.437 The walking network will consist of key walking routes, providing direct links to health, 
education, emplo
yment, retail and other important amenities, and aesthetic walking routes, away 
from main roads, typically with greenery, and providing access to informal recreation opportunities. 
The Borough's walking network will also include long distance routes (e.g. Midshires Way). 
3.438 The cycling network will cater for direct cycling routes (which in some cases may be on 
b
usier roads) and also for routes on quieter residential roads and off-road links (e.g. the Halls 
Route), which are required not only for recreational cycling, but also utility cycling trips for less 
confident cyclists. 
3.439 The Council will continue to develop National and Regional Cycle Network routes in the 
Borough, and local connections to these routes
. 
3.440 The Council will continue to deliver improvements to facilitate cycle-friendly 
neighbourhoods
, which may feature traffic-calmed roads, Home Zones, 20mph zones and cycle 
storage provision. 
3.441 In rural areas, the designation of lightly trafficked minor roads as 'Quiet Lanes' may be 
considered. 
3.442 To ensure that the walking and cycling networks are as continuous and safe as possible, 
there will be an emphasis on good quality infr
astructure, providing connections across severances 
caused by major roads, railways and rivers. 
3.443 Where there are incidences of crime and antisocial behaviour on alleyways and other 
paths
, the Council's Positive Path Management policy will be adhered to, in order to ensure that 
the right balance is struck between protecting the walking network and reducing crime and 
anti-social behaviour. 
3.444 Walking and cycling networks are often able to make use of disused rail alignments and 
other f
ormer transport corridors (e.g. former canals). Where such potential exists routes will be 
safeguarded as appropriate but should not prejudice their future use as public transport corridors. 
Similarly canal towpaths provide potentially important walking and cycling links for both leisure 
and functional purposes and the Council will continue to seek opportunities to improve these as 
part of the wider off road network. 131 
3 The Strategy 
Fixed Track Network 
3.445 In order to facilitate a modal shift from car to fixed track modes, the Council will support 
proposals which pro
vide new fixed track infrastructure (heavy rail, light rail e.g. Metrolink and 
tram-trains) in the Borough.  Such infrastructure could include new lines, new stations, longer 
platforms and other infrastructure enhancements. 
3.446 The Council will support measures to upgrade the existing fixed track network and 
associated infr
astructure (e.g. Stockport rail station improvements). 
3.447 The Council will support proposals arising from the Manchester Hub Rail Study which 
lead to increased frequency and reliability f
or services in the Borough. 
3.448 The Council will support proposals and safeguard land (including, where appropriate, 
disused r
ail alignments) to deliver the following fixed track infrastructure schemes as identified in 
the SEMMMS Strategy: 
Metrolink  extension to Stockport Town Centre from East Didsbury. 
Provision  of an eastern rail link into Manchester Airport from the West Coast Mainline south 
of Cheadle Hulme. 
Off-road  fixed track link between Marple and Stockport Town Centre. 
New stations at Cheadle, Adswood, Stepping Hill Hospital and Simpsons Corner/High Lane. 
Improvements  to facilitate a regular service from Reddish South station. 
3.449 The Council will support proposals from GMPTE and train operators to provide extra 
rolling stoc
k for rail services in the Borough. 
3.450 The Council will support in appropriate locations, proposals for maintenance facilities to 
suppor
t fixed track infrastructure. 
Park and Ride 
3.451 The Council will support Park and Ride schemes for both fixed track modes and bus 
modes
, in order to facilitate an overall modal shift from private car to public transport.  Park and 
Ride schemes in appropriate locations that are in accordance with the current Local Transport 
Plan and which serve rail stations and/or high frequency bus corridors will be supported. 
3.452 New Park and Ride schemes will avoid adverse impacts upon the capacity and safety of 
the highw
ay network and will result in an overall reduction in car travel. 
Bus Network 
3.453  A good quality bus network, providing for links with areas outside the Borough as well 
as within the Borough itself
, will be sought. The bus network will not only include conventional 
and school bus services but also demand responsive services (e.g. Dial-a-ride) which provide 
vital links to residents with limited mobility and areas lacking frequent conventional bus services. 
The Council will support proposals from bus operators and GMPTE that enhance the bus network. 
3.454 To facilitate continued growth in bus passenger numbers in the Borough, the quality of 
infr
astructure for the bus network will be enhanced through the further delivery of Integrated 
Transport Corridors and Integrated Route Treatments. 132 
The Strategy3 
Road Network 
3.455 The general trend Borough-wide has been for a small decline in traffic levels over the 
past 10 y
ears.  However, congestion continues to be a significant problem on the road network 
at a number of locations throughout the Borough during the peak and off-peak. 
3.456 In order to facilitate the removal of through traffic from several District Centres and Local 
Centres in the Borough, including Heald Green, Br
amhall and Hazel Grove, and to improve access 
to Manchester Airport, the Council proposes to construct the SEMMMS A6 to Manchester Airport 
Relief Road from the A6 at Hazel Grove to the M56 at Manchester Airport, which will also 
incorporate a new shared footway and cycle path adjacent to the new road and retrofitted next to 
the existing A555. 
3.457 The Council will continue to seek funding and safeguard the land required to deliver the 
remaining par
ts of the SEMMMS Relief Road in the Borough, listed below: 
SEMMMS  Relief Road A6 Hazel Grove to M60 Bredbury 
The Stepping Hill Link Road. 
The A523 Poynton bypass. 
3.458 Highway schemes will achieve a high quality of design and use of materials, including 
sustainab
le materials such as recycled aggregates where feasible. 
3.459 The Council will aim to maximise its existing road network as efficiently as possible, and 
will aim to spread demand f
or the road network to avoid adding to peak flows on the most congested 
parts of the network. 
3.460 The Council will continue to follow the maintenance regimes set out in the Transport 
Asset Management Plan (T
AMP) in order to maintain the existing road network and its associated 
structures (e.g. retaining walls, bridges) to enable their continued and safe use. 
3.461 The Council will continue to develop its network of 20mph zones, Home Zones and other 
suitab
le traffic calming measures, in order to continue the long term reduction in accidents on the 
Borough's network, improving safety particularly for schools and residential areas, and encouraging 
increased levels of walking and cycling. 
Freight 
3.462 Where feasible, freight will be transported by rail or pipeline and opportunities to link with 
inland w
aterway freight interchanges should also be explored.  However, in many cases, road 
haulage will be the only realistic option and in these cases freight will be transported on or close 
to the National Strategic Road Network and Local Primary Road Network. 
3.463 Development proposals likely to generate significant freight movements will need to be 
acceptab
le in terms of the principles of sustainable distribution and will avoid unacceptable impact 
on amenity. 
3.464 Proposals for overnight parking of heavy lorries and coaches which are unable to return 
to distant bases will be per
mitted in appropriate locations provided that they are not detrimental 
to the amenity of any residential area and have good access to the National Strategic Road 
Network and Local Primary Road Network. 133 
3 The Strategy 
3.465 The Council will continue to support the work of Freight Quality Partnerships to ensure 
the needs of local employers and residents are both met. 
Air Quality and Noise 
3.466 The Council will continue to work alongside other Greater Manchester Boroughs on 
implementing Air Quality Management Plans to f
acilitate improvements in air quality along the 
Borough's major road corridors, where national and European targets on nitrogen dioxide emissions 
are currently not being met. 
3.467 The Council will promote the use of cleaner fuels amongst motorists and continue to use 
cleaner fuels f
or its own fleet of vehicles. 
3.468 The Council will support the use of cleaner fuels by GMPTE and bus and train operators. 
3.469 Modal shift from car to public transport, walking and cycling will also assist in an 
impro
vement in air quality. 
3.470 The Council will manage road traffic noise levels through the implementation of Noise 
Action Plans
. 
Transport in Stockport Town Centre Strategic Location 
3.471 Stockport Town Centre is the most sustainably accessible location for development in 
the Borough.
  However, given the close proximity of the M60 motorway to Stockport Town Centre, 
it is important to consider with the Highways Agency the impacts of development on the M60 and 
how these can be mitigated. 
3.472 During the development of the Allocations DPD the Council, in partnership with the 
Highw
ays Agency, will carry out assessments on the impact of housing, economic, retail and other 
development in the Town Centre on the Strategic Road Network, on both an individual and 
cumulative basis.  Mitigation measures will be identified and appraised in terms of the level of 
mitigation afforded and will be supported by evidence to demonstrate the deliverability of each 
measure. 
3.473 The following measures have already been identified by the Council and will be pursued 
in order to mitigate the impacts of de
velopment in the Town Centre: 
An area-wide Travel Plan for Stockport Town Centre. 
A new public transport interchange in Stockport Town Centre. This will not only improve 
interchange between bus and rail journeys, but will also be 'future-proofed' in order to 
accommodate the future extension of Metrolink into Stockport Town Centre from East Didsbury. 
The Town Centre Accessibility Package will be implemented to improve road infrastructure 
in and around the Town Centre. This will ease congestion for buses and for general road 
traffic. 
A separate strategy for transport in Stockport Town Centre strategic location will be set out 
in the forthcoming Allocations DPD. 
3.474 Provision for coach parking facilities in the Town Centre will be considered in order to 
meet the needs of visitors
. 134 
The Strategy3 
Development Management Policies 
3.475 How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy.  Please note that policies 
relating to specific sites
, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 
Development Management Policy T-1 
Transport and Development 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.476 To facilitate a reduction in the need to travel, development will be focused in the Town 
Centre in par
ticular and also other existing centres, as these locations are the most accessible 
and already contain a wide provision of services and amenities. 
3.477 New development, notably that generating significant numbers of trips, will be required 
to be sustainab
ly accessible by public transport, walking and cycling. 
3.478 New residential development should be designed taking into account the principle of 
Home Zones
, whereby the layout of new developments should favour more "people friendly" 
streets and reduced vehicle speeds.  Quality design is a key element in meeting the requirements 
of the Code for Sustainable Homes and the Council will look favourably on development which 
meets a high standard according to the code. 
3.479 Planning applications for new development that may have significant or specific transport 
implications will be e
xpected to be accompanied by a Transport Assessment or Transport Statement 
and Travel Plan/Travel Plan Statement, the form of which will be dependent on the scale and 
nature of the development and its transport implications. 
3.480 Where additional transport infrastructure and/or public transport and other passenger 
tr
ansport services are required to make the site accessible, developers will be required to provide 
such infrastructure and/or services.  Alternatively developer contributions may be sought towards 
the cost of new infrastructure and improvements to public transport services.  Contributions will 
take the form of Section 106 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy. Contributions 
could include the following: 
Improvements to the walking and cycling networks. 
Impro
vements to fixed track infrastructure. 
Physical improvements to the bus network. 
New or improved public transport and other passenger transport services. 
Park-and-ride schemes for fixed track and bus modes. 
Contributions towards Car Club schemes. 
Travel Plan initiatives. 
Improvements to the highway network, including contributions to off-site highway infrastructure. 
3.481 New developments will be required to maintain and enhance the connectivity, accessibility, 
con
venience, safety and aesthetic attractiveness of the walking and cycling networks and other 
public rights of way for all users, and where appropriate, create new routes to fill gaps in the 
existing network.  Any replacement of existing facilities should be of equal legal status to that 
being replaced. 135 
3 The Strategy 
3.482 The layout of new developments and their links to the surrounding walking network should 
take account of design features which discourage crime and antisocial behaviour. 
3.483 Minimum standards for cycle parking in new developments are set out in the Council's 
adopted par
king standards.  Developers will also be required to provide other associated 
infrastructure in developments to support cycling, which could include showers, changing and 
drying facilities, and lockers. 
3.484 Minimum parking standards for disabled parking and for powered two-wheelers are set 
out in the Council's adopted par
king standards. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.485 Locating development in sustainably accessible locations will facilitate a reduction in the need 
to tr
avel, which will ease congestion and minimise the impact of transport on the environment. 
3.486 The accessibility of a given location will be determined by using the methodology derived 
from Accession softw
are, set out in the Accessibility Assessment. 
3.487 The transport impacts of developments that may have significant or specific transport 
implications will be set out in 
Transport Assessments/Statements.  Mitigation measures identified, 
which may take the form of new or improved transport infrastructure, new or improved public transport 
and other services, and/or Travel Plans, will be required to be implemented. 
3.488 Travel Plans will be monitored in order to ensure that the mitigation measures required are 
identified. 
3.489 Transport schemes for which developer contributions may contribute towards will be informed 
b
y the SEMMMS Strategy and the forthcoming LTP3. 
3.490 Developer contributions will take the form of Section 106 contributions and/or the new 
Comm
unity Infrastructure Levy. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.491 The Annual Monitoring Report will continue to provide data for National Indicator 175 on the 
propor
tion of new residential developments within 30 minutes public transport travel time of key 
services. 
3.492 Transport data from the annual Greater Manchester Transport Unit (GMTU) reports will 
contin
ue to monitor modal share of public, walking, cycling, and car modes. 
Development Management Policy T-2 
Parking in Developments 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.493 Developments shall provide car-parking in accordance with maximum parking standards 
f
or each type of land use as set out in the existing adopted parking standards. 136 
The Strategy3 
3.494 The same maximum parking standards will apply across the whole Borough, with the 
exception of Stockport Town Centre Strategic Location, where different standards will be applied, 
in view of the specific land use pattern and transport needs of the Town Centre. 
3.495 In the event of any changes required as a result of new national, regional or sub-regional 
guidance and e
vidence, revised parking standards will be set out in a separate SPD. 
3.496 Developers will need to demonstrate that developments will avoid resulting in inappropriate 
on-street par
king that has a detrimental impact upon the safety of the highway, and that they also 
avoid impacting negatively upon the availability of public car-parking. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.497 Clearly, the availability of parking is one of the factors which determines an individual's decision 
on whether to tr
avel by car or by more sustainable modes.  Equally, there is also a need to ensure 
that sufficient parking provision is available for new developments to avoid conflicts with other land 
uses in close proximity (e.g. residential, retail) and to enable Stockport Town Centre, and the District 
and Local Centres, to function successfully as retail centres. 
3.498 The current maximum parking standards are set out in the Council's adopted parking standards. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.499 The Annual Monitoring report will continue to monitor indicator LTI25 on adherence to parking 
standards f
or developments. 
Development Management Policy T-3 
Safety and Capacity on the Highway Network 
3.500 Development which will have an adverse impact on the safety and/or capacity of the 
highway network will only be permitted if mitigation measures are provided to sufficiently address 
such issues. 
3.501 Developments shall be of a safe and practical design, with safe and well designed access 
arrangements, internal layouts, parking and servicing facilities. 
3.502 Proposals for overnight parking of heavy lorries and coaches which are unable to return 
to distant bases will be permitted in appropriate locations, provided that they are not detrimental 
to the amenity of any residential area and that they have good access to the national and local 
Strategic Road Networks. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.503 Safety for all road users is of prime importance. The capacity of the existing road network is 
limited, and it is theref
ore important that new development does not have a detrimental impact on 
capacity of the highway network. 
3.504 Detailed guidance on safety and capacity issues is set out nationally in the Department for 
T
ransport's Manual for Streets, the Design Manual for Roads and Bridges and other forthcoming 137 
3 The Strategy 
national policy guidance.  Guidance at the local level is set out in the Transport and Highways in 
Residential Areas SPD. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.505 The forthcoming 3rd Greater Manchester Local Transport Plan 2011-2016 will set out targets 
f
or further continued reductions in road casualty figures, which will be monitored in annual GMTU 
transport data for Stockport.  National Indicator NI167 will measure average journey time per mile 
during the morning peak. 
Development Management Policy T-4 
Protecting Disused Rail Alignments 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.506 The Council will not permit development which would inhibit future transport use of disused 
rail alignments unless it can be demonstrated that there is no realistic possibility of such use. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 
3.507 Disused rail alignments are a valuable resource for the Borough which can potentially be 
used to create ne
w fixed track links, thereby helping to facilitate modal shift from car to public transport. 
PPG13 instructs local authorities to protect disused transport sites and routes so that they are not 
severed by new development. 
3.508 Several of the fixed track infrastructure schemes recommended by the SEMMMS Strategy 
(e.g. Metrolink extension to Stockport Town Centre) involve the reuse of disused rail alignments. 
3.509 Land along disused rail alignments will continue to be safeguarded against development, 
with all planning applications aff
ecting disused rail alignments continuing to be referred to the 
Development Management Highways Team. 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
3.510 A target will be set of no incidences of loss of land on disused rail alignments that can potentially 
be reused f
or transport uses. 
Key Infrastructure Requirements 
3.511  'Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy in the first 5 years of the Core Strategy 
' identifies infrastructure requirements which are expected to be delivered over the first 5 years of the 
Core Strategy plan period. 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy in the first 5 years of the Core Strategy 
WhenWho & How(i)What 
Cheadle Hulme and Marple rail Network Rail 2010-11 
stations step-free access 138 
WhenWho & How(i)What 
2010-11 Stockport Council - match-funding 
from Sustrans Chadkirk River Crossing 
2011-12 GMPTE Hazel Grove station car-park 
expansion and Cheadle Hulme 
car-park improvement 
2011-12 (Dan Bank 
2010-11) Stockport Council - part-funding from 
Regional Funding Allocation Retaining walls maintenance 
programme 
2013-14 GMPTE Greater Manchester rail station 
improvement plan 
Projected year of 
completion - 2015 Stockport Council in partnership with 
Cheshire East and Manchester City SEMMMS A6 to Manchester Airport 
Relief Road, incorporating cycle 
Councils - funding from DfT, Regional route (retrofitted alongside existing 
A555) Funding Allocation and LTP , as part 
of Greater Manchester Transport 
Fund 
2015 Stockport Council, with funding from 
Greater Manchester Transport Fund A34/A555 junction improvements 
(tied in with SEMMMS Relief Road) 
To be confirmed Network Rail - part-funding from DfT Stockport rail station refurbishments 
and car-park expansion 
To be confirmed -
currently a Greater GMPTE - funding from Greater 
Manchester Transport Fund Stockport Town Centre Interchange 
Manchester Transport 
Fund priority although 
awaiting funding 
To be confirmed Stockport Council - funding from 
Greater Manchester Transport Fund Stockport Town Centre Access 
Package The Strategy3 
i. Developer contributions may be sought to assist in the funding of any of these schemes 
3.512  'Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy after the first 5 years of the Core Strategy 
' lists other transport infrastructure schemes which although unlikely to be delivered in the first five 
years of the Core Strategy will be required to address transport issues in the Borough. 
Key infrastructure required to deliver the core policy after the first 5 years of the Core Strategy 
WhenWho & How(i)What 
SEMMMS Relief Road A6 Hazel Grove Stockport Council, Cheshire East To be confirmed. 
to M60 Bredbury and A523 Poynton (Poynton bypass) 
bypass 139 
WhenWho & How(i)What 
To be confirmed. GMPTE East Didsbury - Stockport Metrolink 
extension (as identified in SEMMMS 
Strategy) 
To be confirmed. Network Rail/GMPTE Marple - Stockport off-road fixed track 
link (as identified in SEMMMS Strategy) 
To be confirmed. Network Rail/GMPTE New stations at Cheadle and Adswood 
(as identified in SEMMMS Strategy) 
To be confirmed. Highways Agency/Stockport Council. 
In considering the required measures M60 Measures 
at the M60, the council will work with 
the Highways Agency to identify 
issues, measures and delivery 
mechanisms. 3 The Strategy 
i. Developer contributions may be sought to assist in the funding of any of these schemes 140 
The Strategy3 
3.3.8  Stockport Town Centre Strategic Location 
This section seeks to address the following issues: 
Why Stockport's town centre should be the primary focus for development in the borough 
Which uses should be encour
aged in the town centre 
Setting out broad areas in which these uses should be focused 
3.513 The town centre is proposed to be the principal focus for development in the borough. The 
area is the most sustainab
ly located in the borough and has significant opportunity for development 
for a variety of uses. Development in this area fits with national and regional policy, as well as helping 
with the overall aim of developing a sustainable strategy for the town. The town centre is well located 
in transport terms, with a mainline rail station, bus station, links to the M60 and with the A6 running 
north-south through the centre. It is already the major centre for retail activity in the borough and 
accommodates significant office, leisure, cultural, educational and health facilities. 
3.514 For the purposes of this section the 'Town Centre' can broadly be described as an area with 
the M60 to the nor
th, St. Mary's Way to east, Hempshaw Lane / Longshut Lane to the south and Shaw 
Heath/King Street West to the west. The retail core is on a smaller scale, as described in the Core 
Policy below. Housing will be targeted to a wider area defined as the Central Housing Area as shown 
in 3.3.1 'Key Diagram'. 
3.515 There is potential to attract further development of these facilities in order to strengthen the 
T
own Centre’ s role in achieving a sustainable pattern of development in the sub-region, as well as 
increasing the amount of residential development in and around the Town Centre. 
3.516 As a result it is likely that there will be competing pressures for land in the centre and issues 
relating to ho
w the centre will combine various uses in to a coherent and cohesive whole. The Core 
Strategy therefore aims to set down the principles for the development of the Town Centre. The detail 
will be set down in other Local Development Documents. 
3.517 As set out in 3.3.5 'ACCOMMODATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT', Stockport's town 
centre is not currently providing the quality or quantity of office space needed to meet the demand 
e
xpected. Focusing new office development in this area will be key to developing a sustainable town 
centre and providing sufficient new jobs in the borough. It is intended that a substantial proportion of 
future office development for the borough is located in the town centre area. 
Core Policy CS11 
STOCKPORT TOWN CENTRE 
3.518 The Council will set out in further plans, primarily the Allocations DPD, where it proposes 
cer
tain types of development to take place and at what scale.These plans will detail specific areas 
within the town centre for office, retail, leisure and housing uses, amongst others. 
3.519 The Council objective is the development of a compact, accessible and pedestrian friendly 
retail core area, within a wider to
wn centre which accommodates other town centre uses and 
residential development as set out above. All areas should function as an integrated whole, 
avoiding conflicting uses and ensuring that in combination uses achieve the healthy and sustainable 
development of the town centre.The centre will comprise a series of mixed use areas with priority 
uses in each of those areas. These areas will be linked by the transport infrastructure, including 141 
3 The Strategy 
the road network, car parking, public transport, pedestrian and cycle routes and other public realm 
improvements. 
3.520 With the exception of the Core Retail Area it is expected that all other areas in the town 
centre will be mix
ed-use areas, with some uses predominating. That retail core will be around the 
existing Merseyway area, stretching from the A6 to Great Portwood Street. Section 3.3.4 'ACCESS 
TO SERVICES'  sets out in more detail how retail should be developed in this area. Some diversity 
of uses, such as financial and professional services and restaurants/cafés, will add to the centre's 
vitality and viability and the opportunity for linked trips, which the Council wishes to encourage. 
Within the Town Centre's Secondary Retail Area to the north and south of Great Portwood Street, 
where the focus has been on retail warehouses, further retail development may be appropriate 
and this will be the subject of more detailed consideration in the preparation of the Allocations 
plan or other Development Plan Documents. This will also consider any phasing of development 
sites within the Core Retail Area. 
3.521 A focus on office development, with some leisure uses, is proposed for a general area 
co
vering the bus station, Grand Central and the existing Civic Quarter. A greater level of housing 
is proposed for the area to the east of that office/leisure sector, particularly in the Hillgate and 
Hopes Carr area. The area to the south, around Stockport College is expected to primarily be a 
focus for education and health sector development. 
3.522 In all cases the heritage of the town centre, particularly around the Market/Underbanks, 
Hillgate
, St Peter's and Town Hall Conservation Areas, will be of importance in terms of its 
preservation and where possible enhancement through quality design.The provision of appropriate 
green and civic spaces and quality public realm will also be vital to any new or redevelopment 
within the town centre. A core of evening economy activities in and around the St. Petersgate 
area is expected to develop, although such uses would not be exclusive to that area.The provision 
of hotels in the town centre, as identified in 3.3.4 'ACCESS TO SERVICES' will also need to be 
factored in. 
Development Management 
3.523 How development will be managed to deliver the Core Policy. Please note that policies relating 
to specific sites
, areas or designations are to be set out in a separate Allocations DPD. 
Development Management Policy TC-1 
Stockport Town Centre 
What we're going to do or require: 
3.524 The Council will set out in further plans where it expects certain types of development to 
take place and at what scale. These plans will detail specific areas within the town centre for 
office, retail, housing, leisure and education uses, amongst others. It will also deal with, amongst 
other things, the required infrastructure improvements and heritage and design issues relating to 
any future developments in the town centre area. 
Why and how we're going to do it: 142 
The Strategy3 
3.525 PPS4 sets out what should be considered as town centre uses and the Council needs to plan 
for the pressures of trying to accommodate these uses, along with housing development. There are 
broad areas within the Town Centre that already accommodate these uses and it is the intention to 
maintain and enhance the uses in those areas. 
3.526 Increasing the quality, level and range of retail and complementary facilities in the Town 
Centre will help to reinf
orce its role as a sub-regional centre. The Regional Spatial Strategy(130) 
identifies Stockport as one of a number of centres in the North West where comparison retailing 
facilities should be enhanced and encouraged to ensure a sustainable distribution of high quality retail 
facilities. The issues and challenges concerning retail and leisure use in the Town Centre are set out 
in 3.3.4 'ACCESS TO SERVICES'. 
3.527 The 2008 Greater Manchester Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) (131) 
recommended the encouragement of town centre living, including in Stockport, where the market 
remains comparably undeveloped (in contrast to Manchester City Centre). The SHMA identified 
potential to deliver a high quality rental market in the town centre and predicted an above average 
increase in demand for flats in Stockport’ s Housing Market Area (compared with other parts of Greater 
Manchester). 
3.528 In order to deliver the required number of dwellings the Council is seeking to promote housing 
within the 
Town Centre to bring life to the area, diversify tenure (i.e. increase owner occupation), 
improve security and act as a vehicle for change. The preferred option for housing, as set out earlier, 
suggests that up to 50% of new housing is provided in the Central Housing Area.The Strategic Housing 
Land Availability Assessment identifies capacity for 3,100 dwellings on specific sites in this area 
(including 1,860 dwellings in the Town Centre itself). 
3.529 The town centre office offer needs to be of improved quality and quantity, and the quality of 
the rest of the to
wn centre offer (retail, leisure etc.) also needs to be enhanced in order to maximise 
potential. The recent office study(132) has concluded the following: 
Stockport  is well located but is not meeting its full potential; 
The offer is relatively poor in terms of quality and scale; 
The centre has a weak identity; 
The A6 and the topography are major issues; 
The town centre should lead the regeneration of the office market for the borough as a whole; 
There  needs to be an identification of the priority sites (see below); 
There  needs to be a clear framework to guide office development; 
A number of actions need to happen to help, e.g. environmental and highway access 
improvements, signage and parking; 
Support  a town centre strategy to improve the overall offer of town centre amenities, e.g. retail, 
leisure and tourism; and 
A number of sites have been identified as office opportunity sites, currently standing at 11 or 12. 
These are largely located to the east of the railway line (two are immediately to the west), stretching 
from the station to the east of Piccadilly. 
130 North West of England Plan, Regional Spatial Strategy to 2021, Policy Policy W5 (Retail Development) 
131 Greater Manchester Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2008 available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
132 Future Stockport - Creating a Vibrant Town Centre Office Market, DTZ, May 2009 available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 143 
3 The Strategy 
3.530 The Town Centre Strategy Review by Drivers Jonas (2009)(133) assessed the strengths and 
weaknesses of the town centre, along with opportunities and challenges which it presents. Amongst 
other things this concluded that: 
Bridgefield  and Knightsbridge redevelopment and infill redevelopment in Merseyway represent 
the best opportunities; 
Offices  present an opportunity in the Town Centre, and other important sites including the St 
Peter's Square project, need to be developed further through the delivery of the refurbishment 
and extension of Grand Central; 
Residential  development can continue to make a contribution to the town centre strategy, changes 
in market conditions will, however, necessitate a re-evaluation of the type of housing to be brought 
forward and the process through which it can be delivered; 
The leisure sector is underrepresented in the town centre, it tends to happen ‘elsewhere’  within 
the borough, this can be rectified but requires substantive and ongoing investment if it is to be 
successful; 
Culture  developments are an important part of a successful town centre’ s make up – whilst it will 
not be straightforward to bring forward deliverable projects it should and could be part of the 
longer term strategy for the town centre; and 
Education  and Health are expanding town centre uses and need to be included in any strategy 
and used as a catalyst for further investment 
3.531 The main concentration of leisure use in the Town Centre is currently at Grand Central. 
Ho
wever, the range and quality of leisure facilities e.g. entertainment, restaurants, bars, cafés and 
cultural uses should be increased in the centre. There is an identified need for improvement in the 
quality of the food and drink offer, an additional cinema, town centre hotels and health and fitness 
facilities(134) . 
3.532 Stockport College is proposing to centralise and expand its operations in the Town Centre 
which will result in an impro
ved education offer, significant investment and economic benefits to both 
the Town Centre and the borough as a whole. 
3.533 The qualities and local distinctiveness of the historic environment in the town centre makes 
a v
ery positive contribution to promoting a sense of place and its mixed and flexible patterns of land 
use help to ensure continued sustainability of the area. Heritage assets have potential to be a catalyst 
for regeneration through leisure, tourism and economic development and provide a stimulus to inspire 
new development of imaginative and high quality design. Such an approach should also seek to 
harness the positive impact of the rivers which run into and through the town centre. Future plans for 
the town centre should explore the potential to open up and provide access to those rivers. 
3.534 Alongside all of this there is a need to include transport issues. Congestion is a key issue for 
Stoc
kport as a whole but also within and around the town centre. Improving the flow of traffic will be 
an important aspect of any future plan for the centre. Linked to this will be the provision of sufficient 
parking in the appropriate locations. 
3.535 Public transport links will need to be improved to help reduce the traffic levels in and around 
the to
wn centre, including links between the rail and bus stations, including a new transport interchange 
which will deal not only with bus services but potential Metrolink extensions into the town centre from 
the west. Good pedestrian access to and from the rail and bus stations to the main areas of retail and 
133 Appendix 13, Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 
134 Stockport Shopping and Leisure Study, Drivers Jonas, 2009 144 
The Strategy3 
office development, including routes across the A6 will also be vital to encourage modal shift and 
reduce traffic congestion in the town centre. 
3.536 In addition, suitable provision will need to be made for pedestrians and cyclists, improving 
rele
vant facilities and routes into and around the town centre. 
3.537 Finally, regard will need to be had to potential flooding issues in the town centre, as defined 
within the SFRA(135) . 
How we're going to measure if it's working: 
Monitoring of various factors within the Town Centre area including: 
Retail  floorspace approved and developed 
Leisure  floorspace approved and developed 
Number  and type of new dwellings in the Town Centre granted planning permission and constructed 
Employment  floorspace approved and developed 
Congestion  - average journey time per mile during the morning peak 
Percentage  of population able to access services within a specified time period by public transport 
/ walking 
Working  age people with access to employment by public transport 
Number  of registrations against recognised Environmental Building and/or Design Standards 
3.538 These will be compared with figures from elsewhere in the borough to ascertain whether 
sufficient de
velopment is coming forward in the town centre area. 
135 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 145 
3 The Strategy 
3.3.9 Woodford Aerodrome Opportunity Site 
Introduction 
3.539 The existing BAE Systems operations at Woodford are likely to come to a close in 2012. The 
site is of a significant siz
e and has the potential to provide a number of opportunities for re-use and 
redevelopment. All of the 205Ha associated with aerodrome lie within the Green Belt, spanning the 
boundary between Stockport and Cheshire East, and as such there is significant constraint on the 
type of development that can take place on the site. There are two areas within the site that are 
allocated within the existing Unitary Development Plan Review (UDP) as a Major Existing Developed 
Site (MEDS) within the Green Belt and make up just over 42Ha of the total area. There is also a 
significant area of open space within the site. Figure 10 'Woodford Aerodrome MEDS (areas A and 
B) and BAE Systems owned site area' shows the full extent of the site, including the two MEDS areas. 
3.540 The Regional Spatial Strategy (136) states that a strategic review of the Green Belt in Greater 
Manchester, including Stockport, is not necessary until at least 2011.  In preparing the Core Strategy 
the Council has found no evidence that a strategic review of the Green Belt is necessary to meet 
development requirements up to 2026.  In the light of this the Council believes that the future use or 
redevelopment of Woodford Aerodrome should be considered only within the limits permitted by current 
Green Belt policy for this site. 
3.541 Consultation with the local residents, the landowner, Cheshire East Council and other interested 
par
ties has taken place with a variety of views expressed as to the favoured uses at the site. Although 
there was not a unanimous view, there was a clear desire for there to be a mix of employment and 
residential uses. There was less agreement on what the scale of those uses should be. However in 
conjunction with the evidence gathered so far and an assessment of the relevant policies, a mix of 
these two uses should form the basis for development at the site. 
3.542 The Council considers that the redevelopment of Woodford Aerodrome following the cessation 
of the e
xisting industrial activity on the site should be carefully planned and advantage should be taken 
of the opportunities that the site offers. This is considered preferable to a piecemeal and unplanned 
approach to the re-use of the buildings on the site. A mixed-use development of primarily residential 
and employment uses would maintain a significant employment presence within the area and the 
wider borough, as well as helping to meet housing needs, again in the locality and for the borough. 
In addition the open land which forms the majority of the site should also form part of any planning 
document relating to the land. 
3.543 The Council considers that the development of a more detailed plan for the site can be best 
achie
ved through a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) which will consider all the evidence 
available and which will be based on the Principles of Development set out below. 
Principles for Development 
Area of Development 
3.544 As previously noted the site is split over two MEDS areas. Consolidation of the two areas into 
one ma
y allow for a more cohesive and comprehensive development or it may be that some uses 
may be better separated, e.g. warehousing and residential development. 
136 North West of England Plan, Regional Spatial Strategy to 2021, Policy RD4 146 
The Strategy3 
3.545 Whether the development area is combined or split, there should be no greater impact than 
the existing development on the openness of the Green Belt and the purposes of including land in it, 
development should not occupy a larger area of the site than existing buildings (unless this would 
achieve a reduction in height which would benefit visual amenity), it should not exceed the height of 
existing buildings and it should result in environmental improvement. 
Accessibility and Sustainability 
3.546 The site and the surrounding area of Woodford is currently poorly served by public transport 
and there are issues relating to the immediate highw
ay access and links to wider highway network. 
These issues are potential constraints to development at the site, Improvements to public transport 
in the area will improve its accessibility and sustainability and will be vitally important for the future 
development of the site itself. In order to secure sufficient funding to provide a suitable level of 
improvements to the highway and public transport provision a significant level of development may 
be required on the site. An important consideration will be how much development should be allowed 
on the site in order to secure the necessary improvements so that site and the wider area are made 
as sustainably accessible as possible. 
Future Use of Runway 
3.547 Any future use of the runway is likely to be limited to private aircraft, although its retention 
w
ould provide a distinctive employment offer within the Borough and sub-region. There is no demand 
from Manchester Airport for its use, either in the short or the long-term.There are implications for new 
development and existing residents and businesses in the area, not least from the point of view of 
health and safety. If the runway is to be retained it may be unreasonable to propose significant levels 
of residential development. 
Open Space 
3.548 A considerable area of the overall aerodrome site is undeveloped at present and dependent 
upon the retention of the r
unway acceptable uses would be open land in character such as informal 
or formal recreation space, such as a country park or a golf course, farmland or woodland. 
Heritage Assets 
3.549 The potential impact upon heritage assets and their settings should be assessed and 
oppor
tunities to capitalise upon the historic interest of the site and its surroundings should be identified. 
Potential Uses 
3.550 As stated previously the main two uses on the site should be housing and employment. At 
this stage the scale of either use cannot be quantified and this will be f
or a later stage of the LDF 
process. 
3.551 However in terms of housing, factors to be considered in relation to residential development 
include: 
Bramhall  is one of the borough's most expensive areas for housing but has seen one of the lowest 
levels affordable housing delivery; 
There  is potentially the need for more houses, rather than the large number of flats and apartments 
that have been developed recently; 
There  should be an appropriate mix of housing types in line with the Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment; 147 
3 The Strategy 
There  is a significant shortfall in the level of affordable housing in the area, however the site’ s 
poor accessibility to services and public transport renders it a less desirable site for affordable 
housing unless accessibility can be improved. 
New housing should be genuinely accessible by public transport, walking and cycling; 
3.552 In respect of economic development at the site: 
A key target is to maintain the low unemployment levels in the Borough; 
Ensure  that there is sufficient land in order to accommodate potential future economic growth; 
Ensure  that the Borough has the appropriate infrastructure for adequate growth; 
The development of a large site such as this would not only help to provide a significant location 
for jobs in the borough but would also help towards providing land required in the Greater 
Manchester area, as required by Regional Spatial Strategy. 
Redevelopment  of the site for use as an office/business park would maintain the employment 
nature of the site. 
The opportunity for employment development is not restricted to office uses, but could include 
R&D uses, light and general industrial uses along with warehousing, in existing buildings on site 
or in new units. 
There  are possible highway and accessibility issues given the trip levels likely to be generated 
from large scale office development. 
3.553 In addition to improving the accessibility of the site, local shops and other services may need 
to be pro
vided on site or in the local area. This would particularly include ensuring that there would 
be adequate provision of places in the local schools. 
Unacceptable Uses 
3.554 Uses which are unlikely to be acceptable include retail uses, other than some small-scale 
de
velopment as a part of a wider development of the site, and indoor leisure uses such as cinemas 
or bowling alleys. In both cases the preferred locations for these uses are town and district centres, 
in line with national and regional guidance. 148 
The Strategy3 
Figure 10 Woodford Aerodrome MEDS (areas A and B) and BAE Systems owned site area 
149 
A Glossary 
A Glossary 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
4NW The regional planning body for the north west. 
A1 Use Class (A1 
retail use) Shops - shops, hairdressers, undertakers, travel and ticket agencies, post 
offices, pet shops, sandwich bars, domestic hire shops, dry cleaners, funeral 
directors and internet cafés in accordance with the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
A2 Use Class Financial and professional services - banks, building societies, estate and 
employment agencies, professional and financial services and betting offices 
in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 
1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
A3 Use Class Restaurants and cafés - For the sale of food and drink for consumption on 
the premises - restaurants, snack bars and cafés in accordance with the 
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent 
amendments. 
A4 Use Class Drinking establishments - Public houses, wine bars or other drinking 
establishments (but not nightclubs) in accordance with the Town and 
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent 
amendments. 
A5 Use Class Hot food take aways - For the sale of hot food for consumption off the 
premises in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
AAP Action Area Plan 
Active frontages A ground floor frontage which generates passing trade and provides a 
'shop-type' window display with interest at street level. 
Affordable Housing Includes social rented and intermediate housing (e.g. shared ownership), 
provided to households at a cost low enough for them to afford. Households 
eligible for affordable housing are those who cannot afford open market 
housing. 
AGMA Association of Greater Manchester Authorities 
AQMA / AQMP Air Quality Management Area / Air Quality Management Plan 
Area Committee There are seven Area Committees comprising geographical parts of the 
Borough. These are Bramhall & Cheadle Hulme South, Central Stockport, 
Cheadle, Heatons & Reddish, Marple, Stepping Hill and Werneth. 
Arts and cultural uses Includes D1 Non-residential institutions, such as museums and galleries, 
D2 Assembly and Leisure uses, such as cinemas and concert halls, and 
sui generis uses, such as theatres. in accordance with the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
ASHE Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings 150 
Glossary A 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
See “Previously Developed Land” Brownfield Land and 
Sites 
BSF Building Schools for the Future Programme 
B Use Classes B1 (Business), B2 (General Industrial) and B8 (Storage and Distribution) 
in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 
1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
BVPI Best Value Performance Indicator 
C&I Commercial and Industrial waste 
C1 Use Class Hotels - hotels, boarding and guest houses where non significant element 
of care is provided in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use 
Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
Casual Provision Safely accessible areas for children’ s play of an informal unorganised 
nature. 
Community and Civic 
Amenity Spaces Includes civic and community areas that may be hard surfaced or 
landscaped, designed for pedestrians with the primary purpose of providing 
a setting for civic buildings, and urban spaces for sitting and relaxation, 
public congregation and public events. 
Community Strategy The Community Strategy is a working plan produced by the Stockport 
Partnership, based on the views of local people and sets the vision for the 
future of the borough. A new Community Strategy is currently being 
prepared. 
Community uses Includes health care facilities (e.g. Hospitals, clinics, dental practices), 
drop-in centres, facilities for emergency services, fire, ambulance and police, 
children's centres, libraries, creches, day nurseries, children's indoor play 
centres, youth centres, community meeting halls, places of worship, places 
of religious instruction and church halls. Excludes education facilities. 
Comparison 
Shopping Comparison retailing is the provision of items not obtained on a frequent 
basis.These include clothing, footwear, household and recreational goods. 
Convenience 
Shopping Convenience retailing is the provision of everyday essential items, including 
food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and confectionery. 
Core Retail Area Sequentially the most preferred location in Stockport Town Centre for A1 
use development. 
Core Strategy The Core Strategy will set out the key elements of the planning framework 
for Stockport comprising a spatial vision and strategic objectives, a spatial 
strategy, core policies as well as a monitoring and implementation 
framework. 
D1 Use Class Non-residential institutions - clinics, health centres, creches, day nurseries, 
day centres, schools, art galleries, museums, libraries, halls, places of 151 
A Glossary 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
worship, church halls, law courts, non-residential education and training 
centres in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
D2 Use Class Assembly and leisure - cinemas, music and concert halls, bingo and dance 
halls (but not nightclubs), swimming baths, skating rinks, gymnasiums or 
sport arenas (except for motor sports, or where firearms are used) in 
accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 
and its subsequent amendments. 
dB / dBLA / dB(A) A unit for measuring the relative loudness of sound. Where noise levels 
vary widely over time an index is employed to allow for this variation; such 
weighted measurements are denoted with dBLA. The maximum allowed 
sound level is denoted as dB(A). 
Deprivation Deprivation can cover a range of economic, social and housing matters, 
and this is measured in relative terms using a number of indicators 
District Centre Stockport has eight district centres.These are Bramhall, Cheadle, Cheadle 
Hulme, Edgeley, Hazel Grove, Marple, Houldsworth Square (Reddish) and 
Romiley. 
DPD Development Plan Document 
Dual-Use Facility Formal recreation facilities within the educational sector which are as a 
matter of practice and policy, available for public use when not in use by 
educational establishments. 
Dwelling A self-contained building or part of a building used as a residential 
accommodation, and usually housing a single household. A dwelling may 
be a house, bungalow, flat, maisonette or converted farm building. 
Economically inactive Those people who are not in work, but who do not satisfy all the criteria for 
unemployment, that is, wanting a job, seeking in the last four weeks and 
available to start in the next two. 
Education facilities Includes schools, colleges, life long learning and Special Education Needs 
facilities. Excludes libraries, which are considered under the category of 
community uses. 
Employment Land Land for the development of light industry and business premises (use class 
B1), general industry (use class B2) and warehouses (use class B8). 
Evidence Base The information and data that have informed the development of policies. 
Formal Provision Open space provided for organised sporting activities, such as pitches, 
courts and bowling greens. 
Front-loading 
consultation Detailed consultation undertaken at the policy development stage so as to 
reduce the need for time and resource consuming consultation at the 
detailed planning stage (i.e. to establish the principle of certain types of 152 
Glossary A 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
GI development in specific areas so as to set down with greater certainty what 
would or would not be appropriate there). 
Green Infrastructure 
GM Greater Manchester 
GMGU Greater Manchester Geological Unit 
GMITS Greater Manchester Integrated Transport Strategy 
GMLTP Greater Manchester Local Transport Strategy 
GONW Government Office for the North West 
Green Belt Area of land, largely rural or semi-rural in character, adjacent to the urban 
area and protected from development by permanent and severe restrictions 
on building. The term ‘Green Belt’  refers to areas specifically designated 
for protection in development plans, in accordance with Government 
guidance and is not equivalent to the more general term ‘greenfield’. 
Greenfield Land or 
Site Land (or a defined site) that is not currently or has not previously been 
developed. 
Green Infrastructure ‘Green Infrastructure’  is a network of multi-functional greenspace. It is set 
within, and contributes to a high quality natural and built environment. 
It can include: 
Sites  of Special Nature Conservation Importance; 
Sites  of Nature Conservation Importance; 
Public  rights of way including cycle-ways, footpaths and bridleways 
and other recreational routes; 
open  countryside and Country Parks; 
Strategic  and Local open space; 
private  gardens; 
incidental  landscaping and street trees; 
verges; tree belts; 
hedgerows; 
ditches  and banks; 
dry stone walls; 
plantations  and small woods; 
unimproved/semi-improved  grassland; 
heathland; 
river corridors; 
canals; 
disused  railways; 
lakes,  lodges, ponds and reservoirs; 
allotments  and cemeteries; 153 
A Glossary 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin. Gypsies and 
Travellers 
Hectare (ha) Metric unit of area equal to 10,000 square metres or 2.47 acres. 
HMO Houses in Multiple Occupation 
Hotels Includes all hotels, guest houses, apart-hotels, bed and breakfast 
accommodation and other similar tourist accommodation, including tourist 
hostels. 
Housing Associations Common term for the independent, not-for-profit organisations registered 
with and regulated by the Housing Corporation. Housing Associations are 
able to bid for funding from the Housing Corporation. See also: Registered 
Social Landlords. 
Housing need The quantity of housing required for households who are unable to access 
suitable housing without financial assistance. 
IMD Indices of Multiple Deprivation: The IMD is a combination of a number of 
indicators, chosen to cover a range of economic, social and housing issues, 
into a single deprivation score for each small area in England. This allows 
each area to be ranked relative to one another according to their level of 
deprivation. 
Indoor sports 
facilities Indoor sports facilities includes sports halls, sports stadia, swimmings baths 
and gymnasiums. 
Industrial 
Development Refers to general industry (use class B2) and warehouses (use class B8). 
Intermediate housing Housing at prices and rents above those of social rent but below market 
price or rents (e.g. shared ownership). 
JMDPD (Greater Manchester) Joint Minerals Development Plan Document 
JWDPD (Greater Manchester) Joint Waste Development Plan Document 
LAA Local Area Agreement 
LAP Local Area of Play 
Large Local Centre Service centre, where the number of commercial premises usually ranges 
from as few as about 30 up to as many as 90, with a predominantly retail 
function. 
LDD Local Development Document 
LDF Local Development Framework 
LDS Local Development Scheme 154 
Glossary A 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
Leq The equivalent continuous sound level from aircraft - the sound level of a 
notionally steady sound having the same energy as a fluctuating sound 
over a specified measurement period. 
Lifetime Homes A standard that has been developed to help house builders produce flexible, 
adaptable and accessible homes that can respond to changes in individual 
circumstances, e.g. caring for young children, temporary injuries, declining 
mobility with age. 
LNR Local Nature Reserve 
Local Centre There are 25 Local Centres in the borough that are identified in the Core 
Strategy, comprising the third tier of the Stockport Service Centre hierarchy. 
The Local Centres mainly provide small scale convenience shopping and 
non-A1 retail uses for people living or working nearby. 
Local distinctiveness The positive features of a place and its communities which contribute to its 
special character and sense of place. 
Local Open Space In addition to the major areas of Strategic Open Space there are many 
areas of local open space within the built up parts of the Borough. These 
areas generally fall within the following categories: 
public  parks and recreation facilities 
private  recreation facilities 
school  playing fields 
allotments 
small areas of woodland 
unused/derelict  land (may include unmanaged or wild areas of positive 
value) 
churchyards  and cemeteries 
other  areas of local amenity value. 
LSP Local Strategic Partnership 
M60 Gateway An economically significant corridor located on land between and near to 
Junctions 1 and 27 of the M60 orbital motorway. 
MCRSS Manchester City Region Spatial Strategy 
MEDS Major Existing Developed Sites in the Green Belt 
MIER Manchester Independent Economic Review 
MSW Municipal Solid Waste 
Net Floorspace Net retail sales area as defined in Planning for Town Centres: Practice 
guidance on need, impact and the sequential approach (guidance on PPS4). 
New forming 
households People living in an existing household but intending to form a new home. 
For example, first time buyers living with parents. 155 
A Glossary 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
National Health Service NHS 
Non-A1 retail uses Comprises A2 Financial and Professional Services, A3 Restaurants and 
cafes, A4 Drinking Establishments (excluding nightclubs), A5 Hot food 
takeaways in accordance with the Town and Country Planning (Use 
Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
ODPM Office of the Deputy Prime Minister 
Office Development Refers to office and business development (use class B1) 
ONS Office of National Statistics 
Other Local Centre Service centre, where the number of commercial premises usually ranges 
from as few as about 6 or 7 up to as many as 30, with a predominantly retail 
function. 
Overcrowded 
dwellings Households who do not have enough bedrooms. 
PCT Primary Care Trust 
(The) Peoples 
Network Online services from public libraries, available via 
www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 
PFL Planning for Leisure 
PLSS Public Library Service Standards 
Plan Period The time period over which a specific document will remain valid. 
Planning Obligation A private agreement, usually negotiated in the context of a planning 
application, between a local authority and persons with an interest in the 
land (e.g. owner, developer). 
PPG Planning Policy Guidance note 
PPS Planning Policy Statement 
Previously Developed 
Land Previously-developed land is that which is or was occupied by a permanent 
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated 
fixed surface infrastructure. 
The definition includes defence buildings, but excludes: 
Land  that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings. 
Land  that has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal 
by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been made 
through development control procedures. 156 
Glossary A 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
Primary Frontage Land in built-up areas such as parks, recreation grounds and allotments, 
which, although it may feature paths, pavilions and other buildings, 
has not been previously developed. 
Land that was previously-developed but where the remains of the 
permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the 
landscape in the process of time (to the extent that it can reasonably 
be considered as part of the natural surroundings). 
Defined in PPS4 as 'likely to include a high proportion of retail uses'. 
Private members' 
clubs Clubs which are only open to members who pay a subscription and may 
also have to meet other criteria.These are considered to be a private leisure 
use, and are sui generis uses in accordance with the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent amendments. 
Registered Social 
Landlords (RSL) Technical name for a body registered with the Housing Corporation. Most 
Housing Associations are RSLs. They own or manage both social rented 
and intermediate affordable housing. See also: Housing Associations. 
RES Regional Economic Strategy 
RSS Regional Spatial Strategy for the North West 
S-Time Weighting A weighting applied in noise recording to even fluctuations in the recorded 
level 
SA Sustainability Appraisal 
Saved policies Current policies that are up-to-date and relevant and so can be continued 
into the new system. 
SBI Sites of Biological Importance 
SCI Statement of Community Involvement 
SEA Strategic Environmental Assessment 
Secondary Frontage Defined in PPS4 as providing 'greater opportunities for a diversity of uses' 
Secondary Retail 
Area Sequentially the second most preferred area for A1 use development in 
Stockport Town Centre after the Core Retail Area 
SEMMMS South East Manchester Multi Model Strategy 
Service Centres Designated areas containing a high proportion of A1 use, classified as the 
Core Retail Area of Stockport Town Centre, the 8 District Centres and the 
25 Local Centres. The Service Centres act as focal points for community 
activity. 
SFRA Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 157 
A Glossary 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment SHLAA 
SHMA Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
Social Rented 
Housing Rented housing owned and managed by local authorities and registered 
social landlords. 
Spatial Of, relating to, involving, or having the nature of space. 
Spatial Options The realistic options available for future development. 
Spatial Planning Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning to bring together 
and combine land use planning with other policies that can influence the 
nature of places and how they work. 
Spatial Portrait A description of the character and state of the borough. 
Spatial Vision Aspirations for the future development of the borough. 
SPD Supplementary Planning Document 
SPG Supplementary Planning Guidance 
SRB Single Regeneration Budget 
SSCS Stockport Sustainable Community Strategy 
SSSI Sites of Special Scientific Importance 
Stakeholders Any group or individual with an interest in any part or parts of the LDF and 
its various LDDs. 
Stockport Partnership The Stockport Partnership brings together representatives from the 
voluntary, community, public and business sectors to work co-operatively 
with local communities.The role of the partnership is to improve the quality 
of life for local people by setting out a long term vision for Stockport, 
promoting social, environmental and economic wellbeing, pinpointing 
problems, improving services and targeting resources to address local 
needs. 
Strategic Open Space The areas of Strategic Open Space are relatively large open areas (generally 
over 25 hectares) and possess one or more of the following characteristics: 
contribute  to physical separation of distinct settlements (within the 
Borough or in adjoining Districts) 
contribute to the maintenance of the identities of communities 
incorporate  land currently or last used as major public or private 
recreation facilities (e.g. 9/18 hole golf course) 
provide  actual or potential public access for informal recreation 
include  areas of importance and/or potential for nature conservation 158 
Glossary A 
Explanation Term/Acronym 
SUDS make a significant visual contribution to urban fabric 
make a major contribution to Borough-wide standards of recreational 
open space provision 
make a significant contribution to green chains of related open space. 
Sustainable Drainage Systems 
Sustainability 
Appraisal Sustainability appraisal is a tool used to assess the impact of plan policies 
from an environmental, economic and social perspective.  It is intended to 
provide a systematic process through which the performance of a plan can 
be tested against the objectives of sustainable development, while the plan 
is still being produced. 
Sustainable 
Development Development which meets the needs of the present generation without 
harming the ability of future generations to meet their needs; to do this, 
such development limits damage to the environment, and keeps the 
consumption of natural resources to levels manageable in the long term. 
Tourist attractions Includes cultural facilities such as museums and galleries (D1 
Non-residential institutions), theatres (sui generis), concert halls (D2 
Assembly and Leisure) and locally distinctive attractions such as the Trans 
Pennine Trail, the educational visitor attraction the Mellor Heritage Project 
(available via http://www.mellorheritage.org.uk/) and landscape features 
such as the Macclesfield and P
eak Forest Canal towpaths (forming part of 
the Cheshire Ring) at Marple. 
Travelling 
Showpeople Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses 
or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). 
UDP Unitary Development Plan 
Under-occupied 
dwellings Households with more than one spare bedroom. 
UPS Urban Potential Study 
Use Class Similar categories of land are grouped into ‘Use Classes’.There are sixteen 
use classes as determined by the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
Order 1987 (as amended by ODPM Circular 03/2005). 
Windfall Site A site not specifically identified for development in a plan, but which 
becomes available for development or is granted planning permission during 
the lifetime of the plan. 
World Heritage Site An area designated as having "outstanding universal value" under the 
United Nations Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage. 
A further glossary of key planning terms is available via www.stockport.gov.uk/ldfevidence 159 
B Superseded policies 
B Superseded policies 
The following policies of the Stockport UDP Review (adopted 31st May 2006) will be replaced by the 
Core Strategy: 
UDP Review Policy Name UDP Review Policy 
Number 
DCD1 Design and Character 
DCD1.1 Design Principles 
DCD1.2 Design Appraisals 
DCD1.3 Access for People with Access Difficulties 
Landscaping of New Development DCD1.4 
Public Health, Safety and Security in Developments DCD1.6 
Advertisements DCD1.7 
Landscape, Countryside and River Valleys LCR1 
Protection of Views from the Peak National Park LCR1.11 
Biodiversity and Nature Conservation NE1 
Development and the Natural Environment NE1.3 
Land Management and the Natural Environment NE1.4 
Habitat Creation, Enhancing Biodiversity and Access NE1.5 
Species Protection NE1.6 
Tree and Woodland Promotion NE2 
Tree and Woodland Protection NE2.1 
Tree and Woodland Planting NE2.2 
The Use of Woodland NE2.3 
Green Chains NE3 
Conservation Areas HC1 
Listed Buildings HC2 
Development Affecting Listed Buildings HC2.1 
Retention of Listed Buildings HC2.2 
New Uses for Listed Buildings HC2.3 
Protecting Listed Buildings HC2.4 160 
UDP Review Policy Name UDP Review Policy 
Number Superseded policies B 
HC2.5 Development Affecting Buildings of Local Interest 
HC3 Protection of Archaeological Sites 
HC3.1 Development and Archaeology 
HC3.2 Field Evaluation and Development 
Recording of Archaeological Evidence HC3.3 
Protection of Parks and Gardens of Historic Interest HC4 
Environmental Protection and Improvement EP1 
Treatment of Derelict and Vacant Land EP1.2 
Control of Pollution EP1.3 
Light Pollution EP1.4 
Development on or near Contaminated Sites EP1.5 
Hazardous Substances and Development EP1.6 
Telecommunications Development EP1.11 
Prior Approval of Permitted Telecommunication Development EP1.12 
Green Belt Protection GBA1 
Agriculture GBA2 
Urban Open Space UOS1 
Leisure in Stockport L1 
Provision of Recreation and Amenity Open Space in New 
Developments L1.3 
Indoor Leisure Facilities L1.4 
Community Services and Facilities CTF1 
Tourism Development CTF2 
Development of Tourism Facilities CTF2.1 
Housing Provision HP1 
Phasing of Housing Development HP1.2 
Meeting Housing Needs HP2 
Provision of Affordable Housing HP2.1 161 
UDP Review Policy Name UDP Review Policy 
Number B Superseded policies 
HP2.4 Accommodation for Travelling People 
HP2.5 Dwelling Mix 
HP3 Regeneration of the Existing Housing Stock 
CDH1 Development in Predominantly Residential Areas 
New Residential Development in Predominantly Residential Areas CDH1.1 
Overall Supply of Land for Development E1 
Location and Design of Employment Uses E2 
Protection/Regeneration of Employment Areas E3 
Employment Uses Outside Employment Areas E4 
Industrial, Warehouse, Storage and Office Premises Outside 
Employment Areas E4.1 
Hierarchy of Shopping Centres PSD1 
Shopping and the Built Environment SE1 
Control of Food and Drink Outlets SE1.1 
Sustainable Transport ST1 
Integrated Transport Corridors and Bus Network ST1.2 
Interchange and Park and Ride Facilities ST1.3 
Walking ST1.4 
Cycling ST1.5 
Public Rights of Way ST1.6 
Strategic Transport Corridors ST2 
Strategic Road Network ST2.1 
Road User Hierarchy ST2.3 
Access and Parking in District and Local Centres ST2.4 
Freight Transport ST2.5 
Transport and Social Inclusion ST3 
Transport and Development TD1 
Achieving Accessible Development TD1.1 162 
UDP Review Policy Name UDP Review Policy 
Number 
Transport Assessments TD1.2 
Travel Plans in Developments TD1.3 
Parking in Developments TD1.4 
Safety and Capacity on the Highway Network TD1.5 
Accessibility and the Design of Development TD1.6 
Urban Design and Streetscape TD2 
Homezones TD2.1 
Design of Highway and Transport Schemes TD2.3 
Mineral Extraction MW1 
Waste Management and Disposal MW2 
Development Control Criteria for Minerals or Waste Development MW1.1 
Sustainable Waste Management MW1.2 
Renewable Energy MW3.1 Superseded policies B 
The 2004 Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act requires the Council to replace the UDP with new 
DPDs that form part of the Council's LDF . The Act automatically saved the UDP Policies for a period 
of three years from adoption (i.e. until 31st May 2009). The Council applied for, and received, the 
consent of the Secretary of State to save many of the UDP Policies beyond 31st May 2009 - further 
information on this process is available to view at www.stockport.gov.uk/udp. These policies will 
g
radually be replaced as DPDs, such as the Core Strategy, are adopted. The Stockport UDP Review 
Policies whose saved status was not extended beyond 31st May 2009 are as follows: 
DCD1.8  Energy Efficient Design 
GBA2.2  Control Over Agricultural Development 
CTF1.2  Proposed School Site: Romiley 
HP1.4 Windfall Housing Sites 
E2.3  Design of New Business and Industrial Development 
E4.3 Working from Home 
PSD1.1  New Shopping Provision 
PSD1.3  Large Scale Retail Development 
MW1.4  Mineral and Waste Sites: Control Over Operations 
Some saved UDP Review policies are partly superseded by Core Strategy policies but are retained 
until other DPDs
, for example the Allocations DPD, are adopted, so that they can continue to guide 
decisions about planning applications. In the event of any conflict between a saved UDP Review policy 
and an adopted Core Strategy policy, the Core Strategy will take precedence. 163 
CAdditional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies 
C Additional Information for Core Policies and Development 
Management Policies 
C.1 Energy Opportunities Plan 
164 
Additional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies C 
C.2 Energy Efficiency Checklist 
The energy efficiency checklist should be used to assess what measures are required to be undertaken 
to existing properties in addition to alteration/extension works requiring planning permission (up to a 
maximum of 10% of the total build cost and/or 7 year pay-back period). 
Energy Efficiency Checklist 
Required for: Measure: 
Cavity wall insulation 
Loft insulation (250mm) 
Floor insulation 
Replacement condensing 
boiler Any dwelling that has empty cavity walls, subject to a check for 
suitability from an accredited installer and approval by local authority 
building control. 
Any dwelling with an accessible loft and less than 100mm depth 
existing insulation. 
Dwellings with uninsulated suspended timber floors only, where 
easily accessib
le from underneath (e.g. basements) 
Any dwelling with a wet central heating system with a non condensing 
gas or oil boiler more than 15 y
ears old. 
Any dwelling with central heating that lacks a programmable timer, 
room thermostat or thermostatic radiator valves. Heating controls upgrade 
Any dwelling that has an uninsulated hot water tank or a tank that 
has an existing insulating jacket that is in poor repair as judged by 
a building surveyor. Hot water insulation package 
Any dwelling that has excessive air leakage as judged by a building 
surveyor. Draught proofing 
Any dwelling where 75% of light fittings in commonly used areas are 
not classed as energy efficient (A rated under the EU energy 
efficiency label system) Energy efficient lighting 165 
CAdditional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies 
C.3 Recreational Open Space 
i The information below has been copied directly from the UDP Review 2006 Appendix 4.  It provides 
background information in respect of Core Policy CS6 and Development Management Policy SIE - 2. 
The PPG17 Study 2005 data has not been compiled in the same format, as the Council has restructured 
its Area Committees (ACs). This has resulted in a change from 8 ACs to 7 ACs with consequential 
boundary changes to a number of the areas. While some AC boundaries have remained unchanged 
it makes comparison between the the 1996 information and the data from 2005 less meaningful in 
respect of a number of the Committees Areas. 
ii Consider ation will be given to presenting the PPG17 study data based on the new Area Committee 
structure. 
iii Ho wever, the position in terms of the issues covered by DMP SIE - 2 has not changed in any 
significant way. The proposed approach is considered acceptable and the appropriate basis to plan 
for this infrastructure. 
Recreational Open Space Protection and Standards of Provision 
iv Table 4 'Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area (Hectares)' 
summarises the results of comprehensive surveys of recreational and other open space carried out 
in 1986/91/96. 
These surveys were undertaken based on the same criteria, thereby allowing the 
assessment of changes over this time period. It also provides opportunities to assess the performance 
of the policies. The Adopted UDP 1998 analysed changes between 1986 and 1991. Table 5 'Active 
Recreation: hectares per 1000 population 1986/1991/1996' sets out the standard of provision by 
Committee Area. The table “ Play Facilities”  in the Explanation to DMP SIE - 2 sets out the basis of 
the three tiered structure, LAPs, LEAPs and NEAPs. 
Changes 1991 - 1996 
v With regard to f ormal facilities, the total area of sites on a Borough-wide basis increased slightly. 
This hides a complex number of changes including; loss of a 5.1ha site from the "Public" category to 
Manchester due to boundary changes and an addition of 3.7ha to the same category resulting from 
land at Lavington Avenue moving from the "Private" category. However, none of this land was included 
in the last survey whilst its future was under consideration.There were a significant number of changes 
within the "Dual Use " category. While the stock available remains largely unchanged a number of 
sites have been withdrawn, but a larger number of new sites have become available resulting in a 
slight increase. 
vi The area f or casual recreation / children's play fell slightly. This was not a result of any loss but 
mainly due to reclassification of open space. 
Standards of Provision 
vii The 1996 sur vey shows that provision for formal sports in the Borough was below the National 
Playing Fields Association's 'Fields in Trust' (FIT) standards. Formal sports provision is the principal 
component of the FIT overall standard of 2.4 hectares per thousand population for active recreation. 
Columns 1 - 3 of Table 4 'Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area 
(Hectares)' show a total of 390 hectares at 1996 (an increase of two hectares over the 1991 position) 
used for formal sports. This is equivalent to 1.34 hectares per thousand population in Table 5 'Active 
Recreation: hectares per 1000 population 1986/1991/1996'. The shortfall is very real in that demand 
gauged from enquiries made to the Local Authority for pitches far outweighs supply. In terms of 166 
Additional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies C 
provision per thousand population, six of the eight Committee Areas continue to experience shortfalls 
leaving only the Four Heatons and Cheadle well provided. 
viii The Council’ s policy approach has been to strongly resist the loss of any existing public or 
private sports grounds. At the same time the aim has been to achieve an overall standard for the 
Borough of 2.4 hectares per thousand population for the provision of active recreation of which 1.7 
hectares should be for formal sports facilities (including playing pitches, courts and athletic tracks etc). 
The results of the 1996 survey confirm that there can be no justification for any relaxation in the 
protection of existing formal recreation open space. 
Casual Recreation/Children's Play Provision 
ix The Council has adopted the FIT standard of 0.7 hectares per thousand population. The total 
area for casual recreation amounts to 248 hectares. This is equivalent to 0.85 hectares per thousand 
population based on the FIT standard. 
x Ho wever, when considering the policy for open space in new developments as set out in DMP 
SIE - 2 which contains the requirement for all homes to be within easy access of casual open/children's 
play space, there continues to be a number of localities within all Committee Areas, some covering 
large areas, which have either no supply of or deficiencies in casual open space provision. Indeed, 
no part of Stockport is currently served with the full three tiered structure LAPs LEAPs and NEAPs as 
set out in DMP SIE -2 Table 4 Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area (Hectares) CAdditional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies Tame 27 29 29 8 12 13 2 1 1 33 40 40 5 6 8 85 85 86 73 73 73
Valley 
Heath Bank 17 17 17 12 12 6 10 11 11 17 17 16 17 17 21 9 6 7 17 17 19
37 37 37 5 5 5 2 2 2 24 24 16 17 17 18 11 11 6 19 24 25
41 41 41 87 86 86 - - - 28 28 19 8 8 8 6 6 8 9 9 13
75 67 67 68 69 67 2 2 3 21 22 22 12 12 12 8 7 6 16 15 14
89 89 89 36 35 35 11 11 10 50 50 47 8 12 12 8 8 8 34 34 34
113 97 82 32 32 32 20 20 20 18 19 19 27 27 27 17 16 11 17 17 16
31 31 31 35 35 32 32 20 20 46 48 45 12 13 24 14 12 7 61 58 54
476 452 437 361 359 (vii) 348 85 72 71 244 248 217 102 107 124 86 78 61 202 203 202Courses Space(ii) 7.
18 Hole Golf6.
Other Open
Space(iii) 5.
Amenity Open4.
Areas for Casual
Rec / Children’ s 
Play (i) Formal Sports Provision Area
Committee 
3. 2. 1.
Private Sports
Facilities(iv) Ground(vi) Dual-use Sports
Facilities(v) Public Sports
1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 
Four
Heatons
Werneth 
Marple 
Stepping
Hill
Bramhall 
Cheadle
Total
i. "Casual play" in Column 4 lists only those areas which are used solely for that purpose. However, in 1986 it was considered that most of the pitches in Column 1
w
ould be used for casual play when there were no matches in progress and a calculation of areas for casual play was obtained by adding Column 1 to Column 4,
giving 419 hectares.
ii. "Amenity areas" in Column 5 are the ornamental areas in parks and major landscaped areas throughout the town which provide visual pleasure and passive relaxation.
iii. "Other open space" includes water areas, woodland and natural vegetation generally in public ownership where public enjoyment is informal and often limited to
f
ootpaths and picnic areas. This level of usage is little different from that afforded by public footpaths across open countryside, in which case the whole of the Green
Belt and the river valleys should be counted as countryside recreation area – almost half of the land area of the whole borough.
iv. "Public" in Column 1 includes pitches, courts, bowling greens and athletic tracks, i.e. all Council owned facilities where organised games and sports are played,
which are not par
t of educational establishments.
v. "Dual use" in Column 2 refers to school pitches owned by the Council which are available for organised matches outside school hours.
vi. "Private" in Column 3 includes all outdoor facilities not provided by the Council with the exception of golf courses which are listed in Column 8 and private school
fields which are not a
vailable for general use.
vii. Includes 17 hectares of private fishing waters 167 Table 5 Active Recreation: hectares per 1000 population 1986/1991/1996 
C B A 1991
Population
(Approx the
same for 1986,
1991 & 1996) Committee Area 
Total/'000
2.4 Ha Casual/'000
0.7 Ha Formal/'000
1.7 Ha 
1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 1996 1991 1986 
(2.02) (2.00) (1.7) 0.98 0.98 0.80 (1.04) (1.02) (0.90) 41,000 Tame Valley 
(1.57) (1.50) (1.7) (0.44) (0.44) (0.40) (1.13) (1.05) (1.20) 38,000 Heath Bank 
2.58 2.76 2.40 0.87 0.87 (0.60) 1.70 1.89 1.80 27,500 Four Heatons 
(1.79) (1.75) (1.70) 0.97 0.97 0.70 (0.79) (0.79) (1.00) 29,000 Werneth 
(2.37) (2.30) (2.30) 0.88 0.91 0.90 (1.50) (1.41) (1.30) 24,000 Marple 
(2.38) 2.47 2.40 1.19 1.19 1.10 (1.19) (1.33) (1.30) 42,000 Stepping Hill 
(1.68) (1.68) (1.60) (0.38) (0.40) (0.40) (1.29) (1.27) (1.20) 47,000 Bramhall 
3.24 3.19 3.20 1.12 1.17 1.10 2.12 2.02 2.10 41,000 Cheadle 
(2.20) (2.20) (2.10) 0.80 0.80 0.80 (1.34) (1.33) (1.30) 290,000 Total
Figures in brackets indicate deficiency
A = based on Columns 1, 2 and 3 of Table 4 'Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area (Hectares)'
B = based on Column 4 of Table 4 'Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area (Hectares)'
C = based on Columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Table 4 'Total Recreational Land 1986/1991/1996 Provision by Committee Area (Hectares)' Additional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies C 168 169 
CAdditional Information for Core Policies and Development Management 
Policies 
C.4 The general distribution of Green Infrastructure 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 