  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 17  
 
This chapter sets out the Local Plan’s overall stra tegy for managing 
growth and development across the District, up to 2 040. It describes the 
Plan’s overarching objectives for the future. It se ts out where future 
strategic development will go and explains the leve ls and types of growth 
that have been planned for, in order to meet the Di strict’s needs. 2. 
 
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 1 7 
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 18  
 
 
2.  Making Places | the development 
strategy  
2.1 Stroud District tomorrow | a vision for the fut ure 
2.2 Strategic objectives for the future 2.3  An introduction to the development strategy 2.4 Our towns and villages 2.5 Housing 2.6 Employment and economic growth 2.7 Town centres and retailing 2.8 Local green spaces and community facilities 2.9  Core Policies | CP1 – CP6 
     
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 19  
 
2.1 Stroud District tomorrow  
| a vision for the future  
2.1.1  What do you want Stroud District to be like in 20 years’ time? In developing a Local Plan for the District, it is important to have a vision of the kind of place we want to be living in, working in or visiting in the future, so that clear  
objectives can be set for the policies and proposals that will help us to shape that place.   
2.1.2  A clear vision is an essential part of developing objectives and measuring the likely impacts of any strategies that aim to influence the District’s future growth and development. 
2.1.3  We have developed a broad and over-arching vision, which expresses aspirations for the future of our District, building on the vision contained in the 2015 Local Plan , drawn from 
issues arising in our evidence base and refined through public consultation.
1 This vision offers 
an aspirational glimpse of the future: something that we can all work towards and a 
                                                           
1  Issues and Options Consultation, Autumn 2017; Emer ging Strategy 
Consultation, Winter 2018; Draft Plan Consultation,  Winter 2019 goal that will continue to guide future policy and strategy.  
2.1.4  Derived from this District-wide vision, the Plan also sets out a series of eight ‘mini visions’ for distinct parts of the District. These aim to focus the over-arching goals of the main vision and the strategic objectives in a way that responds more specifically to local priorities, issues and needs. The place-making mini visions are set out in 
Chapter 3 
| Making Places . Core Policy CP4  (2.9) 
explains how these visions are integral to the Draft Plan’s development strategy.  
  
    Vision to 2040...  
 
Stroud District sits at the south-western edge of t he 
Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and extends westward across the Severn Vale, which is bordered by a rich estuarine landscape. This Vision  
draws upon our special environmental, social and economic qualities.  Our rural District is living, modern and innovative . We 
have responded to climate change, becoming carbon neutral by 2030 and continuing to adapt our lifesty les 
to live within our environmental limits, including travelling in sustainable ways. Our District supports a network of market towns, we ll 
connected to their rural hinterlands and complementary to the role of wider regional centres . 
Each contributes to our sustainable and thriving lo cal 
economy. We capitalise on our heritage, skills, and  
knowledge – exploiting our unique assets to nurture  
growth, particularly in high tech, green technologi es, 
creative industries and tourism. We are adaptable a nd 
able to respond to changing needs and modern lifestyles. We enjoy a high quality of life within our healthy,  
vibrant and diverse communities – large and small, urban and rural. These have a strong sense of their  
own identity and local distinctiveness – from Wotto n-
under-Edge in the south, to Stroud Town in the cent re 
and Upton St. Leonards in the north. They are all s afe 
and secure places, where the elderly and vulnerable  
are supported and young people have opportunities. Every day we see the richness, diversity and beauty  of 
our District. We nurture our high quality landscape s, 
green spaces, flourishing wildlife and historic and  
cultural heritage, from our arts and crafts, throug h to 
the Cotswold Canals and our wool and cloth mills. 
 A Vision of Stroud District in 2040...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 20  
 
2.2 Strategic objectives  for th e future  
2.2.1  Taking account of the identified issues and priorities, the Local Plan lists six principal objectives to provide a more tangible way of taking forward the overall vision for the District, and to help us to assess the relative merits of potential locations for strategic growth.  
2.2.2  Whilst there is considerable overlap, these seven objectives fall loosely into three topic areas: Homes and Communities, Economy and Infrastructure and Our Environment and Surroundings. Each of these forms the basis of a suite of policies later in this Plan ( 
Chapter 4 , 
Chapter 5  and Chapter 6 ).    
 Homes and communities: 
Strategic Objective SO1: Accessible communities 
Maintaining and improving accessibility to services and amenities, with: 
 Affordable and quality housing for local needs 
 Healthcare for all residents 
 Active social, leisure and recreation opportunities 
 Youth and adult learning opportunities 
Strategic Objective SO1a: Healthy, inclusive and safe communities 
Developing communities that enable healthy lifestyles; promote social interaction; support the  
elderly, the young and the vulnerable; ensure public safety and reduce the fear of crime.
 Economy and infrastructure:  
Strategic Objective SO2: Local economy and jobs 
Providing for a strong, diverse, vibrant local economy that supports existing businesses and encourages new enterprise – enabling balanced economic growth, coupled with enhancing skills and  job opportunities across the District. 
Strategic Objective SO3: Town centres and rural hinterlands 
Improving the safety, vitality and viability of our  
town centres, which link to and support the needs of their rural hinterlands. 
Strategic Objective SO4: Transport and travel 
Promoting healthier alternatives to the use of the private car and seeking to reduce CO 
2 emissions 
by using new technologies, active travel and/or smarter choices, working towards a more integrated transport system to improve access to local goods and services.  
 The 2015 Local Plan...  
Visit our Local Plan web page to see how these revisions compare to the six Strategic Objectives in the current Local Plan (page 18).  
   
www.stroud.gov.uk/localplan   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 21  
 
 
Strategic Objective SO5: Climate Change and environmental limits 
 
Promoting a development strategy that reduces our District’s carbon footprint, adapts to climate change and respects our environmental limits by: 
 Securing zero carbon development through building design 
 Maximising the re-use of buildings and recycling of building materials 
 Minimising the amount of waste produced and seeking to recover energy 
 Promoting the use of appropriately located brownfield land 
 Supporting a pattern of development that prioritises the use of sustainable modes of transport 
 Maintaining and enhancing the green infrastructure network 
 Minimising and mitigating against future flood risks, recycling water resources and protecting and enhancing the quality of our District’s surface and groundwater resources 
  
Strategic Objective SO6: Our District’s distinctive qualities 
Conserving and enhancing Stroud District’s distinctive qualities, based on landscape, heritage, townscape and biodiversity. 
  
[2] Our environment and surroundings    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 22  
 
2.3 An introduction to the development strategy  
2.3.1  The Local Plan’s development strategy sets out how we will deliver the vision  and objectives  
for the District. It identifies how much development will be supported, in order to meet objectively assessed needs, and where that development will be accommodated. It seeks to define the role of settlements within the District and how development will be co-ordinated with services and facilities at those settlements. 
2.3.2  The strategy recognises the close relationship of the District with the surrounding area. For example, the city of Gloucester lies adjacent to our boundaries and the M5/A38 corridor is an important link to the Midlands and Bristol and the South West. There are established net out-commuting patterns which the strategy seeks to influence. 
2.3.3  There has been extensive consultation and analysis of the type of development strategy most appropriate to deliver the desired vision and strategic objectives for the District. A range of alternatives has been tested.  The Local Plan Review’s Issues and Options  
document (Autumn 2017) detailed four alternative patterns for future growth in the District. The fou r 
options were:  
Option 1:  Continue to concentrate housing and 
employment development at a few large sites, locate d 
adjacent to the main towns in the District 
Option 2:  Take a more dispersed approach with some 
medium sized housing and employment sites on the edge of the larger villages, as well as towns 
Option 3:  Disperse development across the District 
with most villages including at least one small to medium site allocated to meet local needs 
Option 4:  Identify a growth point in the District to 
include significant growth, either as an expansion of 
an existing settlement, or to create a new settleme nt. 
In order to test whether these options were reasonable and deliverable (and to compare the potential impacts of each option), we identified potentially suitable and available sites from a ran ge of 
sources. We then assigned them to each option, depending upon their location and size. The finding s 
of this exercise were detailed in the Emerging 
Strategy  consultation paper (Autumn 2018). The diagram in 
Fig.4  (Chapter 3 | Making Places)  
illustrates the ‘filtration’ process through which each 
potential site was passed, as the sites were assess ed 
alongside the emergence of a preferred strategy.  Following both strategy and site testing, a ‘hybrid ’ 
strategy option ( 
Option 5 ) emerged, which most 
resembles Option 1 , but which includes elements 
from the other options: one or two growth points an d 
some wider dispersal to the smaller towns and large r 
villages. This was subject to consultation and furt her 
refinement in the Draft Local Plan  (Autumn 2020).  
Further potential sites that were promoted through the Emerging Strategy  and Draft Local Plan  stages 
have also been subject to assessment, to determine whether they have potential to contribute to the proposed development strategy. The potential need to find additional housing sites triggered a review  of 
strategy and site options in the Additional Housing 
Options paper (Autumn 2020). 
The development strategy now set out in this Pre-
Submission Draft Local Plan  is based upon ‘hybrid’ 
Option 5 , which incorporates some of the most 
sustainable and deliverable aspects of the four strategy options we consulted on in 2017 and makes use of the most suitable potential sites. Testing the options...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 23  
 
The development strategy’s headlines 
2.3.4  The Local Plan’s development strategy will distribute at least 12,600  additional dwellings 
and 79 hectares  of new employment land to 
meet needs for the next 20 years.  
2.3.5  The strategy supports the development of inclusive, diverse communities, with housing 
and employment in close proximity  and good 
access to wider services and facilities , to 
reduce our carbon footprint and to improve the District’s sustainability and self-containment. 
2.3.6  The strategy will concentrate housing growth  
at the main towns  of Cam and Dursley, 
Stonehouse and Stroud, where there is best access to services, facilities, jobs and infrastructure, and will support the regeneration of the canal corridor  through the 
Stroud valleys and at Berkeley/Sharpness .  
2.3.7  Housing and employment growth will also be centred at two new settlements  at Sharpness 
and at Wisloe within the Severn Vale (Rail /A38/M5 corridor), where there is the potential to create new sustainable communities along garden village principles. Further strategic 
employment growth will also be concentrated 
at accessible locations within the Rail/A38/M5 
corridor . 2.3.8  In order to meet wider development needs and to support and improve existing services 
and facilities at smaller towns and larger villages , modest levels of growth will be 
delivered at the local service centres of Berkeley, Minchinhampton, Nailsworth and Painswick.    
2.3.9  Lesser levels of growth will be delivered at the villages of Brimscombe & Thrupp, Eastington, Frampton-on-Severn, Kings Stanley, Kingswood, Leonard Stanley, North Woodchester and Whitminster. These are 
villages that have a range of local facilities and already benefit from good transport links , or they have the potential to develop 
better transport links  to strategic facilities at 
the nearby towns of Stroud and Wotton-under-Edge, where growth potential is limited by environmental constraints.  
2.3.10  The regeneration of previously used sites and further infill development to maximise the 
use of brownfield land will be supported at 
these and other settlements, within settlement development limits.  
2.3.11  Some limited development at small and medium- sized sites immediately adjoining settlement development limits at Tier 1-3 settlements will be allowed, to meet specific 
identified local development needs  (i.e. 
exception sites for first time buyers, self build and custom build housing, rural exception sites), subject to being able to overcome environmental constraints. 
2.3.12  At Tier 3b, 4a and 4b settlements, in addition to rural exception sites, the development of small sites of up to 9 dwellings outside settlement development limits will be supported in the interests of maintaining social sustainability , provided that the policy 
is supported by the local community. 
2.3.13  Within the Cotswolds AONB , priority will be 
given to the conservation and enhancement 
of the natural and scenic beauty of the landscape . But to support the social well-
being of AONB communities, the strategy supports limited housing development to meet needs arising from within the AONB . 
 The strategy...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 24  
 
  
Map 3.   The development strategy...  
The Local Plan’s growth strategy seeks to distribute at least 12,600 additional dwellings and sufficient new employment land to meet needs for the next 20 years. This strategy incorporates some of the most sustainable and deliverable aspects of the four strategy options we consulted on in 2017. 
 
CAM  
DURSLEY  
Wotton-Under-Edge Berkeley Nailsworth Newtown & 
Sharpness Wisloe 
Kingswood Brimscombe 
& Thrupp  North 
Woodchester  
Minchinhampton STROUD  STONEHOUSE  Hardwicke & 
Hunts Grove 
Painswick 
The Stanleys 
© Crown copyright and database rights 2021 Ordnance  Survey 100019682 Whaddon 
Frampton-on-Severn 
Whitminster 
Key to map  
Stroud District boundary Strategic locations for future growth (housing, community infrastructure and facilities) Strategic locations for future employment growth Locations for growth to meet local needs Sites for future growth (see more detailed maps in 
Chapter 3 ) 
Potential site for further growth at Sharpness, beyond 2040 Committed development (including sites allocated in the 2015 Local Plan and sites with planning permission) Safeguarded location for development to contribute towards meeting Gloucester’s housing needs  Settlements and urban areas Estuarine and river floodplain  The Cotswolds AONB 
Natural environment constraints (including 
key wildlife sites, ancient woodland, SSSI, Ramsar, SAC ...) 
 
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 25  
 
What this strategy means for where you live 
2.3.14  At  Cam , the strategy envisages: regenerating 
brownfield sites within the settlement; the consolidation of growth to the north east of the town, linking the parish centre with improved facilities at Cam and Dursley railway station and completing the linear park and local cycling and walking network; new housing development, community and open space uses to the north west, improving access to Jubilee Playing Field and creating a landscaped buffer between the existing edge of Cam and the M5 motorway. 
2.3.15  At  Dursley , the strategy envisages: regenerating 
brownfield sites within the settlement; supporting town centre improvements; improvements to the local cycling and walking network. 
2.3.16  At Stonehouse , the strategy envisages: 
regenerating brownfield sites within the settlement; supporting town centre improvements; extensions to planned growth to the north west of the town, including enhancing community facilities and additional open space; re-opening the Stroudwater station at Bristol Road; supporting improvements to the canal corridor and local walking and cycling routes.  2.3.17  At Stroud , the strategy envisages: 
regenerating brownfield sites for housing, employment and canal related tourism; supporting the better use of edge of town centre sites and public realm improvements; supporting improvements to the canal corridor, the rail station and local walking and cycling routes.  
2.3.18  At Hardwicke  and Hunts Grove , the strategy 
envisages: new housing development, community and open space uses to the south of Hardwicke; the continuing delivery of a new ‘Local Service Centre’ settlement at Hunts Grove, as established through the 2015 
Local Plan ; a focus on employment growth at 
Quedgeley East / Javelin Park; and access to new and enhanced facilities for residents and businesses.   
2.3.19  At Newtown/Sharpness  the strategy 
envisages: regeneration of Sharpness Docks; delivery of a new garden village community incorporating housing, employment, shopping, a new secondary school and other community and open space uses; with the opportunity to transform local transport facilities through a new rail station with services to Gloucester and rapid bus services to main towns including Bristol; and access to new and enhanced facilities for existing residents and businesses. 
2.3.20  At Wisloe  (south of Cambridge and 
Slimbridge) the strategy envisages: delivery of a new garden village community incorporating housing, employment, shopping, community and open space uses, with the opportunity to improve access to Cam & Dursley rail station and to local facilities for existing residents and businesses whilst protecting the setting of existing villages. 
2.3.21  At  Berkeley , Minchinhampton , Nailsworth , 
Painswick  and the smaller villages of 
Brimscombe and Thrupp , Eastington , 
Frampton-on-Severn , Kings Stanley , 
Kingswood , Leonard Stanley , North 
Woodchester and  Whitminster , the fewer 
and smaller development sites will be focused on meeting local housing needs and on enhancing or delivering new services and facilities which have been identified as lacking in those places, as set out in 
Chapter 2  (2.4). 
The focus will therefore be on using development to overcome existing infrastructure deficiencies and to deliver enhancements to places. 
 
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 26  
 
What are the key challenges to this development str ategy? 
2.3.22  The developing international climate and ecological emergency, the Covid-19 pandemic and potential structural changes to the UK economy due to Brexit present Stroud District with an extremely challenging context within which to plan for the future development needs of our communities. Some long term changes can be foreseen and planned for, others are yet to fully emerge. It will be important that emerging patterns and trends are monitored and the Local Plan is kept under regular review to try to respond as pro-actively as possible to changing circumstances.   
2.3.23  Delivering the growth expected by central Government within the next 20 year time horizon will be challenging. The strategy demands a sustained increase in house building rates beyond levels achieved in recent memory. The strategy includes supply from a range of small, medium, large and very large sites at a number of different locations, which together provide opportunities for all levels of the market to deliver. However, delivery rates are vulnerable to changes in economic cycles, brownfield sites can be complex and expensive to develop and the creation of new settlements is an ambitious undertaking. The development  strategy therefore includes additional housing and employment provision above minimum requirements, to ensure that local needs can be met. 
2.3.24  The increased levels of growth will put additional pressure on our roads, particularly at key network junctions within the District. A Sustainable Transport Strategy  has identified 
the key interventions required to deliver a modal shift to more sustainable forms of travel, by walking, cycling and by public transport. However, transport modelling work has identified the need for highway improvements at M5 junctions 12, 13 and 14, together with improvements along the A419 and A38 corridors. Such improvements will be required whatever the pattern of growth envisaged. Larger sites have more potential to help fund major infrastructure schemes and are more likely to attract public funding. 
2.3.25  Improvements to public transport will include increasing rail and bus services along main transport corridors, improvements to existing public transport interchanges and the creation of new interchanges at new growth locations. The Council continues to support improvements at existing rail stations, the provision of an additional rail station at Stonehouse on the Bristol-Birmingham main line and the reopening of the Sharpness branchline to new passenger services.
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 27  
 
Meeting Gloucester’s needs 
2.3.26  The Joint Core Strategy  for the Gloucester City, 
Tewkesbury Borough and Cheltenham Borough areas has identified that in the longer term additional sites will be required to meet Gloucester’s housing needs beyond 2028. Stroud District Council is committed to working together with these authorities and other authorities in Gloucestershire to identify the most sustainable sites to meet these future needs. 
2.3.27  An assessment of potential alternative sites to meet Gloucester’s long term housing needs has identified that certain locations within Tewkesbury Borough and Stroud District at the 
Gloucester fringe  are functionally related to 
Gloucester and offer the potential to meet Gloucester’s needs in accessible locations.  
2.3.28  At this stage, pending further work on the Joint 
Core Strategy Review , a site at  Whaddon  is 
safeguarded in the Local Plan to contribute to meeting Gloucester’s needs. The South of the District 
2.3.29  South Gloucestershire Council  is at the early 
stages of preparing a new Local Plan which is considering options for housing growth at Charfield and Buckover Garden Village, together with transport improvements at M5 Junction 14, the potential reopening of Charfield station and Metrobus and rural bus improvements. 
2.3.30  Growth and infrastructure improvements beyond Stroud District, but near to settlements in Stroud District, may have an impact on the final Local Plan. At this stage, the strategy for the south of the District (including growth and infill within settlements at 
Berkeley , Cam , Dursley , Kingswood , 
Newtown/Sharpness , Wisloe  and Wotton-
under-Edge ) will require improvements to 
strategic infrastructure, for example M5 Junction 14, but may also benefit from public transport and other planned improvements to services and facilities within this wider area. 
    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 28  
 
…How does the development strategy reflect the Loca l Plan’s strategic objectives?  
Homes and communities: 
SO1: Accessible communities 
2.3.31  New development will be located primarily within or adjacent to large settlements, where people can benefit from existing facilities and services that would be readily available and accessible. New settlements will be of sufficient size to provide a range of new facilities and services to support neighbouring communities. Services such as new schools, GP surgeries and leisure provision require a certain threshold of people within their catchment area to be viable. In developing a hybrid strategy based upon a concentrated approach, the strategy will enable a greater range of service and leisure provision, which can be used by people living within existing settlements as well as those inhabiting the new development. 
2.3.32  The development of larger housing sites is likely to bring about the provision of a greater number of affordable homes and a greater range of types and tenures than a dispersed option would. However, some small scale development within rural communities will help to address specific local needs (for example, within the Cotswolds AONB).     
2.3.33  The strategy also ensures that, through neighbourhood plans, local communities can propose more housing than the Local Plan does, to meet specific identified local needs. 
SO1a: Healthy, inclusive and safe communities  
2.3.34  The strategy supports the development of larger developments and new settlements where there are the opportunities to design in measures to support inclusive communities and healthier lifestyles: by creating a range of house types and tenures to meet differing needs; by creating layouts, a mix of uses and public spaces which offer natural surveillance and support social interaction; by creating walking and cycling routes that support active travel; and by delivering attractive wildlife and recreation corridors to support a sense of wellbeing. Economy and infrastructure: 
SO2: Local economy and jobs  
2.3.35  The development of employment sites in the M5/A38 corridor will mean that development can be located close to strategic road and rail network s 
and in places that business wants to be. It will cr eate 
the opportunity to provide a range of units from large warehousing and distribution units down to offices and smaller industrial units, possibly as s tart-
up businesses. Planning for employment together with housing also provides the opportunity for residents to work locally and to reduce out-commuting levels. 
SO3: Town centres and rural hinterlands  
2.3.36  By concentrating development within or adjacent to the District’s larger settlements, the strategy sho uld 
facilitate opportunities for the provision of new a nd 
improved services and facilities and will generate additional custom to sustain those already existing . 
Some smaller scale development at lower tier settlements will help to support our more local centres. A focus on brownfield regeneration and tourism- and leisure-led mixed-use development on sites lying close to the canal corridor and Stonehouse and Stroud town centres should bring about public realm enhancements, improved linkages and a boost to town centre trade. Strategic objectives...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 29  
 
 SO4: Transport and travel  
2.3.37  By concentrating development at locations where new and improved public transport and active travel routes will be prioritised and integrated, the strategy should deliver convenient, safe and healthier alternatives to the private car (to serve  
both existing and new communities). The strategy involves specific proposals to enhance the rail network through new stations at Stonehouse and at Sharpness and to deliver a strategic walking and cycling network along main movement corridors. 
2.3.38  Development in the Stroud Valleys and at Sharpness will contribute funds to the restoration of the canals and towpaths, as well as designing- in new links across the development sites, thereby improving direct access for surrounding communities as well as those occupying the development. This has the potential to reduce short car journeys, due to the availability of safe , 
off-road walking and cycling routes. Where possible the strategy will integrate housing and employment localities together, thereby reducing the need to travel and offering opportunities to live and work within the same neighbourhood 
.  
SO5: Climate change and environmental limits  
2.3.39  The strategy prioritises suitable sites that are located close to the District’s main settlements (to ease access to services, jobs and transport infrastructure, thereby minimising the need for daily travel by car) and at exemplar new settlements and strategic employment sites, which will promote zero and low carbon development and green technologies.  New development will be required to enhance local biodiversity, build to Net Zero Carbon construction standards and incorporate measures to adapt to climate change. For developments in areas with known surface water flooding issues, appropriate mitigation and construction methods will be required. The strategy identifies suitable areas to promote the generation of renewable energy. 
2.3.40  Regeneration of the Stroud Valleys and at Berkeley/Sharpness is likely to maximise the re-use and regeneration of vacant and underused brownfield sites and buildings. All new developments must make provision for waste recycling and, as a minimum, developments will be required to provide sufficient space to store and manage waste material.   
SO6: Our District’s distinctive qualities  
2.3.41  The strategy seeks to minimise the impact of development on biodiversity and sensitive landscapes by developing mitigation and avoidance strategies for internationally important nature conservation designations and directing development to locations which lie outside the Cotswolds AONB and other landscapes of high sensitivity to built development. Focusing development on brownfield sites will limit adverse effects on wildlife and habitats; while new development on both brown- and greenfield locations offers opportunities to design-in rich new habitat and wildlife areas. 
2.3.42  Development at Sharpness Docks provides an opportunity to create a new heritage- and leisure-led, sustainable tourism destination making the most of an under-realised heritage interest, the exceptional quality of the natural environment and the canal and marina, attracting local people and visitors from outside the District. Prioritising the development of brownfield sites in the Stroud Valleys along the canal corridor that are currently vacant and underused offers a chance to bring about townscape improvements and secure a new lease of life for features of the valleys’ unique industrial heritage. 
 Our environment and surroundings:    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 30  
 
2.4  Our towns and villages  
2.4.1  The Local Plan establishes a Settlement 
Hierarchy  (Core Policy CP3 ), based upon the 
roles and functionality of the district’s individua l 
towns and villages. The development strategy aims to prioritise growth at sustainable locations, in accordance with this hierarchy. 
2.4.2  Each of the settlements identified in the hierarchy has a defined settlement boundary or “settlement development limit”  (SDL), within 
and adjacent to which suitable development may be permitted. The nature and extent of “suitable” development is defined through the Plan’s Core and Delivery policies, many of which refer directly to the 
 CP3  hierarchy. 
2.4.3  Very small settlements not mentioned in the settlement hierarchy will be treated simply as countryside, where development will contribute to farming enterprises, recreation, tourism, or involve the conversion of rural buildings and provision of essential community facilities, in accordance with 
Core Policy CP15 .  
2.4.4  Chapter 3 | Making Places  provides a brief 
summary of the characteristics, constraints, role and function of each of Stroud District’s current  Study findings...  
The 2015 Local Plan  identified a hierarchy of settlements, consisting of five distinct tiers. The 
evidence for the 2015 hierarchy is contained within  the 2014 Settlement Role and Function 
Study , which compares the District’s towns and villages against a range of criteria, including size, 
access to services and facilities, level of retail provision and employment role.  
In order to understand the current and expected fut ure roles and functions of each of the main 
towns and villages in the District, and to help det ermine which places can support future growth 
and which places cannot, we have undertaken further  work to assess each settlement’s key 
characteristics and functions, relative to other se ttlements in the District (the 2018 Settlement 
Role and Function Study Update ). 
Refreshing the data and extending the analysis has suggested some changes to the 2015 
hierarchy. Information about individual settlements ’ key characteristics and functionality, and 
how they compare to others in the District, has als o helped to build a ‘case for growth’ for each 
settlement, which is reflected in the selection of proposed site allocations as well as policy 
wording throughout this Draft Plan. The development  strategy for each individual town and village 
seeks to address identified needs and opportunities  that are particular to the settlement and its 
community. 
 
Where can I find out more about the characteristics ,  
role and function of particular settlements?     
You can find fuller analysis, data and an explanati on of individual 
settlements “case for growth” in our Settlements Ro le and Function 
Study (2014) and Update (2018), which are available  through the 
Evidence Base pages of our website.  
 
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 31  
 
settlements and sets out the envisaged development strategy for each, including any proposed site allocations. The hierarchy distinguishes between settlements suited to (and capable of) meeting strategic growth needs and those with a more local community focus. 
New settlements 
2.4.5  The Local Plan’s development strategy envisages that housing and employment growth will continue at 
Hunts Grove  (a 
planned urban extension to Gloucester, established through the 2015 Local Plan ). It 
will also be centred at two new settlements at 
Sharpness  and Wisloe , within the Severn Vale 
(Rail/A38/M5 corridor), where there is potential to create new sustainable communities along garden city principles. 
2.4.6  These future settlements are not included within the Settlement Hierarchy  at present 
and the scale and nature of their growth and development is determined through their respective site allocation policies and subsequent planning applications. However, once development is sufficiently advanced to establish their anticipated role and function, it is expected that (through a future Local Plan 
Review ) they will be defined as settlements in their own right, with settlement development limits, and 
CP3  will then apply. 
2.4.7  The Plan anticipates that Hunts Grove  and 
the new settlement at Sharpness will both 
include sufficient local facilities to achieve Local Service Centre status  (Tier 2) in the 
future; while 
Wisloe  will function as a new 
Accessible Settlement with Local Facilities  
once complete (Tier 3a).  
2.4.8  National policy identifies that a new settlement should create a sustainable community, with sufficient access to services and employment opportunities within the development itself, or in larger towns to which there is good access. 
2.4.9  At both  Sharpness and Wisloe , development 
will be an exemplar for achieving carbon neutral development by 2030 and will take place in accordance with “ Garden City 
Principles ”.  
 
  A Garden City is a holistically planned new settlem ent 
which enhances the natural environment and offers high-quality affordable housing and locally accessi ble 
work in beautiful, healthy and sociable communities . 
The Garden City Principles are an indivisible and interlocking framework for their delivery, and incl ude: 
 Land value capture for the benefit of the community . 
 Strong vision, leadership and community engagement. 
 Community ownership of land and long-term stewardship of assets. 
 Mixed-tenure homes and housing types that are genuinely affordable. 
 A wide range of local jobs in the Garden City within  
easy commuting distance of homes. 
 Beautifully and imaginatively designed homes with gardens, combining the best of town and country to create healthy communities, and including opportunities to grow food. 
 Development that enhances the natural environment, providing a comprehensive green infrastructure network and net biodiversity gains, and that uses zero-carbon and energy-positive technology to ensure climate resilience. 
 Strong cultural, recreational and shopping faciliti es 
in walkable, vibrant, sociable neighbourhoods.  
 Integrated and accessible transport systems, with walking, cycling and public transport designed to b e 
the most attractive forms of local transport.  
“Garden City Principles” as defined by the Town and      
Country Planning Association    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 32  
 
settlements and sets out the envisaged development strategy for each, including any proposed site allocations. The hierarchy distinguishes between settlements suited to (and capable of) meeting strategic growth needs and those with a more local community focus. 
New settlements 
The Draft Plan’s development strategy anticipates that 
Hunts Grove  (a planned urban 
extension to Gloucester) and the proposed “Garden Village” at 
Newtown/Sharpness will 
both include sufficient local facilities to achieve  
Local Service Centre status  (Tier 2) in the future; 
while Wisloe  “Garden Village” will function as a 
new Accessible Settlement with Local Facilities  
once complete (Tier 3a).  
These future settlements are not included within the Settlement Hierarchy  at present and the 
scale and nature of their growth and development is determined through their respective site allocation policies and subsequent planning applications. However, once development is sufficiently advanced to establish their anticipated role and function, it i s 
expected that (through a future Local Plan 
Review ) they will be defined as settlements in 
their own right, with settlement development limits, and 
CP3  will then apply.   
 future growth targeted to settlements that have better access to services, facilities and infrastructure and which offer the best opportunities for sustainable development. 
 appropriate limitation on the amount, scale and nature of any development at lower tier settlements. 
 managed growth at each settlement, through a combination of site allocations and a policy framework that identifies an appropriate overall scale of growth, to be delivered through windfalls and other exceptions. 
 growth that is sustainable and proportionate to each settlement’s functionality, capacity and character, taking account of each settlement’s relative constraints and opportunities. 
   
 
 a policy framework that takes account of the cumulative impact of successive developments at a settlement, to ensure that the impacts of each individual proposal are seen in the context of the settlement’s overall capacity for growth over the lifetime of the Plan. 
 the creation of new sustainable communities, planned along garden village principles 
  The strategy...  
...Meeting the future needs of our individual towns  and villages   
Having taken into consideration local views, nation al policy and evidence where available, the strateg y 
set out within this Local Plan seeks to deliver: 
Housing and employment growth 
will be centred at two new 
settlements within the Severn 
Vale (A38/M5 corridor), where there is potential to create new 
sustainable communities along garden city principles. 
 
  ‘Garden village’ allocations 
PS36   Sharpness new settlement: 
Up to 2,400 dwellings by year 2040, 10 ha employment, local centre, community uses (including new secondary school) and open space. 
PS37   Wisloe new settlement: 
Up to 1,500 dwellings, 5 ha employment, local centre, community uses and open space. 
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 33  
 
2.5  Housing  
Stroud District’s housing requirement up to 2040 
2.5.1  One of the Government’s top priorities is to signif icantly boost the supply of homes in the 
country to meet housing needs and to address long t erm affordability issues. To deliver the 
housing required, the Government has introduced a formula to establish the minimum number 
of homes  expected to be met by every local authority in the  country. These are based on 
projections of local household needs and the relati ve cost of housing in each area. Departing 
from these minimum targets can only be justified in  exceptional circumstances.  
2.5.2  The Council has worked with adjoining authorities i n Gloucestershire to prepare a Local Housing 
Needs Assessment  that identifies the amount and types of housing th at are likely to be needed 
during the Plan period to 2040. The assessment conf irms the Government’s standard method for 
the Local Plan to provide for at least 630 new home s per year. This is a 40% increase from the 
figure in the 2015 Local Plan  of 456 homes per year. During 2019/20 662 homes we re built in the 
District.  
2.5.3  Much of our natural population growth is due to inc reasing life expectancy, while changes in 
lifestyles and family structures mean that small an d single-person households are on the rise. 
People are also moving here from other parts of Glo ucestershire and the rest of the country, 
attracted by the quality of the environment. 630 ne w homes per year will address housing needs 
whilst also being sufficient to provide the future workers to support the economic growth likely 
to take place within the District.  
2.5.4  To meet this new challenging target every year over  a 20 year period requires the Local Plan to 
identify land for at least 12,600  new homes. Some of the dwellings likely to be buil t from 2020 
have already received permission or are firm “commi tments” (i.e. they are awaiting signing of 
legal agreements). Not all permissions are likely t o be implemented, though, and so an [1]  
Calculating our residual housing requirement 
up to 2040  Supply A Large sites commitments, at April 2020 (on sites with permission / under construction) 4,606  
B Small sites commitments, at April 2019 (on sites with permission / under construction) 525  
C Other firm commitments, at April 2019 (on sites subject to resolutions to grant permission) 84  
D Total commitments (= A + B + C) 5,215  
E Commitments (D) minus undeliverable sites  4,595  Requirement F Housing needs 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2040 (= 630 pa  x 20 years) 12,600  
G Minimum residual housing requirement to 2040 (= F - E) 8,005  
    
 Allocated sites in Local Plan 9,065  
Small sites allowance (75 pa x 17 years)  1,275  
Total housing supply in Local Plan 10,340  
 The development strategy needs to 
establish just how and where at least 
8,000 new homes are to be located 
across the District by 2040  
 Table 2 ... housing requirement to 2040  
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 34  
 
assessment of deliverablity is undertaken every yea r. The latest assessment of the likely housing 
supply means that the residual number of homes that  the Draft Local Plan must identify is 
actually at least  8,000  dwellings. Table 2  (preceding page) illustrates this. 
2.5.5  In addition to meeting Stroud’s housing needs, this  Local Plan addresses unmet needs from 
neighbouring Gloucester  by allocating a site for 3,000 dwellings at Whaddon  for delivery by 
2040.  
Stroud District’s housing distribution up to 2040  
2.5.6  A range of potential locations capable of providing  for housing needs in accordance with the 
overall growth strategy have been assessed and test ed against planning and sustainability 
criteria, to determine the most appropriate locatio ns. 
2.5.7  The development strategy proposes housing allocatio ns at the District’s existing main 
settlements, on the edge of Gloucester , and at two new settlements to be located at 
Newtown/Sharpness  and at Wisloe within the Severn Vale (Rail/A38/M5 corridor).  
2.5.8  Modest housing allocations will also be delivered a t the local service centres of Berkeley , 
Minchinhampton , Nailsworth  and Painswick and lesser levels of housing will be allocated at t he 
Tier 3a villages of Brimscombe and Thrupp , Frampton-on-Severn , Kings Stanley , Kingswood , 
Leonard Stanley  and Whitminster . 
2.5.9  Other housing proposals will be supported, in accor dance with the Local Plan’s settlement 
hierarchy, within settlement development limits and , in specifically defined policy cases, outside 
of settlement development limits. These additional elements of supply will deliver levels of 
housing growth above the minimum requirement, provi ding for flexibility and headroom.  
Strategic sites  Number of 
dwellings at each  
Cam North West 900  
Cam North East Extension 180  
South of Hardwicke 1,350  
Hunts Grove Extension 750  
Sharpness Docks 300  
Sharpness 2,400  
(5,000 by 2050) 
Stonehouse North West  700  
Wisloe 1,500  
Local sites at smaller 
settlements   985 
(cumulative)  
Total  At least  9,065  
  Table 3 ... distribution of housing across Stroud District 
(Core Policy CP2)  
 
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 35  
 
  
2.5.10  Public consultation has highlighted a range of hous ing issues facing Stroud District, while our Local 
Housing Needs Assessment  (2020) identifies the amount and types of housing that are likely to be 
needed during the Plan period to 2040.  
2.5.11  The Local Plan’s development strategy seeks to tack le local housing needs that aren’t currently being 
addressed by the market, including opportunities to grow the rented sector and to meet those wishing 
to build their own homes. The Local Plan also seeks  to enable young people to be able to stay within 
rural neighbourhoods and to meet the needs of older  people or those with disabilities through flexible  
forms of accommodation including adaptable and acces sible homes.    
2.5.12  The Stroud District Settlement Role and Function Study Update  (2018) highlighted the fact that 
housing accessibility and housing affordability var ies markedly across different parts of the District . 
Effects on social cohesion and the vitality of comm unities may be particularly acute in settlements th at 
have seen low levels of housing growth in recent de cades, including some communities in the AONB, 
many of which are highly constrained, yet have some  of the District’s highest property prices and are 
likely to be amongst the most affected by the Distr ict-wide trend towards an ageing population.  
2.5.13  Evidence shows that:   
 House prices have increased by the highest percenta ge within the South West when compared to 
the other regions of England.  
 Much of the housing stock in the District is quite old and the worst housing conditions are most 
evident in the private rented sector.  
 Stroud on average is one of the least deprived dist ricts/unitary authorities in the country. However, 
there are pockets of deprivation, particularly in r elation to housing and service provision.  Study findings...  
Local need...   
Like many places in the UK, housing affordability is a 
particular issue for young families and first time buyers 
across the District. Nationally, home ownership among 25- to 34-year-olds has fallen from 59 % just over a 
 decade ago 
to just 37 % today.  
Over recent years, residents have been able to move  into brand new 
Council homes completed in Stroud District, includi ng at Berkeley (top) 
and Cam (above). 
 Community-led...  
A recently-completed 
community-led project to build new homes for local 
people in Nailsworth is part of a growing 
movement in the UK. Community-led housing comes in many forms, including co-operative and mutual home ownership, co-housing and group self-build. 
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 36  
 
 
...Meeting Stroud District’s housing needs up to 20 40  
Having taken into consideration local views, nation al policy and evidence where available, the housing  strategy set out within this Local Plan seeks to d eliver: 
 at least 630 new homes per year for a 20 year period 
 a mix of brownfield and greenfield allocated housing sites of varying sizes to ensure delivery is maintained throughout the plan period 
 at least 30% affordable homes on all sites of 10 dwellings or above in urban areas and on all sites of 4 or more dwellings in designated rural areas 
 additional affordable homes directly by the District Council, as well as working with and supporting parish councils, co-operatives, community land trusts and community housing groups 
 a mix of dwelling types (1 bed, 2 bed, 3 bed, 4+ bed, flats, houses, bungalows, etc.) on Local Plan housing sites, in proportion to identified local needs  a range of housing tenures, including build to rent, subject to local needs 
 exception sites for first time buyers and renters, subject to local needs 
 rural exception sites to meet local affordable needs 
 small scale housing in rural areas in the interests of social sustainability, subject to loca l 
community support  
 self- and custom-built homes to meet needs identified on the self- and custom-build register, through a combination of site allocations and rural exception sites 
 homes for older people, including sheltered and extra care, as well as smaller two-bedroom dwellings and bungalows, designed to adaptable and accessible standards, allowing people to live for longer in their own homes  accommodation to meet the specific needs of travellers, including local gypsies travelling showpeople 
 housing for local people, including where appropriate, using local occupier clauses to ensure local housing needs are met within or adjacent to existing communities  
 supporting infrastructure to meet the needs of those living within the District. 
       The strategy...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 37  
 
2.6 Local economy and jobs  
Stroud District’s employment requirement up to 2040  
2.6.1  Stroud District has a strong and prosperous economy  and is home to world class companies and 
an innovative, resilient and successful small busin ess sector. The Council has a commitment to 
work closely with the business community to grow th e local economy and increase employment.  
The Local Plan has a role in providing certainty to  the business community to make long term 
investment decisions, while also providing the fram ework for creating an attractive environment, 
including providing for a range and choice of sites  and premises. 
2.6.2  Gloucestershire’s Local Enterprise Partnership GFirstLEP  has produced a draft Local Industrial 
Strategy (LIS)  which seeks to establish Gloucestershire as a “mag net county”, able to successfully 
attract and retain talent in the region. The LIS se eks to focus growth based upon its existing and 
emerging industrial strengths around: manufacturing ; aerospace; agri-tech; cyber-tech; and 
green growth. Stroud District has an important role  to play in delivering this strategy as the local 
economy has particular strengths within manufacturi ng, advanced engineering, agriculture and 
food manufacturing and emerging green technologies.  To underpin this strategy, the LIS sets out 
the importance of investing in people in order to a ttract and retain a talented workforce. 
Expected labour supply and labour demand job foreca sts for the District suggest the need to plan 
for between 7,740 and 10,440  net new jobs (2020-2040). 
2.6.3  Commissioned jointly by all Gloucestershire council s, the Gloucestershire Economic Needs 
Assessment  (2020) examined a range of scenarios for future ec onomic growth to establish future 
employment land requirements for each District. For  Stroud District potential requirements for 
the Plan period ranged from an additional 44.5 hect ares to 71.8 hecatres. The Assessment 
recommended that the Council should consider meetin g two of the highest scenarios: a scenario 
based upon the expected labour supply and a slightl y higher labour demand growth scenario 
based on supporting further growth in the key LIS sectors. This means supporting a net increase  
The development strategy needs to 
ensure that sufficient employment 
land is provided to meet the future 
needs of business and balance the 
planned housing growth  
 Table 4 ... employment requirement up to 2040 (hec tares)  
 Calculating our residual employment 
requirement up to 2040  Supply A Commitments, at April 2020 (on sites with permission / under construction) 52.1 ha  
B Potential losses from ‘B’ uses, (average 2.03 ha lost per year since 2006 x 20) 40.6 ha  
C Total commitments net of potential losses (= A - B) 11.5 ha  Requirement D Employment requirement for   1 April 2020 to 31 March 2040  62.4 – 
71.8 ha  
H Minimum residual employment requirement to 2040 (= D - C) 50.9 – 
60.3 ha  
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 38  
 
 in employment land (offices, industrial and storage and distribution) 
 of between 62 and 
72 hectares  for the Plan period. Table 4  
(preceding page) illustrates this. The Assessment considered Covid-19 and Brexit impacts on requirements, but a review will be necessary once the full implications of these factors becomes apparent. 
2.6.4  To complement and build upon the Gloucestershire Economic Needs Assessment , 
the District Council commissioned a new Employment Land Review  (2021). This looked 
in detail at the local commercial market and identified occupancy rates at well above 90% for industrial and to a lesser degree office space, suggesting an undersupply of premises against demand. Key markets identified included: a focus of industrial and warehouse development at 
Quedgeley , Hardwicke and 
M5 Junction 12 ; a focus of industrial activity at 
Stonehouse ; a market for smaller and more 
modest industrial units within the Stroud 
Valleys ; a key local office market in Stroud , 
Stonehouse  and certain rural locations; a 
growing focus on start-ups/micro businesses in green technology sectors at 
 Berkeley  as well as 
more traditional industrial and distribution activity at 
 Sharpness . In addition, there is an 
active rural market for a mix of office and small workshop space. 
 *[image credits see page 341] 
Creative...  
 Architectural practice Millar Howard Workshop has based itself in a former Stroud Valleys woollen mill. Our area’s rich industrial heritage is fertile ground for creative industries and new start-ups seeking flexible and character-
filled work space.  
 
Co-working... 
Stroud District has above average levels of self-employment and home-working. Co-working 
premises such as 
SpaceHoppers in Stroud and Cluster in Chalford cleverly cater to this market, providing not just a desk or a meeting room, but interaction and support 
for individuals who might 
otherwise feel isolated in their work. © Megan Crouse 
USP...  
Stroud District has exceptional natural, cultural a nd heritage capital. 
Marketing our area’s ‘unique selling points’ not on ly boosts tourism, but may 
help to draw re-locating or start-up businesses to the District and to increase 
the District’s appeal as a place to live and work.    
 
High Tech...  
Global engineering company Renishaw, 
whose main UK base is at Wotton-
Under-Edge (Kingswood), has a 
dedicated Education Outreach Officer. 
   
 [3] © Renishaw  [1] 
[2] Co-location...  
The Plan’s Strategy seeks to 
regenerate under-utilised 
sites and to continue the 
2015 Local Plan’s aspiration 
to grow sustainable 
communities by planning 
new employment and new 
housing together where 
possible. 
Littlecombe in Dursley was a 
major allocation in the 2005 
Local Plan. When finished, it 
will have created more than 
400 new homes, 700 new 
jobs, a new business park 
and 40 acres of green space, 
as well as being home to the 
Vale Community Hospital.  
[5] 
[4] SpaceHoppers   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 39  
 
 
2.6.5  Six key segments of market demand have been identif ied for future employment land supply to 
satisfy: large industrial/warehousing units at key locations within the A38/M5 corridor, serving 
the wider Gloucestershire/regional market; meeting the growth needs of existing mid-sized/ 
large local manufacturing and warehousing businesse s in Stonehouse /Stroud Valleys ; meeting 
the needs for larger offices in the Stonehouse area; supporting local scale expansion at existing 
employment areas; development space to meet the nee ds of specific businesses; and 
encouraging the growth of the high-technology secto rs, particularly focussed on green 
technologies. 
2.6.6  One of the key challenges facing the local economy of the future is the predicted sharp rise over 
the next 20 years in the number of older people liv ing in the District compared, with the very 
small rise in the number of younger people of tradi tional working age. In addition, many young 
people are choosing not to remain in Gloucestershir e. Supporting local businesses and avoiding 
skills and job shortages will require a range of so lutions including trying to retain our young 
people within Gloucestershire and encouraging inwar d migration. A higher value economy and 
better quality jobs will also be part of the soluti on.  
2.6.7  There is considerable out-commuting to work, which presents a big challenge if we are to reduce 
our District’s carbon footprint: as a rural distric t, many people are car-dependent, so we also need 
to ensure that access to jobs, services and facilit ies can be improved in the future and our chosen 
strategy must enable more sustainable forms of tran sport to be used. In order to stem out-
commuting Stroud will need to attract more knowledg e-based industries, enabling greater 
employment opportunities for the highly skilled and  well qualified working population. This 
suggests a need for the District to both increase a nd diversify its employment base, in order to 
provide local job opportunities appropriate to the workforce and to help reduce the number of 
people travelling to towns and cities beyond the Di strict for work. 
  
© Bluesky International Ltd. / Getmapping PLC| © Cr own copyright and database 
rights 2021 Ordnance Survey 100019682 | OS, Esri, H ERE, Garmin Employment hub...  
Stonehouse is one of the District’s largest employm ent hubs. Home to more 
than 7,000 jobs, the town is unusual in being a net  importer of workers. 
 
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 40  
 
 Stroud District’s employment distribution up to 204 0  
2.6.8  The Local Plan seeks to provide for new employment land and support existing employment areas 
located at the key employment property market areas  identified in the ELR : south of Gloucester ; 
within the M5/A38 corridor, at Stonehouse , Stroud , Cam/Dursley , Berkeley/Sharpness ; and the 
Stroud Valleys . These include areas near to existing successful b usiness parks at Quedgeley East  
(Hardwicke), Severn Distribution Park  (Sharpness) and Stroudwater Business Park  (Stonehouse), 
and co-located with new housing at the proposed new  settlements. The GFirstLEP  also has a 
focus on the Rail/A38/M5 corridor as a location for  growth reflecting the good connections to 
the Midlands and the South West. 
2.6.9  As well as supporting development within the key em ployment property areas, co–locating 
employment with housing provides the best opportuni ty for greater self containment and 
shorter journeys to work by means of transport othe r than the car. A side benefit may be that 
higher value residential land uses can help improve  the viability of lower value employment 
land uses in mixed development proposals. 
2.6.10  There are particular opportunities associated with developing new modern business park 
premises at Quedegley East , Javelin Park  and at  Stonehouse  and for growing Green 
technologies at Stonehouse  and at Berkeley-Sharpness . 
2.6.11  Whilst the identification of large new allocations forms part of the strategy, Stroud District has 
above average levels of self-employment and home wo rking, accelerated during the Covid-19 
pandemic. Changes in working practices, linked to t he roll out of fast broadband, could see a 
sustained interest in home working and an increase in the demand for smaller, more flexible 
work environments, including co-working space and l ive-work units. These local forms of 
development are also supported in the Plan. 
   
 Table 5 ... distribution of new employment land 
(Core Policy CP2)  
 
Strategic sites  Hectares at each  
Quedgeley East Extension 5 ha  
Javelin Park 27 ha  
Sharpness Docks 7 ha  
Sharpness 10 ha  
Stonehouse North West 5 ha  
Stonehouse Eco-Park  (M5 J13) 10 ha  
Wisloe 5 ha  
Renishaw New Mills 10 ha  
Total   79 ha  
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 41  
 
   
 
   
 economic growth and additional jobs on and adjacent to existing high value employment sites and within the M5/A38/rail growth corridor 
 new employment sites of varying sizes and locations to meet the specific locational requirements of different sectors, with particular support for green technology hubs 
 support for affordable, low cost sites and premises with flexible terms for business start ups  
 opportunities to foster on-going employment-education links  
  new employment together with new housing to create sustainable communities and to reduce the potential for further out commuting   
 support for the faster roll out of broadband 
 support for co-working facilities, particularly at town centres 
 continued support for appropriate farm diversification proposals, subject to environmental criteria 
 a more flexible approach towards encouraging tourism businesses including accommodation, subject to more appropriate locational and environmental criteria 
 regeneration of under-utilised or low value employment sites for other uses, provided this does not undermine key employment sectors.  
  ...Meeting Stroud District’s employment needs up to  2040   
Having taken into consideration local views, nation al policy and evidence where available, the 
employment strategy set out within this Local Plan seeks to deliver: The strategy...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 42  
 
2.7 Our town centres   
2.7.1  Nationally, shopping patterns have changed signific antly since the 1970s. The rise of the out of 
town supermarkets and retail parks in the 1980s sta rted a decline in the traditional role of high 
streets providing for all of our shopping needs. Th e more recent onset of e-retailing in all its 
forms: click and collect; home deliveries; and onli ne shopping has provided a new and growing 
challenge. Services such as banks, building societi es and estate agents are closing with the 
continued growth of online banking and web based se rvices where a presence on the high 
street is no longer required.  
2.7.2  However, there is also a positive story to tell wit h the rise in local food stores and food outlets, 
giving evidence to the trend of a newly emerging fo od and cafe culture. This is reinforced by the 
trend for increased ‘eating out’. A further factor may be the growth in interest in locally 
sourced and organic foods and also the trend toward s healthy eating. 
2.7.3  The COVID-19 pandemic has affected all parts of the  UK retail and service sectors, with the 
comparison goods retail and the food/beverage secto rs most affected during 2020 and 2021. 
Whilst significant efforts are being made to bring the economy and day to day life back to 
normal, it is likely that the way people will use t own centres in the future will change. An 
emerging trend has been for more frequent visits to  small centres together with an increased 
rate in the rise of internet shopping with forecast ers suggesting town centre retailing is unlikely 
to return to pre-COVID levels. 
2.7.4  There are opportunities to improve the quality of c omparison goods floorspace provision within 
each of the main town centres in the District, alth ough realism is required in relation to the 
ability for the main towns to significantly improve  their respective market shares. 
 
    ©Nick Turner    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 43  
 
 
2.7.5  Recent investment in  Stroud  town centre at Merrywalks demonstrates that despite  difficult 
market conditions it remains feasible to improve ex isting and attract new comparison goods 
floorspace. Stroud has a strong independent retaili ng sector and there are opportunities to 
further enhance  both this and the evening economy. The provision of  two new foodstores (ALDI 
and Lidl) will provide a qualitative improvement in  grocery store provision in the town and will 
add to choice and competition for the local populat ion. 
2.7.6  Wotton-under-Edge  and Nailsworth  have the potential to increase their market share in terms 
of convenience goods floorspace, via qualitative im provements in the retail offer and clawback 
convenience goods capacity which is currently being  lost to other settlements (including 
Stroud ). There are opportunities to improve the quality o f comparison goods floorspace 
provision within each of the main town centres in t he District, although realism is required in 
relation to the ability for the main towns to signi ficantly improve their respective market 
shares.  
2.7.7  The ongoing pattern of change suggests that for sma ller centres such as those within our 
District, town centre strategies which support the evolution of the high street are vital so we 
can capitalise on what makes our town centres disti nctive and unique. 
2.7.8  The Local Plan establishes a retail hierarchy  (Core Policy CP12 ) based upon the function of the 
town centres and supports proposals for improving t he quantity and quality of retail floorspace 
at the main town centres, particularly at Stroud . Proposals are directed in the first instance to 
primary shopping areas within designated town centr es, other town centre locations and local 
centres with edge-and out-of-centre proposals teste d against their impact on the health of 
nearby town centres. However, it is recognised that  the core area for shopping needs to be 
balanced with a more flexible approach to uses outs ide of these areas, so that other leisure, 
community, employment and residential uses can help  to retain vitality and viability in our 
town centres.
 
  Study findings...  
A Future of Town Centres report  (2017) and 
Retail / Town Centre Planning Policy Advice  
(2021), which have looked at the top tier town centres of Stroud, Dursley, Nailsworth, Stonehouse and Wotton-under-Edge, are suggesting the following options for helping our town centres to meet these challenges: 
 Supporting existing retailers to make better use of websites and e-retailing to widen their appeal and increase footfall  
 Marketing our town centres on-line for their leisure and tourism potential 
 Reviewing town centre car parking charges 
 Reviewing town centre planning policies and boundaries to reflect a smaller future retail area and to be more flexible to encourage other uses into town centres 
 Supporting small town centre office uses which provide work spaces with flexible rental arrangements 
 Supporting local independent retailer investment 
These recommendations equally may apply to other town centres in the District. 
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 44  
 
  
2.7.9  The Retail/ Town Centre Planning Policy Advice  (2021) assesses that no additional 
comparative or comparison floorspace is required to address needs in and around the District’s five main town centres for the next ten years.
 The focus should be on supporting 
existing provision within the defined town centres and ensuring that the regulatory (land use) environment is sufficiently flexible to allow local independent retailers to invest. Modest provision of additional convenience floorspace, will be required, however, at planned local centres at 
Great 
Oldbury , Hunts Grove , Whaddon  and the 
two new settlements at Sharpness and 
Wisloe to serve localised need. In addition, 
the Local Plan sets out a number of policy approaches and physical enhancements to support the District’s main town centres.   
 Diversity and niche... 
As well as providing services to our 
communities, our town centres have a role as drivers of economic activity and providers of employment. Our town centres may have to draw increasingly upon their own ‘unique selling 
points’ in order to remain 
economically healthy and well-used places in the future, 
particularly in the face of changing 
retail practices.  
 
[2] 
[3] [4] [5] [6] [1] 
[7] *[image credits see page 341]   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 45  
 
Having taken into consideration local views, national policy and evidence where available, the town centre strategy set out within the Local Plan seeks to deliver:  
 the level and type of future retail floorspace needed for at least a ten year period 
 a more flexible planning policy framework, which prioritises retail uses within primary shopping areas but allows for a more diverse range of supporting uses in wider designated town centres 
 continued support for town centres as the most appropriate location for main retail and leisure uses especially for young people 
 office uses providing work spaces with flexible rental arrangements in town centres 
 support for existing markets and sites and/or policies which support further markets 
 Stroud 
 improvements to the Merrywalks shopping centre and retail and leisure offer 
 the redevelopment of brownfield sites (including those identified in the Stroud Town Centre Neighbourhood Plan) for appropriate uses including housing, retail and leisure 
 improvements to Stroud station; and investigate the potential for an integrated transport hub 
 walking and cycling links to and from the Stroudwater canal and the wider Stroud valleys network 
Nailsworth  
 pedestrian improvements to Market Street 
 redevelopment of the town square area to provide a better retail and leisure experience, including new homes and open space 
 an improved and centrally located town council, library and tourism facility 
 improved walking and cycling links to the wider Stroud valleys network Dursley  
 brownfield sites for redevelopment for housing and town centre uses 
 access improvements to Market Hall, if practical 
 environmental improvements to Parsonage Street 
 urban design, signage and public realm improvements and other proposals as set out in the Dursley Neighbourhood Plan 
 improved walking and cycling links connecting with Cam and Uley 
Wotton-under-Edge 
 opportunities for town centre improvements facilitated by the provision of additional parking 
 priorities set out in the Community Plan Update 2016 
 the Wotton-Charfield-Kingswood Greenway walking and cycling route  
Stonehouse 
 better cycling and walking links, with signage to /  
from the canal to the wider Stroud valleys network 
 proposals set out in the Stonehouse Neighbourhood Plan The strategy...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 46  
 
 
Other centres 
At the District Centres of Berkeley , Cam , 
Minchinhampton  and Painswick , the Local Plan 
supports public realm improvements, signage and improved walking and cycling links from existing and future development. At Cam centre, the proximity of new development will provide opportunities to complete the Greenway cycle and walking link connecting the centre with Cam & Dursley rail station and Dursley, to enhance use of the adjacent Rackleaze wildlife area for leisure use and to improve walking and cycling from Draycott to the centre.   Additional local centres at the new settlements of 
Sharpness  and Wisloe  will be of a scale 
proportionate to meeting the everyday needs of their communities and supporting the retail and leisure role of district and main town centres, particularly those at Berkeley and Cam and Dursley. 
             
 
 [7] 
Leisure...  
Recent years have seen a rise in the 
number of leisure uses at town 
centre locations; many of our town 
centres benefit from independent 
cafes and shops, traditional markets 
and an attractive landscape setting.    
    ©Nick Turner    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 47  
 
2.8 Local green spaces and community 
facilities  
2.8.1  The Local Plan provides the opportunity to consider whether there are local community needs within existing towns and villages that are not currently being provided for. The loss of public houses, village shops and other facilities can leave communities without places to meet and enjoy together. A more active or growing community can need more or differing play and sports facilities. Sometimes development can offer opportunities to deliver new community facilities in places where existing deficiencies exist. 
2.8.2  Equally, there may be existing places and spaces that are valued by the community but are not explicitly recognised in existing plans. Existing community facilities can be identified for protection. Local green spaces can be identified for special protection. These are local areas of particular importance to local communities for their beauty, tranquillity and/or historic, wildlife or recreation value but should not involve extensive tracts of land.   
        Study findings...  
An Open Space, Green Infrastructure (GI), Sport and Re creation Study  has been produced for the 
District, which includes a full audit of all access ible open spaces across the District. The study 
identifies the quality, quantity and accessibility of current provision, produces local provision 
standard recommendations in accordance with relevan t guidance and local needs, and identifies 
opportunities to protect and extend the green infra structure network.  
Key findings include: 
 The distribution of open space varies across the Di strict, however, there are identified shortages 
of at least 1 typology of open space in all Parishe s and clusters/sub areas. 
 Access to formal open space is concentrated within populated areas. There is generally good 
access to large areas of natural green space across  the eastern half of the district, with large gaps 
in the western part of the district. 
 The majority of open spaces surveyed are of good qu ality. Local households however rated 
facilities for teenagers, artificial turf pitches a nd tennis/netball courts as poor or worse. In 
contrast, households rated parks and recreation gro unds, woodlands, wildlife areas and nature 
reserves as being good or very good. 
 A series of strategic and district GI corridors hav e been identified and key opportunities 
highlighted where gaps in the network could be fill ed through positive intervention. 
 Potential sport, health and wellbeing hubs focused around playing pitches have been identified in 
the north and south of the District as well as a nu mber of other priority pitch related projects. 
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 48  
 
 
2.8.3  Future housing and population growth will increase localised demand for many forms of open space and sports facilities and it will be important to review the level of provision, especially in areas of rapid population change. 
  
 There is scope for further health and fitness facilities at leisure centres and for further indoor waterspace opportunities. Existing Council owned pools are in good condition and well used.  
 Whilst the quantity of sports halls is good and there is a strong record of community use and management of school facilities, some of the older school sports halls are in need of upgrade and repair and some sports would benefit from bespoke facilities e.g. gymnastics. 
 There is a lack of “track and field” training facilities for athletes and indoor tennis facilities, although there is provision in Gloucester. 
 There is generally a good spread of community halls across the District. In some locations their upgrading will help to meet community needs where access to more centrally planned leisure centres is difficult. 
 *[image credits see page 341] 
 Strategic planning... 
Brimscombe Port, a key piece in the Cotswold Canals  restoration 
jigsaw, is one of the Local Plan’s proposed site al locations. 
The Plan’s development strategy supports the planne d provision 
of community facilities, public spaces and green in frastructure, 
alongside housing growth, through the masterplannin g of 
strategic sites and other major developments.  
Leisure...  
As our population 
grows, well-planned 
and maintained local 
green spaces are an 
important resource, to 
help ease some of the 
recreational pressures 
on our valued 
landscapes and 
protected habitats, 
including the Cotswold 
Beechwoods and hilltop 
commons. 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] [4] 
[5] [6]   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 49  
 
 
...Meeting Stroud District’s community and green sp ace needs up to 2040  
Having taken into consideration local views, nation al policy and evidence where available, the open sp ace and community strategy set out within this Loca l 
Plan seeks to deliver: 
 policy protection for important open spaces within settlements, outdoor recreation facilities, playing fields or allotments, within or  
relating to settlements 
 a mapped GI network, linking urban areas to the wider countryside, identifying important habitats, landscape features, river and green corridors and ecological networks 
 a set of standards for local open space, sport and recreation facility provision, to guide future development 
 site opportunities to address shortfalls in local open space, sport, recreation and community facility provision and to address gaps in the GI network and enhance the network function 
 restoration of the derelict canal between Stonehouse and Saul Junction, reconnecting Stroudwater Navigation to the Gloucester & Sharpness Canal, including creating 30 hectares of biodiverse habitat and canal towpath  improvements to the Stonehouse to Nailsworth cycleway, including biodiversity improvement and resurfacing work; delivery of the Cam, Dursley and Uley Greenway and provision of a new Greenway linking Wotton under Edge, Kingswood and Charfield; and a new Golden Valley route between Chalford and Stroud 
 support for the identification of local green spaces through Neighbourhood Development Plans and the protection of community facilities through existing Assets of Community Value legislation 
 opportunities to address identified community needs in association with new development through the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and s106 agreements  
 support for the planned provision of community facilities alongside housing growth, through masterplanning of strategic and other major developments  continued protection of identified areas of biodiversity, landscape, and heritage importance 
 a mitigation strategy for the Cotswold Beechwoods SAC, to assess and address recreational pressures including from growth within Gloucester. The  strategy...    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 50  
 
2.9 Core policies  
2.9.1  The six ‘Core Policies’  in this chapter sit at the heart of the Plan. They  are 
the principal means of defining and delivering the Draft Plan’s proposed 
development strategy. There are further Core Polici es relating to Homes 
and Communities , Economy and Infrastructure  and Our Environment 
and Surroundings  in Chapters 4 , 5 and  6, along with detailed ‘Delivery 
Policies’  on a range of topics.  
Delivering Carbon Neutral by 2030  
Core Policy DCP1    
2.9.2  Climate change is the greatest long-term threat to our society. Whilst 
climate change has been developing slowly over the last 150 years, the 
rate of change has been increasing dramatically ove r the last 30 years and 
critical effects are predicted to emerge over the n ext 10 - 40 years. In the 
UK and Stroud District, we have seen dried-up lands capes and water 
shortages during ten of the warmest years on record  since 2002, as well as 
seeing significant periods of flooding and storm da mage, including from 
the 10 named storms that battered the UK in 2018.  
2.9.3  Climate change and human activities are seeing a co rresponding ecological 
emergency. In 2016, the State of Nature Report  found levels of nature 
depletion in the UK to be amongst the highest in th e world. A fifth of 
native mammals are at risk of being lost from the c ountryside and more 
than a quarter of our bird species are under threat .  
 
 
  Stroud District will become Carbon N eutral b y 2030 ahead of the Government 
target of Net Zero Carbon 2050. To support this tar get all new development 
must be: 
 located where the form and mix of development itsel f or proximity to 
essential services and facilities minimises the nee d to travel; 
 designed to discourage the use of the private car, irrespective of fuel 
source, by prioritising in order of importance: wal king, cycling and public 
transport to deliver the highest possible share of trips by the most 
sustainable travel modes;  
 designed to maximise green infrastructure to seques ter carbon, achieve 
nature recovery and to support local food productio n; 
 designed to follow the Energy Hierarchy principle o f reducing energy 
demand, supplying energy efficiently / cleanly and using onsite low or zero 
carbon energy generation to meet standards which mo ve progressively 
towards zero carbon, in terms both of regulated and  unregulated 
emissions. Accordingly, new development should be c onstructed to 
achieve the highest viable energy efficiency and de signed to maximise the 
delivery of decentralised renewable or low-carbon e nergy generation; 
 designed to reduce waste in accordance with the pri nciples of the waste 
hierarchy and to promote a circular economy; 
 designed to reduce vulnerability to and provide res ilience from the impacts 
arising from a changing climate, for example by loc ating and designing 
development to reduce the risk of flooding and to e stablish coherent and 
resilient ecological networks, whilst not increasin g the potential for 
increased greenhouse gas emissions in doing so. 
 * NEW * Core Policy DCP1 
Delivering Carbon Neutral by 2030    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 51  
 
2.9.4  The Paris Agreement  (2015) sought 
international political collaboration to respond to the threats of climate change by committing to keeping a global temperature rise, this century, to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels, whilst pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5°C. In 2019 the UK became the first national government to declare an Environment and 
Climate Emergency  and amended the 2008 
Climate Change Act  to go beyond the original 
target of an 80% reduction in UK emissions by 2050 (measured against a 1990 baseline), with a new focus on achieving Net Zero Carbon by 2050. 
2.9.5  In Gloucestershire, the County Council and all six local authorities have declared Climate 
Emergency and have set varying targets for 
carbon neutrality. In 2015 Stroud District Council became the first local authority in Europe to become carbon neutral in terms of its own operation and in 2019 the Council resolved to do everything possible to make Stroud District carbon neutral  by 2030. This 
means that an immediate and rapid programme of decarbonisation is needed. At 2017 emission levels, Stroud will exceed the recommended emissions budget to 2030 within 7 years from 2020. As a result, the Council adopted  The  2030 Strategy  in March 2021, 
which seeks to address the climate and ecological emergency that is already upon us – to protect our District’s character and communities today and for many generations to come.  
2.9.6  44% of annual carbon emissions in the District are estimated to arise from transport and 38% from the built environment. How we plan for future built development and the patterns of movement they lead to will therefore play a significant part in targets to reduce future carbon emissions. 
Core Policy DCP1  therefore 
sets out some important criteria, which all development planned to 2040 must satisfy. These include locating development to minimise the need to travel, particularly by private car, and designing development to reduce carbon emissions and energy demand. Maximising the provision of green infrastructure to sequester carbon and renewable energy to deliver green energy will also play their part.  
2.9.7  Climate change is already happening and much can also be done through the Local Plan to help reduce vulnerability to and provide resilience from the impacts arising from a changing climate.  
Towards a carbon neutral and climate resilient Stroud 
District 
 
Stroud District Council’s Climate Emergency declaration  
was one of the earliest in the UK and follows a lon g held 
focus on reducing environmental impacts across all aspects of our council services and own operations.   
  
 
1996    SDC’s first environmental 
policy 
Adopted EMAS to monitor and audit 
our corporate performance  
1997  
1998    SDC’s first Environment Strategy 
2007 – 2027 Strategy   
2007  
2009    SDC Carbon Management Plan 
Europe’s first carbon neutral 
council   
2015  
 
2018   
   
 The Council administration declares a climate emergency 
Adoption of  ISO 14001 Environmental Management 
System across the Council  
Council commitment to CN2030 
Formal structure for cross-party 
collaboration on the emergency 
established 
Environmental Policy and 
Environment Strategy updated  
  
  
   2019 
 
2021    Adoption of The 2030 Strategy  
The next steps  on the journey require an approach that 
goes well beyond just our own council operations.   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 52  
 
Strategic growth and development locations 
Core Policy CP2   
2.9.8  The Local Plan will meet the objectively assessed n eeds of the District by 
providing for the development of housing, employmen t, retail and other 
necessary development for the period 2020 – 2040. 
2.9.9  The strategy for delivering the required is to conc entrate most 
development at a series of strategic locations, whe re housing, jobs and 
necessary infrastructure can be coordinated and del ivered in a timely 
manner. 
2.9.10  The strategic sites are located at the principal se ttlements within the 
District, at new settlements and within the key emp loyment property 
market areas: south of Gloucester, Rail/M5/A38 Corr idor, Stroud Valleys 
and Berkeley/Sharpness. 
2.9.11  Smaller scale development is expected to come forwa rd at those 
settlements identified in the Plan’s settlement hierarchy , as set out in 
Core Policy CP3 .    
 
2.9.12  The policies within the Local Plan identify designa ted areas where 
housing, employment and retail development are cons idered 
appropriate. 
2.9.13  Stroud District Council is committed to working tog ether with 
neighbouring authorities to identify the most susta inable locations to 
meet future needs. The Local Plan safeguards a site  to help meet the 
unmet housing needs of Gloucester City, should it b e required.  
 
 
    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 53  
 
 
Stroud District will accommodate at least 12,600 ad ditional dwellings and at least 
79 hectares of additional employment land to meet t he needs of the District for 
the period 2020-2040. Strategic development sites to meet needs are alloc ated at the following locations:  
Location Employment  Housing  
Cam North West  900  
Cam North East Extension  180  
South of Hardwicke  1,350  
Hunts Grove Extension  750  
Javelin Park 27 ha   
Quedgeley East Extension 5 ha   
West of Renishaw New Mills 10 ha   
Sharpness Docks 7 ha  300  
Sharpness 10 ha  2,400 (5,000 by 2050)  
Stonehouse North West  5 ha  700 
Stonehouse - Eco Park M5 J13 10 ha   
Wisloe 5 ha  1,500  
Local development sites are allocated at the follow ing settlements: 
Settlement  Housing (cumulative total)  
Berkeley 170 
Brimscombe & Thrupp 190  
Dursley 10  
Frampton-on-Severn 30  
Hardwicke 10   
 
Settlement  Housing (cumulative total)  
Kingswood 50  
Leonard Stanley 40 
Minchinhampton 80 
Nailsworth 90  
Newtown & Sharpness 70  
Painswick 20  
Stonehouse 10  
Stroud 165  
Whitminster 50 
In addition to allocated sites, development will ta ke place in accordance with the 
Settlement Hierarchy set out in this Plan ( Core Policy CP3 ). 
Housing development will take place within settleme nt development limits, B-
class employment development will take place at des ignated employment areas 
and retail development will take place in accordanc e with the Retail Hierarchy 
(Core Policy CP12 ). 
Limited development will take place outside of thes e designated areas and in 
accordance with other policies of the Plan. Stroud District will make a contribution to meeting  the unmet housing needs of 
Gloucester City for the Plan period by providing fo r growth at the following 
location, subject to it being required to meet need s and provided locating growth 
at this location is consistent with the approved st rategy for the Joint Core 
Strategy Review: 
Location Housing  
Land at Whaddon 3,000  Core Policy CP2 
Strategic growth and development locations       
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 54  
 
Our towns and villages  
Core Policy CP3   
A hierarchy for growth and development across the D istrict’s 
settlements 
2.9.14  The Local Plan establishes a settlement hierarchy , based upon the roles 
and functionality of the district’s individual town s and villages, relative to 
each other. The hierarchy ranks settlements accordi ng to a range of 
criteria, including size, access to services and fa cilities, level of retail 
provision and employment role. When coupled with an  understanding of 
the possible capacity for growth, this enables deci sions to be taken about 
the most appropriate planning strategy for each set tlement. 
2.9.15  One of the primary aims of establishing a settlemen t hierarchy is to 
promote sustainable communities by bringing housing , jobs and services 
closer together in an attempt to maintain and promo te the viability of local 
facilities and reduce the need to travel to service s and facilities elsewhere. 
A settlement hierarchy policy can help to achieve t his by concentrating 
housing growth in those settlements that already ha ve a range of services 
(as long as there is capacity for growth), and rest ricting it in those that do 
not. The development strategy  aims to prioritise growth at sustainable 
locations, in accordance with the settlement hierar chy set out here in Core 
Policy  CP3 . 
2.9.16  The settlements set out within this hierarchy all h ave defined settlement 
boundaries or “ settlement development limits ” (SDL) , within and 
(exceptionally) adjacent to which suitable developm ent may be permitted. 
The nature and extent of “suitable” development is defined through   
various Core and Delivery polcies , many of which refer directly to the 
CP3 
hierarchy. Settlement development limits are identi fied on the Policies 
Map .  
2.9.17  Very small settlements not mentioned in the settlem ent hierarchy will be 
treated as open countryside, where development will  be restricted to that 
which contributes to diverse and sustainable farmin g enterprises, 
recreation or tourism, or involves the conversion o f rural buildings and the 
provision of essential community facilities, in acc ordance with Core Policy 
CP15 .  
2.9.18  Whilst the proximity of the northern part of Stroud  District to the city of 
Gloucester is recognised, the hierarchy only includ es those settlements 
within Stroud District that have a range of service s and capacity for 
growth. Hunts Grove, a planned urban extension to G loucester, will 
include sufficient local facilities to achieve Loca l Service Centre status. 
2.9.19  Hunts Grove  and the new settlements at Sharpness and Wisloe are not 
included within the settlement hierarchy at present  and the scale and 
nature of their growth and development is determine d through their 
respective site allocation policies and subsequent planning applications. 
However, once development is sufficiently advanced to establish their 
anticipated role and function, it is expected that (through a future Local 
Plan Review) they will be defined as settlements in  their own right, with 
settlement development limits, and CP3  will then apply.  
    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 55  
 
 
 
Proposals for new development should be located in accordance with the District's 
settlement hierarchy. This will ensure that develop ment reduces the need to travel 
and promotes sustainable communities, based on the services and facilities that are 
available in each settlement. The use of previously  developed land and buildings 
within settlements will be given substantial weight . 
Tier 1 - Main settlements  
Cam and Dursley, Stonehouse, Stroud 
These are the District’s largest and most populous settlements, each of which 
benefits from transport infrastructure that enables  good access to key services and 
facilities, with good links to their suburbs and “s atellite” communities. They are the 
primary focus for growth and development, with a vi ew to safeguarding and 
enhancing their strategic roles as employment and s ervice centres. They will continue 
to provide significant levels of jobs and homes, to gether with supporting community 
facilities and infrastructure to meet their economi c potential in the most sustainable 
way. Further development will be achieved through s trategic allocations, 
development within settlement development limits, t own centres and employment 
sites and (exceptionally) adjacent to settlement de velopment limits, subject to 
fulfilling the criteria set out in the Plan’s Core and Delivery policies. 
Tier 2 - Local Service Centres  
Berkeley , Minchinhampton , Nailsworth, Painswick, Wotton Under Edge; Hunts 
Grove (anticipated)   
These market towns and large villages have the abil ity to support sustainable 
patterns of living in the District because of the f acilities, services and employment 
opportunities they each offer. They have the potent ial to provide for modest levels 
of jobs and homes, including through sites allocate d in this Plan, in order to help 
sustain and, where necessary, enhance their service s and facilities, promoting 
better levels of self containment and viable, susta inable communities. Further 
development will be achieved through strategic allo cations, development within 
settlement development limits, town centres and emp loyment sites and 
(exceptionally) adjacent to settlement development limits, subject to fulfilling the 
criteria set out in the Plan’s Core and Delivery po licies. Tier 3a - Accessible Settlements with Local Facilit ies 
Hardwicke, Chalford, Manor Village (Bussage), Brims combe & Thrupp, 
Eastington, Kings Stanley, Leonard Stanley, Frampto n on Severn, Newtown & 
Sharpness, Kingswood, Whitminster, North Woodcheste r  
These medium-sized and large villages are generally  well-connected and 
accessible places, which provide a good range of lo cal services and facilities for 
their communities. These villages benefit from thei r proximity and/or connectivity 
to higher tier settlements or transport corridors, which enables access to 
employment and key services and facilities elsewher e, and which may offer some 
scope for further transport and accessibility impro vements. These are relatively 
sustainable locations for development, offering the  best opportunities outside the 
District’s Main Settlements and Local Service Centr es for greater self-
containment. However, their scope for future growth  (in addition to any sites 
already allocated in this Plan) is constrained. Fur ther development will be focused 
inside settlement development limits or (exceptiona lly) on the edge of 
settlements, subject to meeting criteria set out in  the Plan’s Core and Delivery 
policies, and will principally meet specific local housing, employment and 
community infrastructure needs, with a view to safe guarding or enhancing each 
settlement’s current role, function and accessibili ty. 
Tier 3b – Settlements with Local Facilities 
Whiteshill & Ruscombe, Upton St Leonards, Uley, Sli mbridge, Bisley, Coaley, 
North Nibley, Oakridge Lynch, Amberley, Horsley, Mi serden 
These small and medium-sized rural villages provide  a range of services and 
facilities for their communities, but some have poo r access to key services and 
facilities elsewhere and they all face significant environmental constraints to 
growth. There are no site allocations at any of the se settlements. However, there 
may be scope for some development to meet specific local housing, employment or 
community infrastructure needs, either within or (e xceptionally) adjacent to the 
settlement development limit, subject to fulfilling  the criteria set out in this Plan’s 
Core and Delivery policies. Any such development wi ll seek to sustain or enhance 
the settlement’s existing role, function and access ibility.  Core Policy CP3 
Settlement Hierarchy    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 56  
 
 
Tier 4a - Accessible Settlements with Basic Facilit ies 
“Old” Bussage, Cambridge, Eastcombe, Newport, Nymps field, Selsley, South 
Woodchester These small and very small villages provide a limit ed range of services and facilities 
for their communities. Whilst they may be unable to  meet residents’ day to day 
requirements, these are relatively well-connected a nd accessible settlements, 
which benefit from their proximity and/or connectiv ity to higher tier settlements or 
transport corridors. These settlements are relative ly less sustainable locations for 
growth, compared to Tier 1-3 settlements, and most face significant environmental 
constraints. However, there may be scope for very l imited development to meet 
specific local housing, employment or community nee ds, either within or 
(exceptionally) adjacent to the settlement developm ent limit, subject to fulfilling 
the criteria set out in this Plan’s Core and Delive ry policies. Any such development 
will seek to sustain or enhance the settlement’s ex isting role, function and 
accessibility and to boost community vitality and s ocial sustainability. 
 
Tier 4b – Settlements with Basic Facilities  
Arlingham, Box, Brookthorpe, Cranham, France Lynch,  Haresfield, Hillesley, 
Longney, Middleyard, Randwick, Saul, Sheepscombe, S tinchcombe, Stone 
These small and very small rural settlements provid e basic or minimal facilities for 
their communities, but lack the range of services t o meet day to day requirements. 
These are generally inaccessible and unsustainable locations for growth, with 
significant environmental constraints. However, the re could be scope for very 
limited development to meet specific local housing,  employment or community 
needs, either within or (exceptionally) adjacent to  the settlement development 
limit, subject to fulfilling the criteria set out i n this Plan’s Core and Delivery policies, 
to boost community vitality and social sustainabili ty. 
  Core Policy CP3 
Settlement Hierarchy       ...(contd.)  
The settlements named in this hierarchy all have de fined settlement boundaries or “settlement 
development limits” (SDL). Suitable development may  be permitted within and (exceptionally) 
adjacent to SDLs, in accordance with other detailed  policies in the Plan.  
Very small settlements not mentioned in the settlem ent hierarchy will be treated as open 
countryside, where  Core Policy CP15  will apply.  
 
Site allocations  – including mixed -use 
sites to meet strategic housing, employment, retail and community needs, including healthcare and education  A minimum of 2% of dwellings on 
strategic site allocations to be self-build / custom-build plots  
 At least 30% affordable housing on 
all sites capable of providing 10 or more dwellings Main Settlements   
 
1 Within SDL  – 
 Infill and re-development (including housing, employment, live-work, retail/town centre, tourism/leisure and community uses) 
 At least 30% 
affordable housing on all sites capable of providing 10 or more dwellings 
 
Adjoining SDL  – 
 Exception sites: 100% affordable housing, including entry-level homes and affordable self-build/custom build homes 
 Single plots: affordable self-build or custom- build homes  
 Live-work development  
 Tourism / leisure development, subject to criteria 
 Outside SDL  – 
Core Policy CP15 applies   Fig. 3 ... Our towns and villages  |  Development strategy for Tiers 1-4  
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 57  
 
 
                
 
Site allocations  – including mixed -use 
sites to meet both local and strategic housing, employment, retail and community needs, including healthcare and education  A minimum of 2% of dwellings on 
strategic site allocations to be self-build / custom-build plots  
Within and adjoining SDL – 
Including on allocated sites  At Berkeley and Nailsworth, at least 
30% affordable housing on all sites capable of providing 10 or more dwellings 
 At Minchinhampton, Painswick and 
Wotton-Under-Edge, at least 30% affordable housing on all sites capable of providing 4 or more dwellings Local Service Centres   
 
2 
Within SDL  – 
 Infill and re-development (including housing, employment, live-work, retail/town centre, tourism/leisure and community uses) 
 
Adjoining SDL  – 
 Exception sites: 100% affordable housing, including entry-level homes and affordable self-build/custom build homes 
 Single plots: affordable self-build or custom- build homes  
 Live-work development 
 Tourism / leisure development, subject to criteria 
 Settlements with Local Facilities   
 Settlements with Basic Facilities   
 
3 4 Outside SDL  – 
Core Policy CP15 applies  
Within SDL  – 
 Infill and re-development (including housing, employment, live-work, tourism/ leisure and community uses) 
 
Site allocations  – at the 
higher performing and most accessible 3a settlements, 
principally to meet local 
housing and community needs 
 Within and adjoining SDL 
–  
Including on allocated sites  At Hardwicke, Kings 
Stanley and Leonard Stanley, at least 30% affordable housing on all sites capable of providing 10 or more dwellings 
 At all other Tier 3a and 3b 
settlements, at least 30% affordable housing on all sites capable of providing 4 or more dwellings 
 Protection of individual village shops, pubs and other community uses Outside SDL  – 
Core Policy CP15 applies  
Adjoining SDL  – 
 Exception sites: 100% affordable housing, including entry-level homes and affordable self-build/custom build homes 
 Single plots: affordable self-build or custom- build homes  
 Live-work development  
 Tourism / leisure development, subject to criteria 
 At 3b settlements only: Small 
schemes of up to 9 dwellings – not exceeding a 10% cumulative increase in the settlement’s total dwellings during the Plan period. 
At least 30% affordable housing on 
all sites capable of providing 4 or more dwellings. These to be restricted to people in need with a strong local connection 
 
 Within SDL  – 
 Infill and re-development (housing, employment, live-work and community uses)  
 At least 30% affordable 
housing on all sites capable of 
providing 4 or more dwellings.  
 Within and a djoining SDL  –  
 Tourism / leisure development, subject to criteria 
 Protection of individual village shops, pubs and other community uses 
Adjoining SDL  – 
 Exception sites: 100% affordable housing, including  entry-
level homes and affordable self-build/custom build homes 
 Single plots: affordable self-build or custom- buil d homes  
 Small schemes of up to 9 dwellings – not exceeding a 10% 
cumulative increase in the settlement’s total dwell ings during 
the Plan period. At least 30% affordable housing on  all sites 
capable of providing 4 or more dwellings. These to be 
restricted to people in need with a strong local co nnection 
 Live-work development  
 Outside SDL  – 
Core Policy CP15 applies    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 58  
 
 Making places  
Core Policy CP4   
Making Places: a Spatial Vision for the Stroud Dist rict 
2.9.20  The Local Plan includes a spatial vision for the wh ole District, which is 
set out at the start of this chapter ( Chapter 2 | Development 
Strategy ). It also includes a series of “mini visions” for parish cluster 
areas, which reflect the distinct qualities, issues , constraints and 
opportunities that exist in different parts of the overall area (see 
Chapter 3 | Making Places ). The visions set out the envisaged and 
desired effects that the development strategy shoul d have on 
particular parts of the District.  
2.9.21  Core Policy  CP4  is intended to underpin both the Local Plan vision s and 
the strategic objectives.  The policy reflects the Council’s commitment 
to maintaining and enhancing the quality of the bui lt environment 
throughout the District. It promotes sustainable de velopment to 
create attractive places in which people wish to li ve, work and play. 
2.9.22  The quality of design of buildings and spaces plays  a fundamental role 
in achieving attractive places. The policy identifi es the importance of 
an integrated design process from inception, where good place-making 
and sustainable development are considered together . The policy will 
apply to all new development and it is recommended that proposals 
should take account of The National Design Guide  (MHCLG, 2019) and 
principles, guidance and design tools published by the Design Council  
(and its predecessor, CABE ).   
  
 
All development proposals shall accord with the Min i Visions and have regard 
to the Guiding Principles for that locality, as set  out in this Plan, and shall be 
informed by other relevant documents, such as any d esign statements 
adopted as Supplementary Planning Documents. Propos als will be expected to: 
1.  Integrate into the neighbourhood: take account of c onnectivity; be located 
close to appropriate levels of facilities and servi ces; reduce car dependency; 
improve transport choice; support local community s ervices and facilities; 
and meet local employment or housing requirements i n terms of mix, 
tenure and type; 
2.  Place shape and protect or enhance a sense of place : create a place with a 
locally-inspired or distinctive character (whether historic, traditional or 
contemporary) using appropriate materials, textures , colours and locally-
distinctive architectural styles; working with the site topography, 
orientation and landscape features; as well as prot ecting or enhancing local 
biodiversity, the historic environment and any heri tage assets;  
3.  Create safe streets, homes and workplaces: where bu ildings are positioned 
with landscaping to define and enhance streets and spaces; assist finding 
your way around with focal points or landmarks; pro vide permeability, 
reduce car domination of the street and reduce vehi cle speeds; provide 
shared or social spaces on the streets (where appro priate); create safe well 
managed attractive public and private amenity space s; and provide 
adequate external storage space for waste bins, rec ycling materials and 
bicycle storage.   
  Core Policy CP4 
Place Making  
  
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 59  
 
Core Policy CP5   
Principles for the siting, design and construction of strategic 
development.  
2.9.23  An essential requirement of any strong and stable c ommunity is that 
residents have access to decent and secure homes an d to local job 
opportunities. The Local Plan seeks to create place s, homes and workplaces 
that positively influence people's lives. 
2.9.24  This policy seeks to ensure that development at the  strategic sites 
identified in Core Policy CP2  will meet the highest standards of energy 
efficiency; will incorporate on-site renewable and low-carbon energy 
technologies; will reduce the volume of waste going  to landfill; and will 
mitigate against climate change. 
2.9.25  Development will be low impact. This is defined as development which 
does not significantly diminish environmental quali ty. There are a diverse 
range of such developments in the UK often making u se of natural, local 
and reclaimed materials in delivering low or zero c arbon development. 
They can be self-sufficient in terms of waste manag ement, energy, water 
and other needs. 
2.9.26  It is important that steps are taken to reduce the amount of energy which 
we use. In order to contribute to meeting our carbo n neutral targets by 
2030, new development proposals will need to substa ntially reduce their 
energy consumption through energy and water efficie nt design and 
layout. It is acknowledged that pursuing sustainabl e development 
requires careful attention to the viability and cos ts; nevertheless, this  
policy provides a positive framework of key environ mental principles. 
Design and layout can help to maximise the potentia l for renewable 
energy, for example, ensuring that south facing roo f space is available for  the installation of solar water heating and/or sola r photovoltaic power 
or that buildings and spaces are orientated to bene fit from passive solar 
gain.  
2.9.27  Strategic sites offer the potential to realise the multiple benefits of an 
integrated network of green infrastructure, linking  to existing networks 
wherever possible. The Council’s Open Space, Green Infrastructure, 
Sport and Recreation Study (2019)  identifies opportunities to link up 
with and enhance existing green networks through th e District. 
Developers of strategic sites are strongly encourag ed to follow Building 
with Nature  standards.  Proposals for strategic landscaping sh ould be 
discussed and agreed early in the planning stage an d phased for early 
delivery to allow it time to establish and mature.   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 60  
 
   
Strategic sites will: 1.  Be built at an appropriate density that is acceptab le in townscape, local environment, character and 
amenity terms  
2.  Be low impact in terms of the environment and the u se of resources 
3.  Be readily accessible by bus, bicycle and foot to s hopping and employment opportunities, key services and 
community facilities; and will contribute towards t he provision of new sustainable transport infrastru cture 
to serve the area, in seeking to minimise the numbe r and distance of single purpose journeys by privat e cars 
4.  Have a layout, access, parking, landscaping and com munity facilities in accordance with an approved 
indicative masterplan 
5.  Be located to achieve a sustainable form of develop ment and/or support regeneration. Development 
proposals should incorporate a negotiated design co de/framework. 
  
Applications for all strategic sites (both resident ial and non-residential) will be required to provid e a statement 
demonstrating how sustainable construction principl es have been incorporated. This should address 
demolition, construction and long term management. This will be expected to show how the proposal 
maximises its contribution towards the following ob jectives: 
A.  Sustainable sourcing of materials and their efficie nt and appropriate use, including their durability 
B.  Minimising waste and maximising recycling 
C.  Incorporating Sustainable Drainage Systems 
D.  Minimising water consumption 
E.  Minimising energy consumption and improving energy performance 
F.  Minimising net greenhouse gas emissions of the prop osed development 
G.  Maximising low or zero carbon energy generation 
H.  Minimising impacts on the natural environment and m aximising green infrastructure 
Where the Council considers it could be likely that  the proposal will result in significant adverse en vironmental 
effects during the construction phase, a Constructi on Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) will be 
required. 
 © Bluesky International Ltd. / Getmapping PLC| © Cr own copyright and database 
rights 2021 Ordnance Survey 100019682 | OS, Esri, H ERE, Garmin Core Policy CP5 
Environmental development principles for strategic sites    
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 61  
 
Infrastructure and developer contributions 
Core Policy CP6   
2.9.28  In order to create sustainable communities, the Cou ncil wishes to ensure 
that the necessary infrastructure is put in place t o address community 
needs and ensure that transport improvements take p lace to address the 
traffic and travel consequences of new development.  New development 
can create a need for additional infrastructure or improved community 
services and facilities, without which there could be a detrimental effect on 
local amenity and the quality of the environment. T he Council will consider 
viability and deliverability aspects in accordance with national advice. 
2.9.29  Community needs can include affordable housing, all otments, community 
orchards, education, healthcare facilities, emergen cy services, security, 
leisure activities, transport infrastructure, publi c utility infrastructure, flood 
risk management infrastructure, community facilitie s, play and green 
infrastructure. 
2.9.30  An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)  accompanies but is not part of the 
Local Plan. It identifies the infrastructure that l ocal service providers and 
the District and County Councils have established a s key to delivering 
growth in the District and to meet the objectives o f the Local Plan. The IDP 
will need to be reviewed and updated as circumstanc es change. For 
example, public funding may vary over the life of t he Local Plan. Changing  
circumstances may become apparent when new areas of  development are 
designed in greater detail, and/or ways of deliveri ng services are 
reviewed.      
2.9.31  Most infrastructure required by a new development w ill be provided on-
site by the developer and incorporated within the o verall design 
concept for the scheme. In cases where off-site pro vision is required, 
various types of contributions can be secured, depe nding upon the 
nature of the proposed development.  
2.9.32  The Council introduced a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  in 2017, 
which enables contributions from development to be pooled to deliver 
District infrastructure priorities. The Council als o collects developer 
contributions through planning obligations by means  of legal 
agreements. Developer contributions may be secured retrospectively 
when it has been necessary to forward fund infrastr ucture projects in 
advance of anticipated housing growth. The Council sets out in its 
annual Infrastructure Funding Statement (IFS)  how developer 
contributions have been used and will be used to pr ovide infrastructure 
within the District. 
2.9.33  The Government announced plans in 2020 to replace C IL and planning 
obligations with a new national infrastructure levy .  
   
STROUD DISTRICT LOCAL PLAN REVIEW | PRESUBMISSION D RAFT PLAN 2021  Page | 62  
 
 
  
The Council will work with partners to ensure that infrastructure will be in place at the right time t o meet 
the needs of the District and to support the develo pment strategy. This will be achieved by: 
1.  The preparation and regular review of the Infrastru cture Delivery Plan (IDP) for the District that wil l set 
out the infrastructure to be provided by partners, including the public sector and utilities 
2.  Securing contributions to all aspects of land use, infrastructure and services that may be affected by  
development, in accordance with the District Counci l’s identified priorities and objectives for delive ring 
sustainable communities 
3.  The delivery of a Community Infrastructure Levy (CI L) towards the provision of new or upgraded 
infrastructure to support the overall development s trategy 
4.  Negotiating appropriate planning obligations to mit igate any adverse impacts of proposed development, 
while avoiding duplication of payments made through  CIL. 
Where implementation of a development would create a need to provide additional or improved 
infrastructure and amenities, would have an impact on the existing standard of infrastructure provided , or 
would exacerbate an existing deficiency in their pr ovision, the developer will be expected to make up that 
provision for those local communities affected. Whe re the developer is unable to make such provision, the 
Council will require the developer to make a propor tionate contribution to the overall cost of such pr ovision 
through a legal agreement and/or Community Infrastr ucture Levy. 
Various types of contribution will be used, includi ng the following: 
i)  In-kind contributions and financial payments 
ii)  Phased payments and one-off payments 
iii)  Maintenance payments 
iv)  Pooled contributions 
v)  A combination of the above. 
In determining the nature and scale of any provisio n, the Council will have regard to viability consid erations 
and site specific circumstances. Core Policy CP6 
Infrastructure and developer contributions  
    ©Nick Turner  