Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Swindon: Planning for our future
   Adopted 26th March 2015Copies of this document priced £25 excl P&P can  
be obtained from:
Planning Policy  
Swindon Borough Council  
Wat Tyler House West  
Beckhampton Street  
Swindon  SN1 2JH
t: (01793) 466513   e: forwardplanning@swindon.gov.uk
© Copyright: Swindon Borough Council
ISBN 978-0-9554998-0-73This is a time of challenge and opportunity for Swindon Borough. Whilst the building 
blocks for successful economic growth remain, against a background of economic 
recession and public sector spending cuts, the need to plan responsibly and 
realistically is of greater importance. We have a responsibility not only to deliver the 
much-needed regeneration of the Town Centre but also plan for growth in a way  
that benefits existing and future residents of the Borough. Sustainable development is not just about providing homes, local jobs and a vibrant and successful Town 
Centre; it is also about creating inclusive, cohesive, safe and healthy communities. 
Fundamental to this is the timely provision of infrastructure.
This Document has been produced following on from Royal Assent of the Localism 
Act 2011, which includes measures to revoke Regional Strategies and to allow 
local authorities to set their own targets for economic and housing growth through 
the development of a Local Plan. The National Planning Policy Framework (2012) 
states that one of its key principles should be a proactive approach to driving and 
supporting sustainable economic development in order to deliver the homes, business 
and industrial units, infrastructure and thriving local places that the country needs. Swindon needs to rise to this challenge whilst meeting the other planning principles 
of conserving environmental and heritage assets and responding to the impact 
of climate change. Therefore the Council has taken a responsible and balanced 
approach to delivering growth that is achievable, deliverable and suitable.  
The message from the Council is “we are open for business”; but growth should be 
plan-led to ensure local empowerment and give clarity and certainty to both investors 
and residents alike.
This Local Plan provides the policy framework to deliver sustainable growth to 2026 
and beyond. It provides a clear strategy for how we can address the challenges we face and identifies how much, where, when, and how new development will take 
place in Swindon Borough.Foreword
David Renard
Leader of the CouncilDale HeenanCabinet Member for Strategic Planning, 
Sustainability, and 
Transport
Foreword
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265 5Section ?:Contents
Foreword
Part 1:  Introduction           1
Part 2:  Context, Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives     9
Part 3:  Sustainable Development         15
SD1:   Sustainable Development Principles        17
SD2:   The Sustainable Development Strategy        20
SD3:   Managing Development          28
Part 4: Enabling Sustainable Development       31
Theme 1: High Quality Design and Sustainable Development      31
DE1:   High Quality Design         32
DE2:   Sustainable Construction         40
Theme 2: Delivering Sustainable Economic Growth        43
EC1:   Economic Growth through Existing Business and Inward Investment   45
EC2:   Employment Land and Premises (B Use Classes)     47
EC3:   The Role of the Centres and Main Town Centre Uses    51  51
EC4:   Conversions of Buildings to Employment Use in the Countryside   55
EC5:   Farm Diversification         56
Theme 3: Housing & Accommodation        58
HA1:   Mix, Types and Density         59
HA2:   Affordable Housing         63
HA3:   Wheelchair Accessible Housing                   65
HA4:   Subdivision of Housing / Houses in Multiple Occupation               66
HA5:   Rural Exception Sites                   69
HA6:   Agricultural Workers Dwellings                   70
HA7:   Conversion of Buildings to Residential Use in the Countryside              72
HA8:   Gypsies, Travellers, and Travelling Showpeople Pitches and Sites                 74
Theme 4: Transport                     77
TR1:   Sustainable Transport Networks                  78
TR2:   Transport and Development        83       
???
Theme 5: Infrastructure Needs                   86
IN1:   Infrastructure Provision            88
IN2:   Water Supply and Wastewater                  91
IN3:   ICT & Telecommunications        94    
IN4:   Low Carbon and Renewable Energy                 96
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:Theme 6: Healthy & Supported Communities                 100
CM1:   Education                              103
CM2:   Active, Healthy and Safe Lifestyles                 105
CM3:   Integrating Facilities and Delivering Services              109
CM4:   Maintaining and Enhancing Community Facilities            111
Theme 7: Natural and Built Environment                 114
EN1:   Green Infrastructure Network                 115
EN2:   Community Forest                    119
EN3:   Open Space         121
EN4:   Biodiversity and Geodiversity                 123
EN5:   Landscape Character and Historical Landscape    125
EN6:   Flood Risk                    127
EN7:   Pollution                    130
EN8:   Unstable Land         131
EN9:   Contaminated Land        132
EN10:   Historic Environment & Heritage Assets                133
EN11:   Heritage Transport                    138
Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and Change                141
Strategic Policies                     141
Swindon’s Existing Communities        141
SC1:   Swindon’s Central Area                  141
SC2:   Swindon’s Existing Urban Communities                148
New Communities          151
NC1:   Wichelstowe         151
NC2:   Commonhead         155
NC3:   New Eastern Villages – including Rowborough and South
  Marston Village Expansion        160
NC4:   Tadpole Farm         171
NC5:   Kingsdown (East of A419)                  176
Rural Settlements 179         180
RA1:   Highworth                     181
RA2:   Wroughton                    183
RA3:   South Marston                   185
Local and Neighbourhood Policies                 189
LN1:   Local and Neighbourhood Planning                            
191
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:Appendices
Appendix 1:  Saved Policies of Swindon Borough Local Plan 2011 superseded  
  by Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   190 205 193
Appendix 2:  Evidence Base Documents       208
Appendix 3:  Open Space Standards                214
Appendix 4:  Green Infrastructure Typologies      217
Appendix 5:  Housing Trajectory               244  220
Appendix 6:  Monitoring Indicators       221
Appendix 7: Glossary of Terms                 235
Figures
Figure 1:  Relationship with Other Plans, Documents and Strategies                4
Figure 2:  Relationship with Prescribed and Other Bodies    8
Figure 3:  Map of Swindon Borough        9
Figure 4:  The Local Plan Strategic Priorities and Objectives    14
Figure 5:  Key Issues for the Swindon Borough Local Plan     16
Figure 6:  Key Diagram         19
Figure 7:  Green Infrastructure Concept Map                 117
Figure 8:  Swindon Central Area Diagram      143
Figure 9:  Wichelstowe Inset Diagram                 154
Figure 10:  Commonhead Inset Diagram                 188  157
Figure 11:  New Eastern Villages Inset Diagram                 170
Figure 12:  Tadpole Farm Inset Diagram       173
Figure 13: Kingsdown (East of A419) Inset Diagram     179
Figure 14: South Marston Inset Diagram             195     188
Tables
Table 1:  Housing and Employment Land Distribution      21
Table 2:  Employment Land with Permissions and Allocations    24
Table 3:  Employment Land Allocations       25
Table 4:  Projected Household Types       60  60
Table 5:  Dwelling Size and Past Distribution of Housing Completions     61 
Table 6:  Density of Past Housing Completions       61
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part I: 
Introduction1 Part 1:  
 Introduction
 What is the Local Plan?
1.1 The Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 is the main planning policy document for   
 the Borough. It sets out how much housing, employment and retail development   
 the Borough needs up to the year 2026 and where this should be. The plan also  
  sets out what infrastructure will be needed to enable this development to take  
  place. It includes policies to ensure development is of the highest quality, avoids  
 environmentally sensitive locations, respects the existing built environment and   
 meets the needs of present and future residents. 
1.2 The Local Plan includes:
   a vision and strategic objectives for the development of Swindon Borough  
   up to 2026;
   clear policies to guide decisions on planning applications;
   broad locations of development and the allocation of strategic sites;
   the infrastructure requirements required in support of the  
   proposed development;
   the strategic context for the allocation of specific sites in either a future   
   Council planning document and/or Neighbourhood Plans;
   a key diagram, illustrating the main provisions and the strategic  
   site allocations;
   an indication of how the plan will be delivered; and
   indicators to monitor the progress of the Plan.
1.3 The Plan should be read as a whole, with proposals for development being   
 considered against many policies depending on the details of the proposal  
 and its location.
 The Evolution of the Swindon Borough Local Plan
1.4 The Statement of Community Involvement (January 2007 and revised in 2013)   
 sets out how the Council involves the community in the preparation of the  
  Borough’s main planning documents. The Local Plan has been prepared in   
 accordance with that Statement.
1.5 Until the Localism Act was introduced in 2011, Swindon Borough Council had been  
 preparing a Core Strategy as part of the Local Development Framework.  This was  
  in line with previous planning legislation introduced by the Planning and  
  Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.  Following the introduction of a revised    
 development planning process by the Localism Act, and the National Planning   
 Policy Framework (NPPF) published in March 2012, the Council has used the work  
  done on the preparation of a Core Strategy to form the basis of this new Local   
 Plan.  The Local Plan has been prepared with particular reference to paragraph   
 154 of the NPPF as follows:Part 1:  Introduction   “Local Plans should be aspirational but realistic. They should address  
   the spatial implications of economic, social and environmental  
   change. Local Plans should set out the opportunities for development  
    and clear policies on what will or will not be permitted and where.   
   Only policies that provide a clear indication of how a decision maker  
   should react to a development proposal should be included  
   in the plan.”
 1.6 Work on the Core Strategy developed through four previous rounds of public  
 consultation plus numerous workshops and sessions with Town and Parish   
 Councils and community groups.  At each stage the Core Strategy was   
 revised in light of the comments received.
1.7 The public consultation exercises were undertaken at key stages in the   
 preparation and were as follows:
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Issues and Options (April 2007).   
   This set out the issues facing Swindon Borough and a series of options  
   for responding to those issues;
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Preferred Options (March 2008).   
   This set out for consultation the Borough Council’s proposed policy  
   directions, and  highlighted alternatives where appropriate;
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Proposed Submission Document  
   (July 2009). 
     This was intended to be the last stage of consultation before the Core 
    Strategy was submitted to the Secretary of State. The public    
   consultation raised general concerns about the overall level of growth  
   at Swindon, and in particular the provision of essential infrastructure in  
   uncertain economic times, and it was becoming evident that the  
   housing targets were unachievable. This was at odds with the targets 
    set through the emerging Regional Strategy. Subsequently, the new  
    Coalition Government announced its intention to abolish the Regional  
   Strategies and allow Local Planning Authorities to determine their own  
    housing targets; and
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Revised Submission Draft (March 2011).  
   This contained significant changes in relation to overall housing  
   numbers and the spatial distribution of these. However, whilst there  
   remained public concerns over the scale of growth and in particular  
   the allocation of Greenfield sites to meet the revised targets, the  
   business community expressed the view that the assumptions  
   regarding the economy of Swindon were unduly pessimistic and the  
   resultant strategy could undermine economic growth.
1.8 Significant public involvement has been undertaken during the preparation  
 of this Local Plan. Specifically during the autumn of 2010 a series of community 
  participation events were held across the Borough. The outcomes of these  
 events are detailed in the Shaping Your Community Report (2011). 
1.9 In light of the comments received and the publication of the NPPF, revisions  
 have been made to the Core Strategy, translating it into the Local Plan. These  
 revisions were sufficient to warrant a further round of public consultation   
 before the Submission of the Plan.
2 Swindon Borough Local Plan 202631.10 The Borough Council has already adopted the Swindon Central Area Action  
 Plan (2009), which provides the planning framework to facilitate the delivery  
 of the regeneration of Central Swindon.  There are two policies detailed in the  
 Swindon CAAP that have been replaced by policies in this Local Plan. These  
 are detailed in Appendix 1.
1.11 The preparation of Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) may be   
 necessary to provide detailed advice on specific topics and areas. Further  
 details on the contents of these SPDs will be documented within the Local   
 Development Scheme.  
1.12 The Local Plan includes a Policies Map, which shows the geographical areas  
 to which policies contained within the Plan relate. It should be noted that,   
 unless detailed in the relevant policy within this Plan, the defined settlement  
 boundaries will remain unchanged until such time when they are reviewed  
 either through development of Neighbourhood Plans or further site allocations  
 work undertaken by the Borough Council.
1.13 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (formerly known as the Implementation and  
 Monitoring Plan) sits alongside the Local Plan. It provides more detailed   
 information on the Borough’s infrastructure needs and how they will be met.
1.14 For clarity, the Development Plan for Swindon Borough will consist of:
   The Swindon Borough Local Plan (2026),
   The Swindon Central Action Plan (2009), 
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Minerals Core Strategy 2006-2026 (2009),
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Minerals Development Control Policies   
   Development Plan Document (2009),
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Aggregate Minerals Site Allocation  
   Local Plan (2013),
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Core Strategy 2006-2026 (2009),
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Development Control Policies   
   Development Plan Document (2009),
   The Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Site Allocations Local Plan (2013),
   and any subsequent Site Allocation Plans and Neighbourhood Plans  
   (on adoption).
1.15 A Monitoring Report will be produced to assess the progress and effectiveness  
 of the Local Plan as measured against the targets identified in Appendix 6 on  
 an annual basis. The report will include monitoring of the Local Plan policies,  
 and time frames for delivery of infrastructure as set out in the Infrastructure   
 Delivery Plan (IDP). It will provide recommendations for policy review and   
 mitigation of significant effects if required, with consideration of significant and  
 unforeseen events which may impact on the effectiveness of the Plan.
1.16 This Local Plan runs to 2026. An immediate review will be undertaken following  
 adoption to ensure that development provision looks to an appropriately long  
 term end date. Such a review is without prejudice to the need for review   
 which may arise through monitoring and identifying changes in the    
 assumptions underpinning the development strategy.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 1:  IntroductionFigure 1: Relationship with Other Plans, Documents and Strategies
4 STRATEGIES  / GUIDANCE  / LEGISLATION  Delivery  
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan  
 
Utility Providers’ 
Strategy  
 
Community 
Infrastructure Levy  
 
Masterplans  
Design Codes and 
Framework Plans  
Neighbourhood 
Development 
Orders  National Planning Policy Framework,  
Legislation & Circulars  
Corporate 
Priorities & 
Objectives  
Sustainability 
Assessment  
Supplementary 
Planning Documents  
Neighbourhood, Community 
& Parish Plans  Annual Monitoring 
Report  Other Strategies : e.g. 
Neighbouring DPD’s  
 
Economi c Strategy  
 
Local Transport Plan  
 
Minerals & Waste  
Core  Strategy  
 
Green Infrastructure 
Strategy  
 
Surface Water  
Management Plan  
 
Housing Strategy  
 
Biodiversity Action  
Plan  
 Evidence Base   
Local Plan  
NATIONAL  STRATEGIC & LOCAL  COMMUNITY  Figure 1: Relationships with Other Plans, Documents and Strategies  
 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Relationship to other Strategies, Plans and Priorities
1.17 The Swindon Borough Local Plan is influenced by many other policies and 
strategies that affect the future development of the Borough. Figure 1 shows 
the relationship between the Local Plan, other planning documents, national 
policy and other strategies.
 National
1.18 In March 2012 the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) was published 
which sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and how 
these are expected to be applied. It sets out the Government’s requirements 
for the planning system only to the extent that it is relevant, proportionate and necessary to do so. It provides a framework within which local people and their accountable Councils can produce their own distinctive local 
and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs and priorities of their 
communities.
1.19 The NPPF must be taken into account in the preparation of local and neighbourhood plans, and is a material consideration in planning decisions. The Local Plan has been prepared to be in conformity with the NPPF.
1.20 (National) Planning Practice Guidance published online on 6th March 2014 makes clear the importance of Local Plans in setting out a vision and agreed 
priorities for the sustainable development of an area. The guidance also 
supports local authorities and communities in plan-making. Although issued at a late stage in the production of this Plan, the provisions contained within the guidance have been considered through the examination of the Plan.
1.21 International and national bodies have set out broad principles of sustainable development. Resolution 42/187 of the United Nations General Assembly 
defined sustainable development as meeting the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The UK Sustainable Development Strategy Securing the Future
1 set out five ‘guiding 
principles’ of sustainable development and four priorities.
 Principles:
   Living within environmental limits
   Ensuring a strong, healthy and just society
   Achieving a sustainable economy
   Promoting good governance
   Using sound science responsibly
 Priorities:
   Sustainable production and consumption
   Climate change and energy
   Natural resource protection and environmental enhancement
   Creating sustainable communities
5 Swindon Borough Local Plan 202612011 Census first release Part 1:  Introduction Local
1.22 The Local Plan articulates the planning strategy which will help to enable 
the delivery of other Borough Council plans, strategies and priorities in 
the Borough. The key ones are summarised in the following paragraphs. 
Reference is also made to them and others throughout the Plan, particularly where there are clear linkages to specific policies of the Plan.
1.23 The Swindon Sustainable Community Strategy: A Shared Vision for Swindon  
 2008–2030 is the overall vision of how we want our Borough to be by 2030.    From this big picture, all types of organisations, from public services like the  
 police and health agencies to community groups and parishes, will take their  
 cue to develop plans and policies to make this vision a reality.
1.24 The vision in the Community Strategy is based around six themes:
   Swindon as a destination of choice;
   all people are benefiting from our growing economy;
   we have safeguarded our environment for future generations;
   a healthy, caring and supportive community;
   a place where high aspirations are supported by superb education  
  provision for all ages; and
   a place where local people can have real influence and where  
  they feel safe.
1.25 ‘One Swindon’ sets out a commitment to a new partnership of the public   
 sector working with the business, community and voluntary sectors and   
 above all local people to deliver on a shared focus over the period  
 2011 – 2015. The following priorities for One Swindon have been developed:
   I like where I live;
   We can all benefit from a growing economy and better Town Centre;
   Everyone is enjoying sports, leisure and cultural opportunities; and
   Living independently, protected from harm, leading healthy lives and  
  making a positive contribution.
1.26 The Council’s Corporate Strategy 2012 sets out the priorities for the council   
 over the next 3-5 years:
   Work with residents to create neighbourhoods, which are clean  
  and cared for;
   Create the environment for good economic growth;
   Rebalance the mix of our interventions to prevent or reduce    
  vulnerability and health inequalities;
   Work together with young and older people, families and communities  
  to help them reach their potential; and
   Make full use of Swindon’s untapped resources, while better prioritising  
  the Council’s spending.
6 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20261.27 The Local Plan is aligned to and enables the spatial delivery of the  
 Swindon Borough Economic Strategy. The Economic Strategy identifies  
 the following priorities: 
   Create a place of opportunity for young people; 
   Develop higher education facilities for Swindon; 
   Position Swindon as a hub of advanced engineering and technology; 
   Revitalise Swindon Town Centre; 
   Establish Swindon as a regional leisure destination; and
   Create Low Carbon Swindon.
1.28 The Infrastructure Delivery Plan sets out Swindon’s long-term infrastructure 
needs which are required to support the development strategy and has been 
developed with input from partner organisations and the community. It will be 
updated on a regular basis in light of changing circumstances. 
 Other Local Strategies & Evidence Base
1.29 There are numerous other Borough Council and partner organisation strategies that have informed the development of the Local Plan. These and 
others are also referenced throughout the Plan where they have a specific 
relationship with a policy or theme and a full list of evidence base documents can be found in Appendix 2. In developing the Local Plan, the Borough 
Council has undertaken or commissioned research into a variety of subject 
areas to help shape its policies. In many cases this has involved working closely with other stakeholders, including infrastructure providers and other public and private sector bodies and organisations that are responsible for 
delivering change, to produce the various studies and strategies.
1.30 The Borough Council is working with the business community through the 
Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership to enable economic growth. It is also working with Influence Swindon to understand the business community needs.
 Duty to Co-operate
1.31 The Localism Act 2011 (The Act) introduced a requirement on Local Planning Authorities to co-operate with neighbouring local authorities and other bodies with a regulatory or strategic interest in Local Plan issues. The “Duty to  
Co-operate” (The Duty) includes the need to consider the impact of the 
strategy as a whole and its proposals for major development on other places 
close to Swindon Borough and on those places where the Plan’s proposals have a strategic impact.  As a result, the Borough Council produced a ‘Duty 
to Co-operate Statement’ which documents how the Council has fulfilled the 
Duty and how the bodies referred to in the Act and their recommendations have helped to shape the Plan.  As shown in Figure 2, this includes our relationships with Communities and Local Government (CLG), the Homes and 
Communities Agency (HCA), Wiltshire Council and Forward Swindon Limited.
7 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 1:  Introduction Figure 2: Relationship with prescribed and other bodies
 Sustainability Appraisal
1.32 The achievement of sustainable development is the core principle 
underpinning the planning system. This Local Plan is accompanied by a Sustainability Appraisal (SA) Report, which aims to ensure that the principles of sustainable development have been incorporated throughout the development of the Local Plan. The Sustainability Appraisal Report 
incorporates a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), meeting the 
requirements of EU Directive 2001/42/EC.
 Habitats Regulations Assessment
1.33 This Local Plan is accompanied by a Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) to meet the requirements of The European Directive (92/43/EEC) on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and Wild Flora and Fauna (the Habitats Directive). The HRA is required to be undertaken on proposed plans or projects 
which are likely to have a significant effect on one or more Natura 2000 sites 
either individually, or in combination with other plans and projects. 
 Diversity Impact Assessment
1.34 Diversity Impact Assessments analyse functions and policies to make sure that 
Swindon Borough Council’s duty to promote equality and recognise diversity 
are met. The Local Plan has been subject to a Diversity Impact Assessment in line with the Council’s guidelines.
 Health Impact Assessment
1.35 A Health Impact Assessment (HIA) has been undertaken on the Local Plan  
to assess the potential effects that the policies may have on the health of  
the population and the distribution of those effects within the population. 
8
 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 2: 
Context, Spatial Vision  
and Strategic Objectives Part 2:   
 Context, Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives  
 Context
2.1 The Borough is 230km2 (89 square miles) in area and is home to about 209,0001 
people. It consists of the town of Swindon itself, the market town of Highworth, 
the large village of Wroughton, and a number of smaller villages and hamlets. 
Swindon is a daily destination for many people. Swindon is at the heart of the M4 corridor and has excellent links to the rest of the UK and beyond, together with a superb natural setting.
 Figure 3: Map of Swindon Borough
 
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016
2.2 Swindon probably derives its name from the Saxon ‘swine dun’ (hill where pigs were raised) although its occupation extends before that period to when 
Prehistoric and Romano-British settlers were attracted to the ridge.  Latterly 
it developed throughout the Medieval period when it became established as a small market town with a charter being given in 1626. It prospered but 
remained relatively small until the coming of the Wiltshire and Berkshire Canal 
in 1810 and shortly afterwards the railway, which was the key driver in the town’s expansion.
2.3 Modern Swindon was established on Brunel’s vision, when he located his railway works here in the 1840s and a special and significant heritage remains from this Victorian era. Swindon has a post-war history of confident and 
continuous growth. In the face of decline in the railway industry, the attraction 
of new industries and new people was seen as the town’s only means of escaping from economic decline. The 1950s and 1960s saw considerable migration from the rest of the UK, particularly from London.
9 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20262Securing the Future set out five ‘guiding principles’ of sustainable development: living within the planet’s 
environmental limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable economy; 
promoting good governance; and using sound science responsibly.See United Nations. 1987. Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, General Assembly Resolution 42/187, 11 December 1987 2.4 Swindon has transformed itself from a town dominated by the railway industry 
into one with a prosperous economy with a mix of modern industries. It has 
attracted considerable inward investment from national and international 
businesses, including Honda, BMW, Zurich, Nationwide, WH Smith and The National Trust. The remainder of the Borough is characterised by small market towns, villages and high quality landscape, including parts of the North 
Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Thames Vale.
2.5 Swindon Borough has a rich variety of historic and natural features that add to the local distinctiveness, character, appearance and sense of identity of the 
Borough’s towns, villages and countryside. Swindon‘s historic GWR area is the most significant surviving railway-engineering establishment of its time, in the 
world. It is of international importance and a rich source for social and historic 
study interest.
 The Challenge for Swindon Borough
2.6 Working with the community and with other organisations, the challenge is to deliver economic growth in Swindon Borough in a way that is balanced, 
sustainable and improves the quality of life of all.
2.7 Creating sustainable communities is about more than just housing.  
It is also about:
   increasing jobs and economic growth, promoting social justice and  
  improving quality of life;
   meeting the needs of a changing population, particularly one  
  that is ageing;
   encouraging people to get involved in the decisions that affect their   
  community;
   ensuring the delivery of better public services;
   building schools, hospitals and transport as an integral part of    
  development;
   improving the environment, for example by making streets, parks and   
  squares cleaner, safer and greener, and building more environmentally  
  friendly buildings; 
   responding to the threats posed by climate change; and
   recognising and understanding the social and economic value of   
  historical, cultural and natural assets.
2.8 Swindon has a strong potential for growth, however there remain significant 
threats to economic success, particularly:
   the poor performance of Swindon Town Centre, specifically in terms of  
  the retail and office offer;
   a lower level of higher-educational qualifications of residents compared  
  to  competing towns and cities;
   the perceived poor image of Swindon; and
   a low retention of wealth within the Borough
10Part 2:  Context, Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20262.9 Unplanned and uncoordinated growth could damage the longer-term 
investment prospects for the Borough. Past experience of the town’s expansion 
has demonstrated that the more successful areas of growth have been where 
a long-term vision and plan has been in place. Equally, the Borough Council is keen to learn from recent developments and has undertaken resident surveys of new estates to inform this Plan.
2.10 A considerable amount of new and improved infrastructure will be needed to support the new developments proposed. A significant amount will be funded 
from the new developments themselves, by means of planning permission 
conditions and/or development contributions. 
 Swindon’s Economic Prospects
2.11 The headline messages about Swindon’s comparative performance are: 
   Swindon continues to have a productive economy  with one of the  
  highest gross value added (GVA) per capita figures amongst locations  
  outside London. However, it has fallen behind Milton Keynes, Newbury and  
  Reading and has seen growth slow significantly in the last decade  
  compared to other competitor locations;
   The Borough has also seen employment losses over the past decade, a  
  period when many comparator locations saw growth. Youth  
  unemployment has become a particularly acute problem as the recession 
   took hold;
   The Borough’s resident skills base is well matched to its current economy   
  in which manufacturing, logistics/distribution and consumer services play  
  a large part;
   However, it is a relatively lower skilled location . Residents tend to have  
  higher proportions of lower level skills and work in lower skilled occupations  
  than other locations;
   The Borough is well located , with excellent access via road and rail to   
  London, Heathrow, the Greater South East, the Midlands, the West Country  
  and Wales;
   Swindon’s excellent location also enables it to draw on an extensive   
  labour market along the M4 corridor and Great Western rail route. In  
  this respect, it should be well placed to capture a share of future   
  economic growth in south east/south west England; and
   It is a cost competitive location  in which house prices are lower than many  
  areas and which compares favourably to other locations in terms of   
  commercial property prices.
 
11 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 The Local Plan’s Role in Responding to the Challenge
2.12 The Local Plan has a key role in realising the economic advantages of Swindon 
and in helping to address those aspects in which the Borough is comparatively 
weak, whilst at the same time conserving and enhancing the natural and built 
environment and improving the quality of life for its residents. It does this by allocating sufficient land for economic growth and setting out clear policies on which to make decisions. These are set out in Part 3 and in more detail in 
Parts 4 and 5 of this Local Plan.
  The Spatial Vision
  “The Borough of Swindon will become a place where people choose to  
  live, visit and invest. As an important regional centre, Swindon’s appeal  
  will stem from having an attractive and well-equipped town that has   
  successfully blended traditional architecture with high quality  
  contemporary buildings that incorporate sustainable design and   
  construction principles.
  The achievement of a high quality public realm in the heart of the town  
  linked to the countryside will provide a real focal point for visitors and   
  Swindonians alike. 
  Swindon will become one of the best business locations in the UK, offering  
  a high quality of life, not just to its residents, but also to those from a much  
  wider catchment area. New jobs will be created and there will be the  
  fullest range of employment opportunities for the whole community. 
  Swindon will be at the centre of a network of multifunctional green spaces  
  linking the town to the wider countryside. Swindon will have responded to  
  the needs of a growing population in a way that has protected and   
  enhanced our natural and historic environment.  
  People in Swindon will have the opportunity to live active, healthy  
  and learning lifestyles.”
2.13 The Spatial Vision is drawn from the Swindon Sustainable Community Strategy: 
A Shared Vision for Swindon, which has been widely consulted on and 
received general support.
 The Strategic Priorities for Swindon Borough Local Plan
2.14 The key development priorities which guide the Local Plan’s Strategic 
Objectives are set out below:
	4Deliver growth that is balanced and sustainable, and provides the   
  necessary infrastructure, while addressing the impacts of climate change;
 4Deliver regeneration in a way that meets the needs of Swindon’s future,  
  but conserves and enhances the best of the past; and
	4 Recognise the important role of green infrastructure to enhance the   
  quality of life for existing and future residents.
12Part 2:  Context, Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20262.15 The delivery of these priorities is underpinned by a need for high-quality 
design, and a need to protect and enhance existing and deliver new green 
infrastructure, ensuring that opportunities for designing in measures to improve 
mental and physical wellbeing meet local community needs and aspirations.
 The Local Plan Strategic Objectives
2.16 Underpinning the Spatial Vision for Swindon and the Borough Council’s priorities is a themed set of Strategic Objectives based on the strategies of 
the Borough and its partners, and developed through consultation. These are 
illustrated in Figure 4 and set out below:
 Strategic Objective 1:  High Quality Sustainable Development - to improve 
the image of Swindon, enable inclusive communities and address climate 
change by the provision of high quality, well designed and sustainable 
development.
 Strategic Objective 2: Infrastructure - to meet the infrastructure needs for and 
arising from the growth of Swindon (including health and community needs) in a timely and co-ordinated manner and being adequately funded.
 Strategic Objective 3: Economy - to meet the needs of local businesses and 
the forecast growth in the local economy, and to enhance Swindon’s position 
as the UK’s best business location.
 Strategic Objective 4: Housing - to meet the Borough’s housing needs by the 
provision of well-designed sustainable housing, at sustainable locations and at 
a range of types and densities according to local needs and circumstances, and that promotes the effective use of land.
 Strategic Objective 5: Education - to meet the need for education provision 
arising from the anticipated growth in population and to enable an improvement in skills and qualifications, particularly through the provision  
and support of tertiary education opportunities.
 Strategic Objective 6: Community and Health - to promote healthy lifestyles 
and to meet the need for community and health facilities arising from growth 
and demographic change in the Borough.
 Strategic Objective 7: Transport -  to support Swindon’s growth through 
the provision of a comprehensive and sustainable transport network that is efficient, safe, affordable, accessible and easy to understand, and offers a genuine choice of modes.
 Strategic Objective 8: Culture and Leisure -  to enable the provision of 
cultural and leisure facilities commensurate with Swindon’s size and growth in population and realise Swindon’s potential as a regional leisure destination.
 Strategic Objective 9: Green Infrastructure - to provide an attractive and 
inspirational environment to live, work, learn and play, by the provision of a far-reaching network of connected and multi- functional green spaces linked 
to the wider countryside. 
13 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Strategic Objective 10: Natural, Built & Historic Environment - to ensure 
that development respects, enhances, and conserves the best of the 
existing built, historic and natural environment in the Borough.
14Figure 4: The Local Plan Strategic Priorities and Objectives
Part 2:  Context, Spatial Vision and Strategic Objectives
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: 
Sustainable Development Part 3: 
 Sustainable Development
3.1 Part 3 outlines the approach to sustainable development within  
Swindon Borough for the period to 2026.  It sets out policies which:
   establish sustainable development principles by which all development  
 proposed in the Borough will be assessed;
   propose the appropriate amount and broad location of future    
 development in the Borough, based on robust evidence and  
 consultation; and
   determine how development will be managed including how the   
 presumption in favour of sustainable development will be applied.
3.2 The greatest challenge in planning for growth and change is to ensure that 
a balance is struck between responding to local needs, accommodating growth in population and enabling growth in the local economy, whilst at the same time protecting and conserving vital assets, facilities and services and 
what is good about our built and natural environments.  It is the purpose of this 
Plan to ensure that this balance is struck in the interests of all its existing and future residents, workforce and visitors.
3.3 Within these constraints, opportunities and needs, the Local Plan sets out clearly how development proposals are going to be fulfilled; where, by when 
and how growth and change will be managed.  To regulate this change, 
robustly evidenced policies have been developed to guide and enforce the strategy and steer decisions on proposals for development throughout the Borough.  However, planning cannot make desired changes happen; it can 
only ensure that the right set of policies and plans are in place to help enable 
them to happen.
3.4 The choices made through this Plan, and the consultations which have run before it, have been based on the principles of providing sustainable and balanced development and, within the context of the ability of the local 
authority, development industry and other bodies and agencies, to  
deliver this change. 
3.5 At the heart of the NPPF is a presumption in favour of sustainable 
development, which should be seen as a golden thread running through  
both plan-making and decision-taking.
3.6 In Swindon Borough there are a multitude of issues that this Plan must  
address when setting a framework for the effective management and delivery of sustainable and balanced development.  Many sit across social, economic and/or environmental roles rather than neatly fitting within  
one category.  These include (but are not limited to), those listed in Figure 5  (in no order of priority).
15Strategic Objectives
The Sustainable Development Policies flow directly from and help  
to implement all Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2 of this Plan. 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202616 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
 
29 
 Figure 5.  Key Issues for Swindon Borough Local Plan  
Economic  Social  Environmental 
 
  
  
Maintaining and 
growing the local and 
sub-regional economy  Housing provision 
(market and affordable)  Efficient and wise use 
of land  
     
Employment provision  Encouraging healthy 
and active lifestyles  Reducing CO 2 emissions 
     
  Providing social and 
community 
infrastructure and 
facilities  Providing low carbon and 
renewable energy 
opportunities 
     
    Managing the risk from 
flooding  
     
  Protection, conservation, enhancement of assets  
(built and natural) 
     
Ensuring viability of development    
     
Reducing cost of development through  
economies of scale   
     
Improving Swindon’s image and built environment through good design  
     
Providing utility and transport infrastructure 
     
Regeneration of Swindon’s Central Area  
     
Improving accessibility and attractiveness of Swindon through  
provision of green infrastructure 
     
Spatial distribution of development  
     
Providing for the right scale of balanced development, facilities and infrastructure  
in the right locations and at the right time 
     
Responding to local needs  
     
  Figure 5:  Key Issues for Swindon Borough Local Plan
Part 3: Sustainable Development
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026     
 Policy SD1: Sustainable Development Principles 
 To enable the delivery of sustainable development and support sustainable  
 communities in the Borough all development proposals will:
    be of high quality design;
    promote healthy, safe and inclusive communities;
    respect, conserve, and/or enhance the natural, built and  
   historic environments;
    assess and address the impact of climate change through mitigation  
   and/or adaption measures;
    provide or contribute to the assessed local and borough wide   
   infrastructure and service requirements;
    contribute to the retention of jobs and growth of the local economy  
   and complement Town Centre regeneration;
    be accessible by walking, cycling and/or public transport; and,
    use land and resources (such as water, energy, minerals and waste)  
   in an efficient and effective way.
3.7 In the planning context, sustainable development principles are a 
combination of factors to help ensure that new development minimises 
and mitigates its impact where it is proposed, by providing adequate and accessible services and facilities for the occupiers of the new development and overall delivers a “balanced development” which respects the social, 
environmental and economic demands placed upon it.  In short, they are  
the critical components required to deliver balanced growth and change.
3.8 Policy SD1 sets out the development principles which underpin this Local Plan and the development proposals which will come forward in the Borough.  They represent a sustainable and balanced approach to the provision of new 
development and respond to:
   Swindon Borough’s Strategic Objectives and Priorities identified in Part 2  
 of this Plan, translating them into “on the ground” positive requirements   
 and outcomes;
   the key issues pertinent to Swindon Borough identified in Part 2 of this Plan; 
   the need for all new development to contribute to sustainable and   
 balanced growth and change for the better in the Borough; and,
   the Government’s desire, through the NPPF, to see sustainable economic  
 growth at the heart of planning which respects and balances all social,  
 economic and environmental factors with the need for development.
3.9 In doing so the criteria provides the basis of standards and requirements that all new development in the Borough should meet, whatever the scale and 
wherever it is located.  The policy provides the platform for more detailed policies which follow in Parts 4 and 5 of this Plan.
17 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Evidence Base
3.10 The key evidence base documents for Policy SD1 include:
   The Swindon Sustainable Community Strategy: A Shared Vision for Swindon  
 2008–2030 (2008)
   A Swindon Climate Change Action Plan for Swindon Borough 2006-2010  
 (2006)
   An Economic Strategy for Swindon 2012-26 (2012)
   Active Swindon Strategy 2009-2015 (2009)
 Delivery and links with other key policies 
3.11 The delivery of sustainable development will be achieved through:
   The implementation of the Sustainable Development Strategy in this Plan  
 and associated Development Plan Documents (DPDs);
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders ; 
   Collaboration with other local authorities, the Swindon and Wiltshire Local  
 Enterprise Partnership,  Neighbourhood Forums, Parish Councils,  
 developers, infrastructure providers and other key stakeholders as  
 appropriate to enable the delivery of the above Plans and proposals for  
 sustainable growth and development; and,
   The consideration of development proposals within and outwith of these  
 processes through the application of Policies SD2 and SD3 and other  
 relevant policies in this Plan.  
3.12 The Swindon Design Toolkit will set out our approach to successful 
regeneration and place making to deliver the best and most sustainable outcomes for Swindon. Targeted investment beyond the standard at key 
destinations can help deliver high quality development that can help in 
transforming Swindon’s image and redressing its design legacy.
3.13 As this policy sets out the key principles for the strategy, Policy SD1 links through to all other policies in this plan. 
18
Part 3: Sustainable Development
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202619
 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
 
33 
 Figure 6.  Key Diagram   
 
  
Figure 6:  Key Diagram 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016      
 Policy SD2: The Sustainable Development Strategy  
 a. Recognising its role and function in the wider area development in the   
  Borough will be concentrated at Swindon through a combination of:
    realising development opportunities within Swindon’s urban area; and
    allocated strategic sites at; Wichelstowe, Commonhead, Tadpole   
   Farm, Kingsdown (east of the A419) and the proposed New Eastern   
   Villages, Rowborough and expanded South Marston, as defined on  
   the Key Diagram.
 b. The Swindon Central Area, as defined on the Key Diagram and at  
  Figure 6, will be the main focus and first preference for the location of  
  built civic, cultural, further education, office, retail, leisure and regional  
  sports facilities.
 c. Outside Swindon :
    rural development will be located primarily at Highworth and   
   Wroughton, which (of the rural settlements) are the most accessible   
   and maintain the largest range of facilities;
    South Marston will be extended as part of the allocated strategic sites  
   in part a. above; 
    at the other villages in the Borough, proportional to their size and   
   function, development will be supported within the rural settlement  
   boundaries as shown on the Policies map, or on land allocated in a  
   Neighbourhood Plan or Site Allocations DPD as detailed in Policy LN1  
   where it delivers (at least) the quantum of development identified in  
   the Plan and responds positively to address local needs; and,
    development proposals in rural and countryside locations outside the  
    rural settlement boundaries as shown on the Policies Map will be   
   permitted where:
   local needs have been identified and allocated through a   
    Neighbourhood Plan or Neighbourhood Development Order;  
    and/or
   it supports the expansion of tourist and visitor facilities in appropriate  
    locations where identified needs are not met by existing facilities in  
    a rural service centre; or
   it is in accordance with other policies in this Plan permitting specific  
    development in the countryside.
20
Part 3: Sustainable Development
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202621 d. Sustainable economic and housing growth will be delivered in    
  Swindon Borough during the plan period through the provision of:
    119.5 hectares of employment land (B-use class) through:
   77.5 hectares of additional employment land3; and,
   42 hectares with extant permission and existing allocations carried  
       forward (see Table 2)
  About, but not less than, 22,000 dwellings between 2011 and 2026,   
   phased as follows:
   1,150 average per annum between 2011 and 2016; and,
   1,625 average per annum between 2016 and 2026.
    The strategy shall be reviewed by 2016 at the latest, to assess future  
    levels of need for new homes and employment land over the period  
   to 2031, to provide an appropriate basis for employment land and   
   infrastructure provision.
 e. This quantum of employment land and dwelling numbers for the  
  period 2011-26 will be distributed as set out below:
  Table 1:  Housing and Employment Land Distribution
4Including land with permission at Wichelstowe, Tadpole Farm and Commonhead Dwellings Additional Employment 
Land4 & Floorspace 
Employment
Swindon’s Central Areaabout 1,000 90,000 m
4 office
Remainder Swindon’s existing urban areaabout 3,500
Northern 
Development Area589
Wichelstowe 4,064 12.5 hectares
Commonhead 890 15 hectares
Tadpole Farm 1,695 5 hectares
New Eastern Villages about 6,000 about 40 hectares
Rowborough about 1,500
South Marston
Village:
Greenfield
Brownfield  
500
about 140
3Including land with permission at Wichelstowe, Tadpole Farm and Commonhead 
 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: Sustainable Development
225Including land with permission at Wichelstowe, Tadpole Farm and Commonhead Dwellings Additional Employment 
Land5 & Floorspace 
Employment
Kingsdown (east  of the A419)about 1,650
Highworth at least 200* 5 hectares
Wroughton at least 150*
Other Villages  
(in total) at least 100*
* See paragraph 3.26 below
The Northern Development Area, Wichelstowe, Commonhead  
and Tadpole Farm have existing permissions. The number of 
dwellings and employment land for these areas shown above  
are per the existing permissions (excluding completions prior  to April 1
st 2011).
3.14 The development strategy aims to meet Swindon’s development needs  
 whilst protecting the Borough’s most important assets.  Development is to  
  be concentrated primarily at Swindon as the focal point for the economy,  
 services and facilities and transport for the Borough and the wider-area.  
 Urban concentration is the most sustainable development strategy because:
   it will create a better balance between job growth and housing; and
   critical mass and economies of scale can be more easily attained; and 
   it will make the best use of existing and planned infrastructure and making  
  the most efficient use of public resources and developer contributions.
3.15 The convenience and low prices at large supermarkets and the flexibility,  
 choice and mobility provided by the car are increasingly undermining the  
 prospects and viability of shops and services in smaller towns and villages.  
 A limited amount of development has the potential to help support the  
 long-term viability of these and other local facilities, and provide local  
 job opportunities.
3.16 The Borough Council recognises that not all of Swindon’s development  
 needs can be met within the existing urban area. Therefore the Council is  
 adopting a rational and responsible approach to town expansion in order  
 to deliver the best and most sustainable outcomes for the town. Accordingly,  
 development opportunities should be realistic and not compromise the  
 existing or emerging longer-term vision and strategy. To ensure that this  
 takes place, due consideration has been given to constraints and advice  
 received both from statutory and non-statutory bodies and organisations  
 to ensure that the allocations of the Local Plan are realistically capable of  
 being implemented.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202623 Economic Growth
3.17 The Swindon Borough Economic Strategy demonstrates the potential for   
 continued economic growth for the Borough over the Plan period, based on  
  a number of priority key sectors. Economic growth not only secures future jobs 
  for residents, but also provides much continued investment in the town   
 that enables improvements to infrastructure and services. The Local Plan’s   
 key role in supporting economic growth is through the identification of   
 sufficient and deliverable employment land and housing commensurate with  
  growth forecasts. Work underpinning the Economic Strategy has been  
  undertaken to address comments that the Plan was based on a single  
 economic growth projection. This work produced a base scenario and higher  
 growth scenario for the forecast increase in jobs for the period 2011-26,  
 as follows:
   Base scenario   +10,400
   High scenario  +19,600
   Core Strategy (2011) +14,500 (for comparison)
3.18 On the basis of the following requirements the high scenario has been   
 adopted as the target. 
3.19 The Local Plan needs to:
   be NPPF compliant;
   be in line with the Borough’s Economic Strategy involving the  
  prioritising of sectors;
   acknowledge the aspirations of the Local Economic Partnership;
   take account of the views and advice of The Local Nature Partnership   
  (Link2Nature) ;
   send out a ‘positive message’ to the business community that Swindon is  
  ‘open for business’; and 
   respond positively to the Government’s growth announcements.
3.20 The development strategy for the Borough is based on a position of moving  
 from recession to recovery during the Plan period, whilst recognising that  
  this recovery could be a slow transition to one of growth.  On this basis,  
 should the economy recover either much quicker or much slower than  
 anticipated by the Plan’s evidence base, and the strategy no longer  
 becomes a true reflection of the pace or type of growth and change  
 expected at the time of adoption, the Plan will be reviewed to adjust the  
 strategy to reflect the different pace of change.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: Sustainable Development
246Excluding Commonhead, Tadpole Farm and WichelstoweSite Area 
(hectares)Potential  
Likely Use
Delta 300 0.3 Light industrial or distribution
Edison Road, Dorcan 2.42 Light industrial
Penny Lane, Drakes Way 1.12 Office
Europa/Brittania 1.65 Manufacturing
Adjacent to Abbey 
Stadium4 Office – business park
Hillmead  (2 sites) 7.9 Light industrial or distribution
Keypoint- K3 2.9 Distribution
Rivermead 1.3 Light industrial or distribution
Site 10a –  
South Marston Park0.6 Office
Site 10b –  
South Marston Park1.45 Distribution
Site 4 – South Marston Park 0.7 Light industrial or distribution
G-Park (remainder) 15.25 Large Distribution
Plot 9 Windmill Hill 
(allocation)2.38 Office
Total 42 Employment Land
3.21 To meet future employment land (B-use Class) an additional requirement   
 of 77.5 hectares of employment land has been identified. This is in addition to  
 permissions6 yet implemented (39.6 hectares) and allocations taken forward  
 from the Adopted Swindon Borough Local Plan 2011 (2.4 hectares), as set out  
 in Table 2. In addition 90,000m2 of B1 (office) floorspace is provided for in the  
  Swindon Central Area. This additional land requirement is a net figure of  
 strategic landscaping and internal distribution highways.  
 Table 2: Employment land with extant permission and allocations  
 carried forward from the Swindon Borough Local Plan 2011 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026253.22 The existing available sites are mainly small sites with the exception of the   
 remainder of the G-Park site. In order to provide for a range of sites to meet  
 market expectations; to allow for expansion and relocation of existing   
 businesses in Swindon; and to allow for churn, a substantial amount of new  
 employment land is allocated. In particular, it is recognised that Swindon’s  
 location makes it attractive to regional distribution centres. These large   
 distribution units have a role to play in a balanced approach to economic  
 growth in the Borough, but are land-hungry, typically 15 to 20 hectares. It is 
  also critical that land is available in both the short and longer term to realise  
 the aims of the Economic Strategy. The additional allocations include  
  provision for advanced manufacturing, and low carbon, creative and ICT   
 industries. Table 3 sets out the additional allocations and the likely potential  
 uses and their likely delivery timescale.
 Table 3: Employment Land Allocations
Allocation Area 
(hectares)Potential Use Likely time 
scale
Wichelstowe 12.5 ha B1b/c – Advanced Technology  
Park and Low Carbon R&D5-10 years
Commonhead 15 ha B1a – Prestige Business Park 10-15 years
New Eastern  
Villages2.5 ha B1a – Office Space  Business Professional Financial Services0-5 years
7.5 ha B1c/B2 – advanced  
manufacturing0-5 years
30 ha B8 – Medium & Large Distribution 0-5 years
Tadpole Farm 5 ha B1a/b –Low Carbon and  
creative sectors5-10 years
 Housing
3.23 On the basis of new economic projections and to meet locally derived  
 demand for new housing, about 22,000 additional homes are required for  
 2011-2026. After taking account of completions between 2006 and   
 2011 (6,852), this equates to about 29,000 houses for the period 2006 to 2026.  
 Approximately one-third of the additional housing requirement is needed  
 to meet local needs through forecast changes in household and    
 demographic structures in the Borough.
3.24 This revised requirement represents 1,466 new homes per year on average  
 (2011 to 2026), a 28% increase on the annual average completions since  
 1996, and thereby providing for a significant boost in housing as required   
 by the NPPF. However, as economic growth projections over the short-term  
 are less optimistic than they would be during a period of strong economic   
 growth, the phasing of the release of housing sites is particularly important as  
 there is no advantage in releasing too many development sites which are 
  unlikely to be delivered.  To prevent unnecessary release of additional   
 greenfield housing sites the housing targets are phased to an annual average  
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: Sustainable Development
267A review of housing targets would be subject to the statutory process including public consultation, 
sustainability assessment and examination. of 1,150 dwellings a year for the period to 2016, with 1,625 per annum from  
 2016 to 2026. Housing and economic growth will be regularly assessed to 
  ensure they are consistent with the assumptions underpinning this Plan.  
 If proven to be significantly out-of step a review of the targets will be 
  undertaken which may result in an extension of the phasing period7.   
 A housing trajectory is shown at Appendix 5.
3.25 Development of previously developed land will be maximised. However, 
  this alone will not be sufficient to deliver the housing numbers required   
 by 2026. To complement development in the urban area, additional   
 housing is allocated at Kingsdown (east of the A419) and the New Eastern   
 Villages, Rowborough and expanded South Marston Village, in addition to 
  the  existing planning consents at Wichelstowe, Commonhead and Tadpole  
 Farm. More detailed policies for these allocations are included within Part 5 of  
 this Plan.  Limited development is also proposed at the remaining settlements  
 to support the viability of local services and facilities, particularly Highworth  
 and Wroughton, which have the greatest range of services and facilities, and  
 are the most accessible.
3.26 Outside of the strategic allocations at the new communities, the Local Plan  
 sets an approximate number of dwellings which, has been demonstrated   
 through evidence, are broadly appropriate, in terms of scale and fit within 
  the overall spatial strategy for the Borough, for Highworth, Wroughton and  
 in total for the other villages in the Borough.   The Neighbourhood Planning  
 process allows for the additional allocation of specific numbers of dwellings  
  above that set in adopted Local Plans, where they have been tested through  
 the Neighbourhood Planning process, and the Plans proceed to adoption by  
 the Borough Council.  Policy LN1 sets out the approach to Neighbourhood  
 Planning which will be taken within the Borough. The scale of development  
 at individual settlements should be proportional to the size and function   
 of the settlements. Highworth and Wroughton are identified as the main focus  
  for development within the rural area.  Of the remaining villages in the   
 Borough; Broad Blunsdon, Chiseldon, Wanborough and Bishopstone have  
 some supporting facilities, but they lack core services, particularly  
 employment and leisure compared with Highworth and Wroughton.  
 Development should be in accordance with the settlement hierarchy. The  
 villages in the Borough have distinct characteristics and features that are  
 worthy of protection and enhancement, and therefore development should  
 be at a scale in keeping with the historic form and character of the village,  
 and therefore policy SD2 should be read in conjunction with Policy DE1.
3.27 There is a significant cross border relationship with Wiltshire Council. The  
 former emerging Regional Spatial Strategy for the South West proposed that  
 part of Swindon’s housing needs was to be met on land to the west of  
 Swindon within Wiltshire. Due to the revised levels of growth being proposed  
 there is no longer a need to provide growth on land to the west of Swindon  
 within Wiltshire due to alternative proposals. Should the proposed strategy  
 and level of growth for Swindon change,  Wiltshire Council and Swindon  
 Borough Council as co-operating authorities, together with the Swindon and  
 Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership, will continue to discuss the most  
 appropriate strategy for Swindon’s future growth. If land to the west of   
 Swindon area becomes a potential option for growth again appropriate   
 consultation will be undertaken and if necessary the two  authorities can   
 pursue a single issue joint site allocations DPD for this area.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026273.28 In accordance with the NPPF the Council will identify annually a supply of  
 deliverable sites to provide 5-years’ worth of housing against the targets in  
 this plan with an additional buffer of 5% moved forward from the later part of  
 the plan period. Should there be a shortfall identified the Council will rapidly  
 review the allocations of housing sites in the Local Plan to ensure a  
 continuation of supply. Housing sites that come forward that are not in  
 accord with Policy SD2 and where there is a shortfall of supply identified will  
 be assessed against Policies SD1 and SD3.
 Evidence Base
3.29 Key evidence base documents include:
   Swindon Workspace Strategy (2009)
   Swindon Employment Land Review (2007)
   Active Swindon Strategy 2009-2015 (SBC & NHS, 2009)
   Economic Testing of Swindon Core Strategy (2012)
   An Economic Strategy for Swindon 2012-26 (2012)
   Swindon Housing Requirement Update Report (2012)
   Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009 and 2013)
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005)
   Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Study (2008)
   The Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Evidence Review Paper (2012)
   Swindon Housing Needs Assessment (2006)
   Swindon Housing Market Area Strategy 2009-2014 (2009)
   Annual Swindon Borough Housing Monitoring Report 
 Delivery and links with other key policies 
3.30 The delivery of the strategy will be achieved through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified  
  in the “Evidence Base”, particularly the Economic Strategy for  
  Swindon 2012-26: above;
   The adopted Central Area Action Plan;
   Framework plans and masterplanning for new communities;
   The implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Swindon Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document;
   Public funding where it can be secured, developer contributions and/  
  or the Community Infrastructure Levy;
   Forward Swindon Limited; and, 
   The Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: Sustainable Development
28    3.31 The Duty to Co-operate Statement also signposts where co-operation  
 and collaboration with key stakeholders has influenced decision-making on  
 the Sustainable Development Strategy.
3.32 The Local Plan should be read as a whole, with proposals for development  
 being considered against many policies depending on the details of the  
 proposal and its location. 
      
 Policy SD3: Managing Development  
 a. When considering a development proposal, the Council will take a  
  positive approach to reflect the presumption in favour of sustainable  
  development. This means:
    it will always work proactively and jointly with applicants to find   
   solutions which mean that proposals can be approved wherever  
   possible, and to secure development that improves the economic,  
    social and environmental conditions, and promotes health and  
   well-being, for those people living and working in Swindon Borough;
    planning applications that are in accordance with the policies in this  
   Local Plan (and with policies in adopted neighbourhood plans) will be  
   approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate  
   otherwise; and,
    where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant  
   policies are out of date at the time of making the decision then the  
   Borough Council will grant permission unless material considerations  
   indicate otherwise, taking into account whether:
   any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly  
    and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed   
    against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework  
    taken as a whole; or
         specific policies in that Framework indicate that development  
    should be restricted
 b. At all significant development areas:
    following outline permission being granted, detailed design  
   submissions including reserved matters applications should be  
    guided by an overarching design approach that is set out in  
   design codes and/or framework plans or appropriate  
   alternative mechanism;
    management strategies will be agreed to secure the long term   
   maintenance of infrastructure prior to development; and
    the production of Diversity Impact Assessments and Health Impact   
   Assessments will be encouraged.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202629c. For the Swindon Central Area a Masterplan will be produced  
 to give further guidance to development proposals to  
 realise the aims of this Plan and the Swindon Central Area   
 Action Plan
d. For the Strategic Allocations a tariff or model legal agreement  
 will be developed to ensure timely delivery of infrastructure,  
 maintenance and mitigation and fair and equitable    
 contributions between phases.
3.33 In setting out national policy guidance, the National Planning Policy  
 Framework (NPPF) seeks to oversee the delivery of sustainable growth  
 and change, having at its core a “presumption in favour of sustainable  
 development”.  The NPPF should be read as a whole and states that the  
  presumption should be seen as a “golden thread” through both plan-making  
 and decision taking. This is in accordance with paragraph 14 (footnote 9)   
 which indicated that development in Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty  
 should be restricted whilst paragraph 15 states that:
   “Policies in Local Plans should follow the approach of the presumption  
   in  favour of sustainable development so that it is clear that    
   development which is sustainable can be approved without delay.  
	 		 All	plans	should	be	based	upon	and	reflect	the	presumption	in	favour		
   of sustainable development, with clear policies that will guide how the  
   presumption should be applied locally.”
3.34 Policy SD3 aims to meet these requirements, setting out clearly what the   
 presumption means in the Swindon context, whilst at the same time taking  
 into account the wording of the Government’s model policy on the   
 “presumption in favour of sustainable development” which it recommends is  
 included in each development plan.
3.35 At large significant sites design codes and/or framework plans must be  
 approved prior to Reserved Matters approval to guide the physical  
 development of the site. They should provide a clear sense of identity,  
 character and provide a clear land use and movement structure to support  
 the vision and principles.  It will be critical in their preparation that a  
 partnership approach is adopted between the Local Planning Authority,  
 developers, stakeholders and service providers. They will:
   help to deliver high quality sustainable development;
   help facilitate delivery; and,
   provide certainty and clarity to developers, community groups and  
  parish councils.
3.36 The Borough Council is committed to reducing inequalities across all   
 Swindon’s communities and to putting in measures to improve the health of  
 residents. Development has a role in such a process and working with the  
 Council developers are encouraged to undertake Diversity Impact  
 Assessments and Health Impact Assessments at an early stage in the  
 application process to deliver schemes that are of the highest quality  
 in this regard.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 3: Sustainable Development
303.37 A model Section 106 agreement will be developed for the allocated  
 strategic sites for the following reasons:
   development of this scale generates the need for an entirely new set of  
  infrastructure, services and facilities and needs to be calculated differently;
   there are high cost infrastructure items that the existing policy would not  
  generate enough funds to deliver;
   funding needs to be directed to the highest priority infrastructure, which  
  may not be consistent with the Developer Contributions SPD; and,
   external funding will need to be secured to deliver high cost infrastructure  
  items in the form of gap-funding to deliver sustainable development.
3.38 The preparation of Supplementary Planning Documents may be required to  
 aid infrastructure delivery including guiding the coordinated and timely  
 manner of development within the Borough.  These documents would  
 provide guidance on the quality of development expected and aid the  
 Council in considering planning applications.
3.39 A Swindon Town Centre Masterplan has been produced which forms an 
 important framework to guide and steer development at a detailed level  
 in the Central Area.
 Evidence Base 
3.40 The evidence base includes the Government’s Model Local Plan Policy  
 on the application of the presumption in favour of sustainable  
 development (2012).
 Delivery and links with other key policies 
3.41 Effective management of development will be achieved through the  
 application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the   
  “Evidence Base” above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document;
   Any subsequent DPDs;
   New community development framework plans, design codes  
  and masterplans; 
   Early and continuing dialogue between the Council, local community  
  and developers;
   The development management process;
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which 
   might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then    
  consequently adopted by the Council; and/or
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual   
  development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
  site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish  
  and other Community Plans.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4: 
Enabling Sustainable Development Part 4: Enabling Sustainable Development
 Theme1: High Quality and Substainable Development
 
314.1 Theme 1 sets out policies to:
   ensure high quality design in all new development;
   ensure that new development is constructed to the highest possible   
 sustainable construction standards to help meet targets in the reduction of  
 carbon dioxide emissions; and
   assess and determine proposals for development in accordance with these  
 high quality design and sustainability standards.
   Key Issues
4.2 The quality of Swindon’s urban environment is perhaps one of the most 
emotive issues for residents of Swindon.  Well-designed buildings and urban 
spaces help give a sense of place and identity and contribute to civic pride.  Design plays an important role in shaping a healthy and safe environment, 
and can contribute to healthy and active lifestyles.  This is not only through the 
construction of high quality buildings and public realm but also through the provision of open spaces and other ‘soft’ or ‘green’ infrastructure, as detailed in Theme 7 of this Plan.  To realise Swindon’s economic potential, well-designed 
fit for purpose employment space will be required, as well as an attractive 
working and living environment.
4.3 The changing climate has implications for the design of buildings and the 
urban environment.  There are requirements set through legislation and 
applied through Building Regulations for new developments to reduce the 
amount of carbon dioxide they emit.  As targets regarding emissions tighten, 
buildings will need to be designed to incorporate both on-site and off-site measures to offset carbon dioxide emissions such as energy saving, and renewable and low carbon energy generation solutions.  These types of 
measures will also assist in addressing concerns about the future security of 
energy supply and higher energy costs.
4.4 Significant steps have already been taken to effect positive change to the 
Swindon Central Area’s urban landscape and overall appearance through 
the adoption of the Swindon Central Area Action Plan (CAAP).  However, local planning policies need to be set to help ensure that the aspirations of 
the CAAP are realised and to ensure high quality sustainable design and 
construction is delivered across the Borough.The High Quality Design and Sustainable Development theme’s policies flow directly from and help to implement the following 
Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2 of this Plan:
SO1: High Quality Sustainable Development
SO3: EconomySO4: Housing
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202632Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.5 To secure a strong development vision and high quality design the Local 
Planning Authority will seek to work collaboratively to coordinate objectives 
through the use of such tools as masterplans, design codes and design 
briefs. Different scales of development and different sites bring variation in complexity and such tools should be modified to suit each circumstance accordingly. It is expected that Design Codes will be produced for all major 
development proposals on large or complex sites where land is in multiple 
ownership, multiple developers are involved or where development phasing is proposed. Large scale sustainable developments require a significant amount of co-ordination to ensure high quality design and successful communities.  
Masterplans, design codes, framework plans and other assessment tools 
such as BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Methodology) Communities are considered necessary to deliver high quality 
design and sustainable development in accord with Policy SD3.
4.6 As well as the application of policies in this Plan, other organisations, 
both private and public, have a role in delivering high quality design and 
sustainable construction standards.
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 1
4.7 Key evidence base documents for high quality design and sustainable development include:
   Swindon Design Guide (2006)
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Sustainable Development Policies (2009) 
   District Energy Pre-Feasibility Study (2011)
   Swindon Sustainable Energy Framework (2011)
Policy DE1: High Quality Design  
High standards of design are required for all types of development.  
Proposals for development should address the objectives of sustainable development through high quality design and place-making principles.   
To ensure this, proposals will be assessed against all the following  
design principles:
a. Context and character; in respect of: 
   existing built characteristics; 
   acknowledged features of importance; and 
   existing site conditions. 
b. Layout, form and function of the development, in respect of:
   accessibility, connectivity, permeability, legibility, inclusivity,  
  safety & security, efficiency and adaptability; and
   siting, orientation, scale, massing, materials and detailing.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202633 c. Amenity, in respect of: 
   Light, privacy, outlook, noise, disturbance, smell,  
  pollution and space. 
d. Quality of the public realm
4.8 Development proposals can only be acceptable and sustainable where they 
meet the requirements for high quality design. The Borough Council considers 
that high quality design transcends development scale and is an essential 
requirement of all proposals across the Borough.  Policy DE1 sets out the  
design principle that development proposals should be assessed against.  These include: 
   the place and setting of the development (context & character); 
   how the development will feel and work for the users of it (layout,  
 form & function); 
   how it will provide for people’s needs and protect important features   
 (amenity); and 
   what benefits the development will bring to the urban environment  
 (quality of the public realm).  
 The result should be a more attractive environment, embracing high quality place-making ideals, well-functioning and robust enough to withstand future changes.
 Design Principles
 Character and Context
4.9 Each place has its own distinctive character and possesses inherent design 
assets and opportunities.  As such, all development must be in context with 
the existing natural, built and historic environment and proposals must respond positively to enhance or create distinctive character and identity. Appreciating 
and responding to the context and character of a site and its surrounds 
requires the following aspects to be positively addressed by development.
   Existing built characteristics  such as views & vistas, points of access, rights of  
  way, servicing requirements, buildings, density, scale, form, access and   
 street patterns;
   Acknowledged features of importance (natural and historic) such as:  
 landscape character, historic landscape, flood protection, tree and  
 hedgerow protection, protected habitats, archaeology and heritage  
 assets; and
   Existing Site Conditions : physical characteristics of the site such as  
 topography, sun path, water courses, drainage, noise, etc. 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202634Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development Layout, Form and Function of Development
4.10 Assessing the quality of design requires an understanding of the 
considerations of layout, form and the functioning of proposals.  “Layout” 
refers to the structuring or setting out of development, the way buildings, routes and open spaces relate to one another, “Form” refers to the detailed 
aspects which make up the configuration of the three-dimensional built form, 
and “Function” refers to the utility or need required to satisfy the proposed use and its users.  
4.11 Layouts should be designed to ensure a clear and logical structure which is easy to navigate and understand.  This should be achieved through a  
well-ordered and defined public realm, with clear relationships between  uses, buildings, routes and spaces.
4.12 The network of streets and public spaces should connect visually and physically as a sequence of public spaces that form part of a high quality public realm network.
4.13 Development layouts should aim to achieve the following  
principles as follows:
   Accessibility of the development to facilities such as public transport, open  
 space, schools, shops and employment by all modes of transport giving  
 priority to pedestrians and cyclists;
   Connectivity of the new development with the existing surrounding   
 area, including strong, direct, safe and desirable linkages as well as visual  
 connection, between housing, green infrastructure and public realm;
   Legibility through a clear and logical structure that is easy to navigate   
 and understand. This should be achieved through a well-ordered and   
 defined public realm, with clear relationships between uses, buildings,   
 routes and spaces;
   Inclusivity across all user groups through the principles of inclusive design.  
 Inclusive access to places, spaces, buildings and public transport is a   
 crucial part of achieving social equality and the prevention of economic,  
 social and physical barriers; 
   Safety & Security -  development must be safe, secure and attractive to  
 minimise opportunities for criminal activity and reduce the fear of crime.  
 This will be assessed in terms of mix of uses, active frontages and passive  
 surveillance of planned, integrated routes through the development public  
 realm, surveillance, lighting, clear entrance points and the location and  
 extent of planting, paying particular attention to the needs of those with  
 disabilities or restricted mobility; 
   Efficiency -  in design and layout to optimise energy efficiency through  
  passive solar design considerations; and in the use of land without   
 compromising existing and proposed amenity; 
   Permeability - ensuring a high degree  of ease of movement within and  
 across the development, by adopting a strong layout that avoids closed  
 streets and blocked movements; and
 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202635   Adaptability -  in the robustness of the pattern, arrangement, size and   
 configuration of plots and blocks of development and of building design to  
 allow for change over the long term.
4.14 The Form of development proposals should create a strong contextual 
response to sites and deliver high quality design in order to create distinctive 
identity. The form of development proposals will be assessed in terms of the following;
   Siting -  the relative position and configuration of a building’s footprint on  
 a site should address and respond to the existing context (trees, buildings,  
 landscape, topography, etc.), street patterns, neighbouring buildings and  
 the character of the wider area;
   Orientation -  the direction a building faces should ensure corners and vista  
 terminations are addressed, that key buildings are prominent and to ensure  
 solar gain is maximised;
   Scale - the size of the built form must relate to its surroundings and respond  
 to context. Individual iconic buildings are often of a size intended to be  
  highly visible however in all cases the scale of development (from mixed  
 use layouts to small extensions) should be justified and not dominate or   
 compromise amenity;
   Massing - the combined effect of the height, bulk and silhouette of an  
 extension, building or group of buildings must compliment the form and  
 function of the development or host building and be in keeping with the  
 character and context of the area. As with Scale (above), individual 
  buildings may challenge the general massing arrangement of a    
 development to create identity and impact, but this must not be to the  
 detriment of other aspects of quality design such as amenity. Massing is  
 considered to include the physical attributes of development such as   
 height, shape, bulk, and the arrangement of these in terms of proportion,  
 rhythm and silhouette;
   Materials -  the choice of materials for buildings and the public realm, in  
 terms of their quality and durability, must suit the context, character and  
 end purpose(s). The use of matching or complementary colours, textures  
 and patterns should assist in ensuring new development is in harmony with  
 the character and context of the surrounding area and where applicable  
 the host building. Contemporary materials that exhibit high performance  
 and have sustainable credentials should also be considered; and
   Detailing -  relates to the articulation of individual or common elements of a  
 development. Attention to how these elements come together and shape  
  the public and private space is important to delivering high quality design.  
 These include: boundary treatments, enclosures for refuse and recycling 
 provision, landscaping, street lighting and street furniture, building elements  
 such as entrances, doors, windows, cills, lintels, surrounds, porches, bays,  
 balconies, chimneys, roofing details, dormer windows, brick detailing,   
 construction details, etc.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202636Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.15 The quality of architecture is a fundamental in achieving a high quality 
built environment. A positive approach to good quality architecture will be 
expected in the Borough and will be assessed in relation to the considerations 
above. The Borough Council considers that innovative and exemplar architecture has a key role in improving Swindon’s quality and image. Where development proposals are outstanding or innovative and which help to 
raise the standards of urban design and architecture, they will be afforded 
significant weight.
4.16 The function of development layouts should take into account how all the 
aspects of the development proposal will operate, by considering their  
inter-relationships and synergies.  This should be achieved without 
compromising the quality of the public realm and sense of place. In 
considering the function of development proposals, layouts will need to accommodate the necessary service, utility and amenity requirements appropriate to it.  Such requirements should be provided in a way that  
does not compromise the social, environmental or economic benefits of  
the scheme proposed.
 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
37 Amenity
4.17 Development proposals must ensure convenience and levels of comfort and 
enjoyment, and promote good health and well-being. Development should 
not adversely impact users of existing or proposed development; this will be 
assessed in terms of;
   Light -  available to existing (or future) occupiers;
   Privacy - impact on living conditions in respect of overlooking private   
 amenity areas such as gardens, habitable rooms and other private spaces;
   Outlook - visual impact of proposed development on existing and/or future  
 occupants, important vistas and views;
   Noise, Disturbance, Smell, Pollution (including light pollution) - development  
 should be compatible with nearby land uses and not compromise amenity  
 with regards to any of these factors; and
   Space - public and private space available to future and existing  
 occupiers of development.
4.18 Residential development should provide an acceptable level of internal 
and external amenity for all types of dwellings in order to protect future users 
and contribute to sustaining populations within their communities over the long term.  Accommodation that falls below an acceptable level inevitably compromises its function and usability over the long term, and can have a 
cumulative negative impact on the local area. It can also have a negative 
impact on the health and well-being of the residents themselves. The Borough Council will issue supplementary guidance in respect of space standards 
applicable to residential development.  Such guidance will be in the context 
of sustainable development as it relates to the efficient use of land, and will provide equitable minimum standards to ensure new housing is of a high quality that maintains long-term social benefits to the wider community.
4.19 Features of acknowledged importance form an important aspect of  
existing amenity established over time. They often form an inherent part  
of the character of an area, its identity and its enjoyment by local  
residents. Development proposals should respect and integrate such  
features where appropriate.
 Quality of the Public Realm
4.20 The quality of the public realm and open space is a key issue in creating and 
maintaining a sense of place and providing for social cohesion.  A very high 
quality approach to the design of new, and works to existing, public realm and open space is required.
4.21 Public realm includes streets, hard and soft spaces and routes used by the public. The design of public space should take careful consideration of the 
proximity and accessibility to local residents and all public realm should be 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 202638Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Developmentdesigned with the principles as set out under layout, form and functioning of 
development above.
4.22 Streets perform a major role in defining the quality and character of the urban environment.  Their detailed design and the integration of the buildings and 
other structures fronting them are key attributes to establishing local identity. 
Streets should be designed with a strong place-making approach justified through good sections and plans in order to establish their specific role and function for each site. Shopfronts and signage can have a significant impact 
on the quality of a building, a street and its character.  High quality shopfronts 
and signage are expected across the Borough to contribute positively to Swindon’s image and improve accessibility and inclusiveness. 
 Design Considerations
4.23 Major development proposals must be prepared in a co-ordinated manner taking into account the local, physical, social, economic and environmental context at the earliest stage of the design process.
4.24 Policy DE1 requires that the following considerations are taken into account in 
the design of development:
   Energy and Sustainable Construction -  to ensure the design, layout, and  
 orientation, including the passive solar design, of the development,  
 support and achieve energy efficiency, generation and sustainable   
 construction methods;
   Flood Risk -  to ensure that the location, layout, and design, incorporating  
 sustainable drainage systems (SuDS), mitigates and manages flood risk  
 arising from new development;
   Transport - to ensure that the design and layout of the development   
 integrates into the transport network for all modes of travel;
   Green Infrastructure -  to ensure that the design and layout of the   
 development protects and enhances green infrastructure, and to integrate  
 measures to improve mental and physical wellbeing into the design; and
   Historic Environment -  to ensure that historic assets and their settings are  
 protected and integrated into the design where appropriate.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.25 Where to find additional information:
   Swindon Design Guide (SBC, 2006)
 Swindon Shop-Fronts Developer Control Guidance Note (SBC, 2006)
 Manual for Streets (Department for Transport, 2007)
 Manual for Streets 2 (Department for Transport, 2010)
 RNIB Shopfronts and Wayfaring Guidance
 
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies
4.26 High quality design will be delivered through the application of this policy and 
through:
   the Swindon Design Toolkit, which will provide further detail on: 
  Urban Design Principles & Policy;
  Context and Character;
  Green Infrastructure;
  Residential Layouts;
  Transport Requirements for Development;
  Sustainable Design and Construction;
  Residential Extensions and Alterations;
  Residential Space Standards;
  Shopfronts and Signage;
  Access for All; and
  Public Art.
   Design and Access Statements, the detailed requirements for which are  
 included in Council guidance; 
   design briefs and masterplans; 
   the development management process; and
   Backland and Infill Development SPD (until superseded by the  
 Design Toolkit)
4.27 Information submitted with a planning application should be proportionate to the scale, significance and impact of the proposal. 
4.28 In accordance with NPPF the Borough Council as the Local Planning Authority 
will seek the advice and recommendation of recognised local, regional or 
national design review panels to provide assessment and support to ensure high standards of design on development proposals are achieved where appropriate.
4.29 The Borough Council will produce criteria through the Design Toolkit to enable development proposals to be positively planned. Assessment tools such as BREEAM Communities will also be used to structure and assess the delivery 
process. 
4.30 Where a Design and Access Statement, development brief, framework plan 
or design code is required, it must clearly set out the overall design approach, site constraints and key considerations for the site. The Borough Council will produce guidance on what should be included within such documents.
39 Swindon Borough Local Plan 202640Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.31 All applications for major development will be expected to be accompanied 
by a design brief or masterplan that has been subject to public consultation 
undertaken broadly in line with the Statement of Community Involvement. 
Those developments of greater significance owing to their scale, location, or impact on sensitive areas or important assets, should be preceded by a design code and this will be a condition of the outline permission in such 
circumstances. Those commissioning development projects should aim to 
achieve high quality design. It is recommended that appropriately  qualified and experienced design professionals such as registered  architects, urban designers, landscape architects and public artists are 
engaged at an early stage of the development proposal to ensure all  
aspects of design are considered.
Development 
typeBy April 20138 2013 – 2016820168
Residential Code for Sustainable 
Homes level 3  
(In full) Code for Sustainable 
Homes level 4  
(In full)Code for Sustainable 
Homes level 5  
(In full)
Non-residential BREEAM ExcellentPolicy DE2: Sustainable Construction  
a. Development shall demonstrate passive solar benefits, (heating,  
  ventilation, cooling and lighting) in accordance with Policy DE1,  
 through the layout and design of the site, and orientation and  
 design of buildings.
b. All major development (see glossary) shall meet the following  
 sustainable construction standards until superseded by national  
 prescribed standards. 
c. Where on-site provision of renewable technologies is not  
 appropriate, new development can meet CO2 reduction  
 requirements through off-site provision by making ‘allowable  
 solutions contributions’. Funds gathered will be used for wider  
 energy efficiency and energy generation initiatives.
d. The use of combined heat and power (CHP), and/or combined, 
  cooling, heat and power (CCHP) with district heating is encouraged.  
 Within the identified “District Heating Priority Areas” and strategic   
 allocations, as shown on the Policies Map, major development shall:
   demonstrate a thermal master-planning approach considering 
   issues such as mix of uses, anchor loads, density and heat load  
   profiles to maximise opportunities for the use of district heating;   
  and
   incorporate infrastructure for district heating and connect to  
  existing systems where and when they are available or fully  
  justify any alternative approach.
8 On the 27th March 2015 the Government withdrew the Code for Sustainable Homes.  
Applicants are  advised to contact the Planning Department for further advice.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026414.32 Policy DE2 aims to ensure new developments are designed and constructed 
to minimise their environmental impact, and contribute to meeting statutory 
targets for reductions in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Sustainable energy 
is a key focus for the Borough Council and the approach to this follows the energy hierarchy in addressing energy conservation and energy efficiency before considering low and zero carbon energy generation. Whilst this policy 
focuses on new development, opportunities to improve the energy efficiency 
and resilience of existing buildings are encouraged.
 Passive Solar Benefits
4.33 A design which takes advantage of natural heat and light from the sun (known as ‘passive solar gain’), and uses air movement for ventilation, can 
reduce the need for artificial light, heat, cooling and ventilation. Designing  
in energy efficiency should begin at the start of the planning process to 
ensure maximum savings are made and potential risks around overheating 
are fully addressed.
4.34 Different approaches are required depending on the size and use of buildings, but all must demonstrate that they have given consideration to how the 
principles of passive solar gain could be applied.
 Sustainable Construction
4.35 The sustainable construction requirements of this policy mirror the national 
timescale for zero carbon development. The national zero carbon 
requirement relates to CO2 reduction and will be implemented through the Building Regulations. Each zero carbon milestone to 2016 also relates to a level of the ‘Code for Sustainable Homes’, which includes wider issues such 
as water use and sustainable materials. The aim of this element of the policy 
is to harmonise the zero carbon timescale with the wider requirements of the ‘Code for Sustainable Homes’.
4.36 Additionally, for non-residential development, a requirement of BREEAM “excellent” is required of all major development to ensure sustainable 
construction issues are addressed in all forms of development.
 Allowable Solutions
4.37 The requirement for new buildings to be ‘zero carbon’ will occur within the 
timescale of this plan and is likely to require the adoption of ‘Allowable 
Solutions’.  Allowable Solutions is a concept that has been developed to 
account for the fact that it may not always be possible to achieve zero carbon on-site using carbon compliance measures (i.e. energy efficiency  
and renewable energy). Whilst the exact definition for measures that would 
meet the requirements for Allowable Solutions has not yet been established,  
it is likely to include additional measures that may be either ‘on-site’  
(but not duplicating carbon compliance measures), ‘near site’ (within 
the Local Planning Authority area) or ‘off-site’ (outside the Local Planning 
Authority area).
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.38 Allowable Solutions could make a significant contribution to delivering 
sustainable energy schemes within Swindon Borough. The Council intends 
to establish a Community Energy Fund to use Allowable Solutions payments 
to deliver additional benefits in Swindon Borough. These measures may include but are not limited to energy efficiency measures in existing buildings, decentralised energy networks, or renewable energy schemes. The fund will 
deliver carbon reduction and maximize the benefits to local communities.
 District Heating
4.39 District heating schemes deliver heating and hot water to multiple buildings 
from a local plant via a network of insulated pipes buried underground.  
These can often be installed at the same time as the other services when a site is being developed and can also be retrofitted to existing buildings. 
District heating can be combined with electricity production combined heat 
and power (CHP) or in combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP). This is an efficient form of decentralised energy supply providing heat and electricity  
at the same time.
4.40 District heating feasibility work undertaken in Swindon indicates the areas 
with the most immediate potential for district heating are the existing areas 
of high heat demand in the urban area of Swindon and the larger new development areas where district heating infrastructure can be laid in step 
with new development. The Town Centre and industrial areas around Stratton 
and South Marston, along with the strategic sites, are therefore the focus of this policy.
4.41 Further detail on the requirements of this policy including testing economic and technical feasibility, how the CO
2 offset fund works, and what should  
be submitted with a planning application will be included within a Sustainable 
Design and Construction Supplementary Planning Document.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.42 The delivery of sustainable construction will be achieved through the 
application of this policy and through: 
   the application of Building Regulations (Part L) standards as a  
 minimum requirement;
   working in partnership with key stakeholders such as the Swindon  
 Energy Partnership, local communities, businesses, Parish Councils  
 and amenity groups;
   application of The Swindon Sustainable Energy Framework; 
   the development management process; and,
   the requirement of a post-construction review and certification of  
 sustainable construction standards, required by condition.
4.43 Major developments will require a ‘Code for Sustainable Homes’ and/or BREEAM pre-assessment estimator/design stage assessment undertaken  
by accredited assessors in line with the targets.
42 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
Section ?: Theme 2: Delivering Sustainable Economic Growth
4.44 Theme 2 sets out policies to: 
   enhance existing and provide new high quality employment space;
   direct new employment provision to the appropriate locations;
   support key employment sectors and the aspiration for a University;
   protect and enhance the role of the town and local centres; and,
   provide a framework for farm diversification.
4.45 It provides a planning framework to help retain current levels of economic 
activity and productivity and help provide the built infrastructure to enable recovery and sustainable economic growth.  In doing so it will help ensure Swindon remains “open for business” and is supportive of the needs of 
businesses across the Borough.
 Key Issues
4.46 Sustainable economic development is a key element of the NPPF. Historically, 
Swindon’s economy has been very successful based on its location, the 
diversity and resilience of the sectors present in the Borough, land availability, 
comparatively low commercial property prices and high business start-up rates. In 2009 the Gross Value Added (GVA) per head at current basic prices for Swindon was £27,616; this is 138.1% of the UK average. What is notable about 
the Swindon economy in terms of sector output is the relatively small role of the 
public sector (only 12.3% of GVA) and relatively large production (including manufacturing) sector at 25% of GVA. (Source: ONS Gross Value Added 1997-
2009, ONS Dec 2011).
4.47 The recent economic recession, however, has had a significant impact on 
Swindon’s local economy with a rise in unemployment observed.  The future 
focus for Swindon Borough should be on maintaining the existing economic base, adapting to changes and realising opportunities in key employment sectors and sustaining economic recovery. The restructure of the economic 
base of Swindon Borough as guided by the Swindon Borough Economic 
Strategy is a critical issue for the Local Plan to address.
43The Economy theme’s policies flow directly from and help to implement  
the following Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2 of this Plan:
SO1: High Quality Sustainable DevelopmentSO3: Economy
SO5: Education
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.48 The retail sector has also felt the impact of the recession as consumer 
spending has fallen and the types of goods being bought has changed.  
The Town Centre continues to provide an important economic and social 
role for the Borough and the wider area, augmented by district and local centres. Supported by the NPPF, local polices should support the role of the Town Centre whilst allowing it to adapt to changing patterns of consumer 
spending.  A key part of this will be to achieve a “step-up” in the quality of the 
central urban area of the town, encapsulated by the Swindon Central Area Action Plan and the policies in Theme 1 of this Plan.
4.49 Central to developing a more sustainable economy will be ensuring that school-leavers have access to training and skills development, through 
both continuing through to further education and finding a place with 
local employers.  Providing such opportunities locally will help to ensure that Swindon has a competitive workforce which does not seek to leave the area for training and jobs elsewhere.  For a town of Swindon’s size, provision 
of these types of opportunities would be strengthened further through 
development of a university or enhanced tertiary provision.
4.50 For businesses to have the opportunity to grow and thrive, they need the right type of building space to do so, whether that is for office, industrial or other employment uses.  It will be important to ensure that a range of the right type and size of employment buildings is available to allow such growth 
and change to occur, from start-up units to flexible space to larger scale 
warehousing.  It is important that employment floorspace which responds to economic needs in Swindon should be provided at the right time, so that it does not lay dormant for extended periods, although the commercial 
building market will be a key barometer of need and is likely to react 
accordingly.
4.51 Broadly speaking, economic development will need to be supported by an appropriate level of housing growth to help retain Swindon residents who work in the town and also provide capacity for economic migrants who find work 
in Swindon and would also like to live in the town.  The quantum of housing 
and employment growth allocated in this Plan in Policy SD2 responds, in part, to that relationship.
4.52 Swindon currently lacks a university presence, which is unusual for a town of Swindon’s size. The business community has highlighted the importance of attracting a university to deliver the skills needed to support Swindon’s future 
economic growth, raising Swindon’s profile and establishing the town as a 
destination. The delivery of a university and/or enhanced tertiary education provision would be beneficial for economic growth; however it is not reliant upon it. Without a university Swindon’s growth prospects remain significant but 
a university would add significant value as a hub for attracting and retaining 
visitors, increasing skill levels, aligning them with business needs and reinforcing strong local economic sectors.
4.53 The Swindon Borough Economic Strategy provides further detail on these and other issues and action needed to develop the local economy.
44 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.54 The private sector has a critical role in the economic recovery of the town, 
augmented by the work of the Borough Council and Forward Swindon in 
facilitating investment and through the implementation of the Economic 
Strategy, with which the Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 is aligned.  Planning policies should also enable the delivery of infrastructure to support businesses and the economic needs of the Borough.
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 2
4.55 Key evidence base documents for delivering sustainable growth include:
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005)
   Swindon Employment Land Review (2007)
   Swindon Workspace Strategy (2009)
   An Economic Strategy for Swindon 2012-26 (SBC, 2012)
   Economic Testing of Swindon Core Strategy (2012) 
   Retail and Leisure Study Update (2007)
   Swindon Retail Capacity Update (2009)
45Policy EC1: Economic Growth through Existing  
Business and Inward Investment  
a. Inward investment and the growth and retention of existing business  
 will be enabled by:
   promoting Swindon Central Area as the first preference for  
  office development;
   protecting the best employment sites under Policy EC2 for  
  employment use  (B-class) and enabling development  
  opportunities at others where it will optimise investment    
  opportunities;
   identifying new employment sites;
   supporting large inward investment proposals where there is   
  significant net economic or social benefit; and
   the provision of a university and/or enhanced higher education 
   facilities in Swindon Central Area to meet business skills needs,   
  enhance the town’s profile and provide a local highly qualified  
  and skilled workforce.
b. Opportunities to develop the following key employment sectors  
 will be particularly supported:
   specialist manufacturing in east Swindon;
   financial and business services at the Central Area;
   distribution and logistics in the A419 corridor;
   environmental, tourism and leisure, information communication  
  technologies (ICT), education, health, retailing and creative   
  industries at appropriate locations; and
   low carbon development and manufacturing at appropriate  
  locations and in conjunction with Policy IN4.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.56 The objectives of the Swindon Economic Strategy are to develop sectors of 
the economy that are already strong and to grow sectors with long-term 
potential through inward investment and business retention.  Other sectors will 
not be restricted, but Policy EC1 sets out the planning framework to support these key sectors.
4.57 There is potential for specialist manufacturing growth, particularly in the motor vehicles industry, as a cluster in east Swindon, associated with existing employers and transport links.  Distribution and logistics are centred on the 
A419 corridor, which will continue to be a key location for growth in this 
sector.  The potential for growth in the financial and business sector remains strong in the medium and long term, especially in supporting regeneration in 
Swindon’s Central Area.  Given the varied nature of activity and workspace 
requirements in the ICT, creative and environmental industries, a flexible approach to this sector is supported, particularly in their potential to contribute to town centre regeneration and rural employment.
4.58 Retail, leisure, tourism, health and education make an important contribution to the economy.  By 2026 it is anticipated that these sectors will account 
for 39% of total job growth based on high growth scenario. Growth in these 
sectors should complement growth in other sectors to ensure a balanced and mixed economy. In particular, development at North Star and redevelopment at Swindon Town Football Club can make a significant contribution to the 
leisure sector.
4.59 Should any large inward investment proposals come forward these will be supported, especially where it would support Central Area regeneration and 
provide significant employment opportunities. The Town Centre will be the first priority for the location of such investment, but where the Town Centre would 
not be suitable, development must not harm Town Centre regeneration or 
conflict with other policies of this plan and must be accessible with a good range of travel choices.
4.60 The retention of Key Employment Areas for employment use is seen as important in providing for a range of sites across the Borough. Policy EC2 provides more detail on the protection afforded to such areas.  Intensification or expansion of existing employment sites will be supported to allow business 
to expand and encourage development in accessible locations subject to 
other policies in this Plan.
4.61 A vibrant and prosperous Town Centre is essential to support economic growth and prosperity.  Office development will be focused at Swindon’s Central Area to support regeneration, particularly in the early phases of the 
plan, and provision is made for additional office floorspace in Policy SD2 and 
within the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan.
4.62 To provide for future investment and business expansion, additional employment allocations are made at Commonhead, Wichelstowe,  Tadpole Farm and the New Eastern Villages as detailed in Policy SD2.
46 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.63 Economic growth through existing business and inward investment will be 
enabled through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above; 
   The adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   The actions of Forward Swindon; and,
   Implementation of the Swindon Borough Economic Strategy.
  
47      Policy EC2: Employment Land and Premises  
(B-Use Classes) 
a. The Key Employment Areas defined on the Policies Map and listed  
 below, shall be retained primarily for employment generating uses  
 within the Use Classes B1, B2 and B8. Planning permission will be  
 given for Class B1, B2 and B8 uses, and for sui generis uses, in  
 these areas, subject to the Class B1(a) office development not   
 adversely impacting upon the regeneration of Swindon Central Area. 
b. The change of use or redevelopment of land and buildings or   
 development for other (non-B Class) uses, within the Key  
 Employment Areas and Central Swindon, shall only be supported  
 where it can be demonstrated that:
   the development proposal will not adversely impact upon the   
  regeneration of the Swindon Central Area; and
   there has been genuine marketing for commercial (B class) uses  
  for at least 6 months, at reasonable market values, which has   
  proved unsuccessful; and
   a site appraisal search has been undertaken that takes account  
  of the current quality of the employment area such  that loss of   
  the highest quality employment land is minimised, assessing  
  the following factors:
 strategic and local road access;
    access to labour, public transport and services;
    compatibility of adjacent land uses;
    site characteristics, conditions and development constraints;  
   and
    attractiveness to the market including vacancy and market  
   activity, and
   proposals for retail development have undertaken a sequential   
  site search in accordance with Policy EC3
 In addition the change of use proposal should demonstrate at least   
 one of the following criteria:
   the development proposal will generate the same number, or   
  more permanent jobs than could be expected from the existing,  
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
48  or any potential employment use; and/or
   the site is not appropriate for the continuation of its present or   
  any employment use due to a significant detriment to the   
  environment or amenity of the area; and/or 
   the site is no longer capable of meeting modern business needs;  
  and/or
   it can be shown that the loss of a small proportion of employment  
  floorspace would facilitate the redevelopment and continuation  
  of employment uses on a greater part of the site, providing the   
  same number or more permanent jobs than on the original whole  
  site; and/or
   the change of use is to facilitate the relocation of an existing  
  business from buildings that are no longer fit for purpose to more  
  suitable premises elsewhere within the Borough and no other  
  B-class occupiers are likely to take up the site; and/or
   the change of use is to secure the continued occupation of a   
  heritage asset or landmark building.
c. At the strategic allocations of Wichelstowe, Commonhead,  
 Tadpole Farm, Kingsdown and the New Eastern Villages,  
 employment land allocations will be implemented in accordance  
  with Policies NC1, NC2, NC3, NC4 and NC5.  To ensure the delivery   
 of sustainable mixed-use developments, these sites will be protected  
 for specified B class employment uses for a period of 18 months from  
 completion of buildings.  After this point, proposals for the change of  
 use of buildings or redevelopment will be subject to Policy EC2b. 
d. Proposals for office development (Use Class B1(a)) over 1,000m2  
 gross floorspace which are located outside of Swindon’s Central   
 Area will be supported where they:
   do not harm or undermine the regeneration of Swindon’s Central  
  Area; and,
   demonstrate a sequential approach to site selection in order of   
  preference and priority as follows:
  1. Swindon’s Central Area 
  2. Swindon’s urban area well served by public transport or the  
   employment allocation at the New Eastern Villages; within the  
   floor space limits specified in NC3; and,
  3. Peripheral sites in locations that are accessible by a choice of  
   transport modes.
e. Where employment development does not comply with parking  
  standards, development may be permitted where the impact of  
 off-street parking, safety and amenity is acceptable, including  
 parking provision for disabled people.  Parking dedicated for  
 the use of disabled persons should always be provided in    
 accordance with the required standard.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.64 Swindon Borough has a large amount of employment land for a centre of 
its size, providing a good range of premises suitable for industry and business 
in a variety of locations. The majority of Class B-uses occupy sites on the Key 
Employment Areas in the Borough, which provide the infrastructure and facilities to enable their continued role and function.
4.65 The Key Employment Areas have been identified taking account of the following factors:
   Quality and range of units;
   Current and historic vacancy;
   Accessibility;
   Nature and range of uses; and
   Environmental quality
 The Key Employment Areas in the Borough are:
4.66 Existing employment land is vital to ensure the supply of employment 
opportunities and sustainable economic growth. Sites within Key Employment 
Areas are particularly valuable and the loss of land in these areas may generate additional pressure for the release of new land in less acceptable locations. The Key Employment Areas are therefore protected primarily for 
Class B-uses and as such, the loss of these sites is not generally acceptable.
4.67 Proposals for other employment uses falling outside the B-Use Class can 
provide significant employment opportunities and may be acceptable in Key Employment Areas. Other uses may also positively contribute to the viability and vitality of Key Employment Areas or provide appropriate support services 
49Area Name
Blackworth, Highworth
Blagrove/Euroway
Bridge End Road
Central Trading Estate
Cheney ManorChurchwardDelta
Dorcan
Drakes WayElgin
Europa/Britannia
GreenbridgeGroundwell
Groundwell West
Gipsy Lane South
Hillmead
Isis/Stratton RoadArea Name
Kembrey Park
Keypoint, South Marston
Marshgate
Parsonage Farm (BMW)
Pipers Way (Nationwide)Pipers Way (Intel)River Ray
Rivermead
Rushey PlattTechno
The Triangle (G-Park)
South Marston Airfield 
(Honda)
South Marston Park
WestleaWestmead
Windmill Hill
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Developmentto assist in the day-to-day functioning of the employment areas. Proposals 
for non-B Class uses will be assessed on their own merits informed by the 
Workspace Strategy (2009). In addition to the main criteria, the number and 
quality of jobs provided by a proposed non-B Class use will be an important consideration. Applicants are encouraged to submit a pre-application enquiry for proposals relating to non-B Class uses to obtain a view on the 
acceptability of the alternative use.
4.68 The Borough Council will monitor the occupancy of the Key Employment Areas to ensure that the methodology applied benefits their vitality  
and viability.
4.69 A number of existing older employment areas within Swindon are in need 
of some form of redevelopment to ensure that they are fit for purpose for modern business needs.  Whilst the Borough Council recognises these 
needs, this Plan is not considered the appropriate planning document 
within which to include a detailed, structured and managed approach to their redevelopment.  Such potential for longer-term managed release and redevelopment of sites will be explored through further work on possible 
options for change in the future, including the potential and options to 
accommodate the relocation of existing long established businesses on these older estates, whose premises are no longer fit for purpose. Small scale redevelopment proposals may be appropriate, initiated by the private sector, 
where they satisfy the criteria of the policy and do not undermine the role 
and function of the employment area as a whole.
4.70 The Borough Council is seeking to encourage an increase in floorspace for Class B1 (a) office use in the Central Area as part of the regeneration of that area. Class B1 (a) uses attract significant numbers of people and as such 
are best located where there is maximum accessibility for public transport. 
However, it is recognised that some vacant office space can be difficult to fill, not only due to economic circumstances but also due to it not meeting market requirements for modern office accommodation, particularly if it is 
old stock.  Policy EC2 provides sufficient flexibility for such office buildings to 
change to alternative uses, if it meets the policy criteria.
4.71 The Borough Council acknowledges that there will be continued demand 
for office accommodation outside Swindon’s Central Area.  In accordance 
with the NPPF, the Council has set a local threshold of 1,000m
2 floorspace for 
out-of-centre office development.  Proposals exceeding this threshold will 
be subject to an impact assessment in line with paragraph 26 of the NPPF.  
Such applications will also be required to demonstrate that the sequential approach has been applied to justify the site selection. A sequential test will be assessed in accordance with paragraph 24 of the NPPF.  The sequential 
approach will become more flexible as the Central Area regeneration 
becomes substantially complete. 
4.72 Proposals for development will be considered against policies DE1 and DE2. In all cases, due consideration will be given to design, sustainability and the highways impact of the proposal.
50 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.73 In order not to constrain economic development, development for 
employment proposals will be permitted where parking standards cannot  
be achieved providing the impact in terms of parking, safety and amenity  
is acceptable. 
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies  
4.74 Employment land and premises shall be enhanced and new premises delivered through the application of this policy and through: 
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Up-to-date monitoring of the quality and quantity of employment premises; 
   Commercial and employment premises developers; 
   The development management process; 
   Discussion on pre-application proposals; 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which   
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council; and/or, 
   Further work on the detailed location and specification of individual   
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish  
 and other Community Plans. 
Section ?:
519Defined in the Glossary of the NPPF as Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory 
outlet centres); leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including 
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities)
10Primary Rural Centres are Highworth Town Centre and Wroughton Village CentrePolicy EC3: The Role of the Centres and Main  
Town Centre Uses 
a. Proposals for main town centre uses9  (not including offices  
 covered by Policy EC2c above) outside Swindon Central Area  
 shall be permitted:
   where they do not harm or undermine the regeneration of  
  Swindon’s Central Area; and,
   where they do not undermine the vitality and viability of existing  
  District, Primary Rural Centres10 and Local Centres; and
   where a proposal’s delivery is not dependent on location at a  
  specific site because its use is tied to that location, a sequential  
  approach to site selection has been undertaken in order of  
  preference and priority as follows:
  1. Within Swindon Town Centre
  2. At edge of Town Centre
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
52     3. At District and Primary Rural Centres: Cavendish Square,  
   Gorse Hill, Highworth Town Centre, Orbital Retail Park,  
   Old Town, West Swindon, Wroughton Village Centre and the   
   Eastern Villages District Centre.
  4. At Local Centres: as shown on the Policies Map including   
   those at Wichelstowe, Commonhead, Tadpole Farm and   
   Kingsdown developments.
b.  Outside the defined hierarchy of centres: 
    proposals for new single shop units (A1-Use Class) will be  
    permitted where it can be demonstrated that they provide   
   only for the daily shopping needs of the local population, are  
   within walking distance of the community they serve and do  
    not harm the vitality and viability of existing centres; and
    existing single shop units (A1-Use Class) will be protected from  
    changes of use to non-A1 uses, where the proposed use is not  
    compatible with the local area in which it is set.
c.  To protect the shopping function of the Town Centre and other  
   centres, as defined on the Policies Map:
    in Swindon Town Centre, Class A1 uses should occupy at least  
    75% of the primary frontage and 60% of the secondary   
   frontage; 
    in District and Primary Rural Centres11, Class A1 uses should   
   occupy at least 70% of the street frontage; and,
    in Local Centres, Class A1 uses should be predominant.  
   Proposals for non-Class A1 uses will be permitted only where  
   they enhance the local retail centre function and do not by   
   themselves or cumulatively harm the vitality and viability of  
   the centre’s retail function.
d.  All retail development proposals with a floorspace exceeding   
  600m2  should be accompanied by a Retail Impact    
  Assessment to ensure they would not have an adverse  
  impact on Swindon Town Centre or hierarchy of centres.
e.  Within Swindon Town Centre, or any District or Primary Rural   
  centre, where the percentage of the street frontage is already   
  at or below the threshold of the desired Class A1 Uses (retail)  
  identified above, proposals for non-A1 Class uses will normally   
  be permitted where they demonstrate that:
    at least 12 consecutive months active marketing of the  
   premises for Class A1 Use (retail) has been undertaken; and,
    the proposed use is appropriate for its location.
f.  Street trading will be permitted where it satisfies other  
  development management policies, and is in accordance  
  with the adopted Street Trading & Ancillary Retail Kiosks    
  Development Management Guidance Note.
11Primary Rural Centres are Highworth Town Centre and Wroughton Village Centre
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:4.75 Annex 2 of the NPPF defines “town centres”, a definition which includes 
reference to district and local centres.  In the context of this Plan, district 
centres comprise a group of shops, usually including a supermarket and a 
range of non-retail uses such as banks and building societies, public facilities and restaurants.  Local centres include a range of shops of a more local nature to serve the day-to-day needs of the community.
4.76 Retail development is to be focused at existing centres, with the priority being Swindon Town Centre. Higher density, mixed-use schemes are advocated 
in these locations. An approach which encourages main town centre uses 
to be subject to a sequential test when proposed outside of the centre, the effective use of land and mixed-use development is supported by the NPPF.
4.77 There will be continued pressure for more out-of-centre development of retail warehouses, and pressure to relax bulky goods conditions on existing retail 
warehouses in Swindon. It will be important to resist such pressure in order to 
protect the vitality of the Town Centre. There will also be continued pressure from out-of-centre food retailers to develop more space for comparison goods sales, particularly in existing out-of-centre superstores. There is a 
strong presumption against new out-of-centre developments. However, 
small extensions to existing schemes may be permitted where they meet the requirements of the Policy, and some account is to be taken of applicants’ business models.
4.78 A new District Centre to serve the New Eastern Villages will need to be anchored by a food superstore in a highly accessible location.
4.79 Current national policy concerning the continued vitality of the town centre 
encourages local planning policies to produce a competitive town centre 
which can provide consumers with a diverse range of retail offer and individuality. It aims to support the creation of a well-defined hierarchy of centres, whilst ensuring the network is resilient to any anticipated economic 
changes. The NPPF advises the Local Planning Authority to request an impact 
assessment for all retail developments which exceed the floorspace threshold. If the Local Planning Authority has not implemented any local thresholds, then applications will be assessed against the national threshold of 2,500m
2.
4.80 The Borough Council consider that the national threshold of 2,500m2 may 
result in developments that have the potential to adversely affect the vitality 
and viability of the town centre and/or other defined centres. Using evidence 
on average gross unit size in existing centres a locally set threshold of 600m2 
has been set. Any development proposals greater than this threshold will 
be assessed in terms of the proposal’s impact on any existing and future 
investment in the surrounding area and its impact on the vitality and viability of the town centre. The threshold will be applied to all new buildings providing retail floorspace and to any alterations to a development where an extension 
would result in the total floorspace of that store exceeding the threshold. It will 
be relevant to all locations within Swindon Borough, whether they are situated in the town centre, on the edge of centre or out of town.
53 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.81 Policy EC3 encourages the clawing back of Class A1 Uses in local, rural and 
district centre frontages where there are currently lower levels than aspired 
to by this Plan. This is in the interest of protecting the retail function of such 
centres and ensuring that measures are put in place to encourage and  
re-establish the viability and vitality of those frontages that have in the  
past seen an unacceptable loss of retail.
4.82 The Old Town and Fleet Street areas are coming under pressure for change of use for A3/A4/A5
12 uses . This undermines the function of these areas 
during the day. The same approach would protect the local centres from a 
proliferation of A5 uses.
4.83 Although street trading (including hot food vending, ice cream vans, markets and stalls) can be a positive addition to a retail centre, this informal way 
of trading should be carefully controlled to ensure a positive rather than negative impact on the centre in which it is located. It is noted that the  
term “street” includes any road, footway, or other area to which the public 
have access.
4.84 Annual monitoring of implementation is to be undertaken which will 
encompass a regular review of town centre vitality and viability.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.85 Retail and leisure development shall be appropriately located and of an appropriate scale through the application of this policy and through:
   alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   up-to-date monitoring of retail and leisure premises and facilities;
   commercial premises developers; 
   the development management process; 
   discussion on pre-application proposals prior to applications being   
 submitted; 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council; and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish  
 and other Community Plans.
Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
5412The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) places uses of land and 
buildings into various categories called Use Classes.  A Use Class is a grouping together of similar land 
uses. For example, restaurants and cafes are A3, drinking establishments such as pubs and wine bars  
are A4, and hot food takeaways are A5
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:
4.86 Re-using or adapting existing rural buildings has a valuable role in meeting 
the need for commerce and industry in rural areas. It helps to reduce the 
demand for new buildings, can provide local jobs and improve derelict  
or vacant buildings.
4.87 The Borough Council wishes to support such proposals provided they are 
appropriate in scale and impact to their countryside location.
4.88 Where buildings in the countryside have either become so derelict that reuse is only possible following complete or substantial reconstruction, or their 
construction and materials are such as to require considerable alteration to make the building suitable for the new purpose, the proposal will be assessed 
as if it were for an entirely new development in the countryside. In such cases 
proposals will be considered under Policy SD2.
4.89 The Borough Council seeks to ensure that countryside buildings retain their 
original character wherever possible. It is, however, acknowledged that 
alterations may be required to upgrade the appearance or quality of  
a building to adapt it for employment use. Such changes will be  
acceptable provided they maintain the original character of the building  
and its surroundings.
4.90 Consideration will also be given to the transport implications arising from proposals to convert buildings in the countryside to employment use, as the road network in rural areas frequently has lower capacity levels to accommodate increased volumes of traffic.
4.91 Any proposals should be appropriate in scale for their location. The conversion 
of buildings to employment use will only be acceptable where they do not 
significantly affect the vitality of nearby rural settlements.
55Policy EC4: Conversion of Buildings to Employment  
Use in the Countryside
In the countryside, proposals for the conversion of a building or structure  
for employment use not related to policy EC5 shall be permitted provided:
  it is structurally sound and capable of conversion without  
 substantial reconstruction;
  the conversion maintains the original character of the building and  
  does not have a detrimental effect on the fabric and character  
  of any adjacent buildings, including listed buildings, or the  
  landscape character type generally;
  utilities can be provided and the building has adequate access to  
 a metalled road without creating traffic hazards and without    
 involving road improvements incompatible with the character of  
 the area; and
  the conversion does not lead to a dispersal of employment activity   
 on such a scale as to adversely affect the vitality of neighbouring   
 rural settlements.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.92 Appropriate conversion of buildings to employment use in the countryside  
will be delivered through the application of this policy through the 
development management process.  Applicants will be encouraged to  
have early pre-application discussions with the Borough Council to ensure 
that criteria are satisfied.
4.93 Paragraph 28 of the NPPF supports economic growth in rural areas by taking  a positive approach to sustainable new development, including the 
promotion of the development and diversification of agricultural and other land-based rural businesses.
4.94 The policy refers to the EU definition of farm diversification in order to provide clarity and consistency, and to conform with nationally collected statistics.  
The EU defines farm diversification as all activities other than farm work 
that have an economic impact on the holding. These activities must make use of the farm’s resources (such as the land, buildings or machinery) or products. If only the farm’s labour force and no other resources are used for the activity then this is not classed as being a diversified activity. Agricultural 
work for other holdings is included. Exclusions are: pure financial investments, 
commercial activity on the holding which is not linked to any agricultural or horticultural activity (e.g. a hairdresser or insurance company), renting out 
the land for diverse activities where there is no further involvement in these 
activities, and letting out of buildings.  Included in the definition are:
   Contracting and haulage, including any agricultural contracting, haulage  
 and clearing snow;
   Tourism, which includes accommodation and sport/leisure activities;
   Environment, which includes aquaculture and forestry; and
   Processing and food manufacture, including animal or arable products  
 (e.g. cheese-making), handicraft and wood processing.
56Policy EC5: Farm Diversification
In rural areas, proposals for economic activities that bring about farm diversification (as defined by the EU) shall normally be permitted,  
providing that:
  the proposals are operated as part of a viable farm holding and   
 contribute to the viability of the holding; 
  it is not detrimental to the character and appearance of existing   
 buildings and their setting within the Landscape Character Area;
  existing buildings are used in preference to new buildings  
 or extensions;
  utilities and other infrastructure is available or can be provided; and
  there is access by means of an existing road; no traffic hazards   
 are created or increased; and road improvements incompatible  
 with the character of the surrounding area are not required.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 4.95 Diversification provides opportunities to generate additional income for the 
farming business, reduces reliance on a single income stream and reduces 
risk.  Policy EC5 sets out the criteria within which farm diversification can 
contribute to a prosperous and viable rural economy in the Swindon rural area in accordance with the principles set out in SD1.  In doing so the policy ensures that farm diversification as promoted in paragraph 28 of the NPPF 
meets the definition of sustainable development as set out in paragraph 
7 of the NPPF.  It also ensures that farm holdings can remain viable, and agricultural buildings can remain in use, without causing harm to the environment by new construction, and without increasing traffic hazards  
on rural roads.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.96 Additional information includes:
   Farming Statistics: Diversification and Renewable Energy Production on   
 Farms in England 2010, (National Statistics & DEFRA, 2012)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.97 Appropriate farm diversification will be delivered through the application of this policy through the development management process.  Applicants will 
be encouraged to have early pre-application discussions with the Council to ensure that criteria are satisfied. 
57 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable DevelopmentTheme 3: Housing and Accommodation
4.98 Theme 3 sets out policies to:
   deliver planned housing growth set out in the Plan (SD2);
   deliver affordable housing to meet current needs;
   assess and determine proposals for housing development and other types  
 of accommodation which come forward in locations where this Plan does  
 not propose additional development, including small scale development;  
 and,
   assess and determine proposals for specific types of accommodation.
 Key Issues
4.99 Housing and accommodation is important to us all and across all  
sections of society.  In Swindon, there are a number of key housing issues 
facing its population and which demonstrate a need for housing growth  
in the Borough.
4.100 As incomes on average remain constant or go down in real terms, housing is becoming more expensive.  The “affordability gap” between earnings and 
the ability to pay rent for accommodation affects those who are trying to 
access the rental market (private rented or social housing) the most.
4.101 Government policy continues to place an emphasis on sustainable economic (and housing) growth, to which Swindon is responding to through its spatial strategy encapsulated in the Sustainable Development Strategy.  As the economy changes and recovers from recession, additional housing will be 
needed to support economic migration to the area and retain Swindon’s 
resident workers of all ages, from those moving to their first rented or owned home at a young age to those seeking to upsize or downsize to or from a 
family home.  In particular a range of housing is needed, including at the high 
end of the market, to attract economic migrants to the Borough.
4.102 Nationally and locally there is an ageing population, with people living longer and needing more accessible accommodation.  This will include provision of different types of adaptable accommodation such as lifetime homes and lifetime neighbourhoods with nearby access to facilities and services required 
particularly by the elderly.
4.103 Despite the changes to the economy, with the cost of market housing falling 
since before the recession, access to homes for first time buyers in particular 
has remained difficult. 
58The Housing and Accommodation theme’s policies flow directly 
from and help to implement the following Strategic Objectives  
set out in Part 2 of this Plan:
SO1: High Quality Sustainable Development; and,
SO4: Housing
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 4.104 However, effective planning for housing is not all about housing provision 
at any cost anywhere.  The delivery of housing in sustainable locations and 
to the appropriate scale is as important and there are clearly parts of the 
Borough where, set against the Government’s presumption in favour of sustainable development, there will be limitations on housing development that should and should not be built.
 Addressing the Key Issues
4.105 Planning has a key role to play in helping to resolve many of these issues.  However, the Local Planning Authority’s and planning system’s key role in helping to deliver positive change is as an enabler.  It cannot guarantee that planned changes will happen.  Other mechanisms, legislation and 
bodies (private and public sector) have key roles in the implementation and 
regulation of housing and accommodation growth and change (including, but not limited to, private developers, Registered Social Landlords / Housing 
Associations and the Council’s Building Control and Housing teams).
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 3
4.106 Key evidence base documents for housing and accommodation include:
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005);
   Swindon Housing Needs Assessment (2006);
   Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Study (2008);
   Swindon Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009 and 2013);
   Swindon Housing Market Area Strategy (2009);
   Swindon Borough Housing Requirement Update Report (2012); and
   Swindon Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2012). 
59Policy HA1: Mix, Types and Density
a. Housing development should be design-led, in particular:
   densities, house types and sizes should respect the character of  
  the surrounding area;
   there should be a variety of densities, house types and sizes to  
   meet local needs as identified within the Swindon Strategic  
  Housing Market Assessment and in line with the Swindon Borough  
  Housing Strategy;
   higher densities should be directed towards Swindon’s Central  
   Area and locations served by a good range of services and  
  facilities; and
   lower densities and larger homes should be provided to satisfy  
  the higher value end of the market where they are in accord with  
  the context and character of the local area.
b. Large development proposals will be expected to consider  
 the contribution self-build can make to the mix and type  
 of development.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.107 To gain an understanding of the types of housing that are needed in 
Swindon Borough, a Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) has been 
undertaken.  The NPPF requires that SHMAs should identify the scale and 
mix of housing and the range of tenures that the local population is likely to need during the lifetime of the Plan.  This housing needs to be responsive to demand, meet future anticipated household and population growth, and 
address the need for all types of housing and the needs of different groups 
of people in the local community, particularly in response to the ageing population and to assist independent living at home.
4.108 The type and mix of new housing can play a role in improving the physical environment; ensuring inclusive communities; attracting industry to locate 
to Swindon and higher skilled workers to live here; and improving Swindon’s 
overall image.  Whilst here is a pressing need for affordable housing in the rural parts of the Borough, especially Blunsdon & Highworth and Ridgeway wards (see Policy HA2), building more prestigious homes in Swindon or high quality 
landmark schemes in the Town Centre can contribute to the improvement of 
the urban environment.  
4.109 A key challenge already identified for Swindon Borough is to ensure that new development is well-designed to help bring about and create high quality and inclusive urban environments.  Swindon Borough is promoting a design led approach to housing that reflects the character of the local area.  This is 
the starting point for the approach to the design and density of development, 
but where it is innovative, high quality, inclusive or highly accessible an alternative design approach may be acceptable. Therefore, all new housing developments will have the highest regard to good design in accord with 
Policy DE1 in particular.  
4.110 Overall, forecast demand and need for housing suggests growth in one-
person households as Table 4 shows, translating to a future need for predominantly 1 and 2 bedroom properties. 
4.111 However, when considering these figures it is too simplistic to plan just for smaller dwellings, as this does not take into account the demand from some small households for larger properties.  It is essential to get a mix of housing that best reflects the needs and aspirations of Swindon Borough’s growing 
population and when considered alongside the forecasts of household types, 
this suggests accommodating, in particular, a growing population of older people and meeting the needs of younger families.  
60 Table 4. Projected Household Types
Household Type 2011 2016 2021 2026
Couples 46% 44.5% 43.5% 42.5%
Singles 31% 32.5% 34% 35%
Multi-person e.g. families 23% 23% 22.5% 22.5%
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:4.112 Providing a mix of housing types and sizes helps to provide new  
development with character whilst different sized households with a variety 
of socio-economic make-up can help to foster a sense of community and 
variety, and prevent homogenous neighbourhoods forming.  Policy HA1 responds to the guidance in the NPPF which requires plans to provide for  
a full range of types of market and affordable housing to reflect locally 
assessed needs, identified through the SHMA and to provide mixed and 
inclusive communities.
4.113 New housing in Swindon in recent years has been characterised by high-density schemes often dominated by flats. Over the period 2006 to 2010, approximately 41 per cent of new housing was in the form of flats with 
only 12.5 per cent in the form of lower density four bedroom houses.  The 
proportion of four-bed homes fell to a low of 5.2 per cent in 2009/10 with the balance made up by an increase in the proportion of two-bed houses.   
Table 5 illustrates the percentage of the number of completions in recent 
years by dwelling size (number of bedrooms) and Table 6 shows the densities 
achieved since 2006.
4.114 Translating this into the number of dwellings per hectare, densities have started to fall in recent years.
4.115 The NPPF supports Local Planning Authorities setting their own approach to housing densities to reflect local circumstances.  Housing densities help 
to define the character of new housing development.  What might be 
appropriate in one location may be inappropriate in another and so it is important that densities respect the character of the urban or rural area within 
which they are located.  Without dictating strict housing densities in Swindon 
Borough, Policy HA1 aims to encourage higher densities, for example, in the Central Area and allow lower densities, for example, in more rural locations.  
61 Table 5: Dwelling Size and Past Distribution of Housing Completions by percentage of total completions
Flats Houses
Year 1 bed 2 bed 3 bed 1 bed 2 bed 3 bed 4 bed
2006/7 13 29 0 5 13 25 16
2007/8 12 30 1 0 13 27 17
2008/9 13 32 0 2 13 28 11
2009/10 7 34 0 3 26 24 5
  Source: Swindon Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2012.
        Table 6: Density of Past Housing Completions (dwellings per hectare)
Area 2006/7 2007/8 2008/9 2009/10 2010/11
Northern Development Area 45.15 44.23 44.17 33.85 26.02
Wichelstowe 0 0 63.14 58.79 50.90
Swindon remainder 88.30 82.18 68.48 62.35 49.54
 Source: Swindon Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2012.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.116 Other factors will influence the appropriate density of new development.  
Higher density development will, for example, help to encourage walking and 
cycling, the economic viability of public transport and minimise the need for 
developing greenfield land.  Lower density housing will help meet demand for larger and higher value homes not currently well catered for in Swindon Borough.  The application of design codes and other mechanisms such as the 
development management process will help to ensure that the right densities 
are applied to proposed housing developments.
4.117 The criteria required to guide the type, mix and density of new housing development should not be designed as a “one size fits all” standard and so policy needs to be responsive to and set a framework which allows 
appropriate scale, density, type and mix of housing depending on its location.  
The detail of housing development identified in the Local Plan and in other locations will need to be brought out further through the application of other policies in this plan, masterplans, design codes, management plans and 
planning applications.  
4.118 The self-build sector is a component of the housing supply, but currently is largely restricted to single dwellings. In order to increase the supply of housing, 
larger developments should consider how self-build units can be incorporated in the proposal.  The Borough Council will work with developers to agree a suitable approach to delivering self-build homes as part of larger schemes. 
The Borough Council will also work with the Self-Build community to further 
understand their requirements and promote on their behalf.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.119 The appropriate mix, type and density of housing developments shall be delivered through the application of this policy and through:
   alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   engagement between the Council, developers and the community;
   development of framework plans, design codes and masterplans; 
   the Swindon Design Toolkit
   phasing to control the release of housing land which will better match the  
 housing requirements generated by Swindon’s changing economy;
   using previously developed land wherever possible; 
   an up-to-date understanding of development viability; 
   the development management process; 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council; and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by  
 Parish and other Community Plans.
62 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:
4.120 According to the Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), in September 
2010 there were 6,166 households classed as ‘in housing need’ on the 
Council’s Housing Register, representing around 7 per cent of all households in 
the Borough.  Those staying with friends or relatives made up almost half of this total.  The greatest need from households on the Register is for one-bedroom accommodation; 59.4 per cent of all households on the Register require  
one-bedroom; 20.5 per cent require two-bedrooms; 17.9 per cent require 
three-bedrooms; and, 2 per cent require four or more.
4.121 The SHMA has established that there is an annual average shortfall in Swindon 
Borough of around 801 affordable homes (as defined in the glossary).  As 
a result, it recommended that Swindon Borough should maintain its existing policy of seeking a 30% affordable housing contribution on sites large enough 
to qualify.  Additionally, it stressed a need to increase the supply of affordable 
housing in the rural wards of Ridgeway, and Blunsdon & Highworth, where the current supply is most limited, and housing is least affordable.
4.122 The number of affordable homes that can be provided is constrained by both available public sector funding and the level of cross subsidy that can realistically be achieved from land value enhancement associated with 
planning permission (planning gain). In current housing market conditions, 
the number of affordable homes which can be delivered is inextricably linked with the development of market homes and if planning policies push for too high a quota of affordable homes it may both reduce the overall number of 
dwellings built, and the proportion of those that are affordable.   
It is also important that the delivery of all types of housing is not undermined by development sites becoming unviable, which can happen as a result of the recession’s impact on residential values and access to borrowing.  
4.123 In light of concerns over the viability of delivering development to 
accommodate affordable housing to the thresholds identified in the SHMA 
as a result of the recession, the Borough Council commissioned independent consultants (GVA) to test the viability of delivering affordable housing and tenure split, having regard to the NPPF.  With regard to the appropriate 
proportion of affordable housing to be sought, the study recommended that 
“taking into consideration the need for development to contribute towards strategic infrastructure through a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), as 
63Policy HA2: Affordable Housing
a. On all developments of 15 homes or more, or on sites larger than  
 0.5 hectares, and subject to economic viability assessment:
   a target of 30%13 affordable homes should be provided on-site; or
   where it can be robustly demonstrated as appropriate, a  
  proportionate contribution should be provided towards    
  affordable homes off-site where on-site provision is not suitable.
b. Where affordable homes are to be provided on-site affordable  
  housing should be integrated within the design and layout of a  
 development and of a mix and tenure that reflects current need.
13This level of provision should be delivered with nil public subsidy, unless otherwise agreed by the Council
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Developmentwell as on-site S.106, that Swindon Borough can provide for its anticipated 
growth agenda.  The Borough Council takes an approach to affordable 
housing based on the assumption of today’s ‘weak’ market conditions, 
and allows itself flexibility when negotiating affordable housing provision by setting an affordable housing target of 30%.  The accompanying Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Study, which should be read in conjunction 
with the Affordable Housing Viability Study, demonstrated that in the vast 
majority of developments, development is viable with more than 20% affordable housing.  The study also noted that “Should the Council believe that development could in theory afford to contribute lower or higher levels 
of affordable housing without prejudicing its ability to contribute to CIL and 
on site S.106, the Council should enter into negotiations with the respective developer / landowner to determine the appropriate level of affordable 
housing.”  This suggests that site by site viability testing should take place for 
the foreseeable future.
4.124 Therefore, in order to maintain an up-to-date understanding of deliverability, the SHMA will be updated periodically (which will include review of the overall affordable housing target) and individual development schemes’ viability and ability to deliver affordable housing will be tested through an ‘open book’ 
approach as part of the planning application / development management 
process.  Where the provision of on-site affordable housing is demonstrated to be unviable, contributions to the provision of affordable housing off-site to 
the scale which would have been required on-site can be made (where it is in 
accord with paragraph 50 of the NPPF).
4.125 Intermediate housing
14 is important in the delivery of the affordable housing 
requirements.  The SHMA recommended that the relative affordability that the 
market presents on new housing schemes, as well as the effective affordability 
of the ‘affordable housing’ (particularly low cost home ownership), should be taken into account when considering proportions of market, affordable and intermediate housing on a site.  It also recommends that Registered Providers 
and housing developers should be required to demonstrate on a scheme-by-
scheme basis the market demand for additional one and two bedroom flats for the intermediate sale and key worker market. 
4.126 With regard to tenure split, the consultant’s report which tested viability also looked at the appropriate split in Swindon Borough.  It recommended that “the tenure split within the affordable housing provision does not have 
a significant effect on development viability, and we would therefore 
suggest that the Borough Council considers its housing need and the desire of its Members and RP’s (Registered Providers) to adopt the ‘Affordable Rent’ model in coming to a decision on which tenure split would be most 
advantageous for the Borough”.
4.127 In all cases, where the affordable housing is a proportion of the overall scheme, in the interests of developing inclusive, mixed and socially integrated 
communities in Swindon Borough, affordable and intermediate housing should be well-designed and integrated with the rest of the development 
scheme.  This approach is supported by the NPPF
15.
6414“Intermediate market housing refers to affordable homes for sale through schemes such as  
shared-ownership, or rented properties offered at a discount to market rent, usually 80 per cent.  
Both forms of intermediate housing have increasingly been included in the supply of new affordable 
homes.” p.197, SHMA
15See paragraph 50 of the NPPF.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026  
Section ?:4.128 In summary, Policy HA2 is designed to help deliver affordable housing in 
response to the evidence gathered in the SHMA, whilst introducing some 
flexibility which recognises that the current housing market is struggling to 
deliver the scale of housing (market, intermediate and affordable) due to the impact of the recession.   The required thresholds introduced in the policy are derived directly from the SHMA and have been tested as part of 
the viability assessment and are aligned with the NPPF, which requires Local 
Planning Authorities to use their evidence base to ensure that “their Local Plan meets the full, objectively assessed needs for market and affordable housing” (paragraph 47).  
 Additional Evidence Base
4.129 Additional information includes:
   Affordable Housing Viability Study (2012)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.130 The delivery of affordable housing shall be achieved through application of 
this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in 
  the evidence base above;
   The provision of affordable and intermediate housing by developers and  
 Registered Social Landlords (RSLs);
   Engagement between the Council and developers and the negotiation  
 of developer contributions towards the provision of affordable housing  
 based on the Council’s adopted Developer Contributions Supplementary  
 Planning Document; 
   The development management process; 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council; and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by  
 Parish and other Community Plans.
4.131 An underlying theme within the NPPF is the creation of healthy and inclusive communities.  Inclusive access and good design are key to creating 
sustainable communities and lifetime neighbourhoods, and therefore important in achieving sustainable development.  Ensuring that future homes meet the needs of a wide range of people is essential in the creation of a 
mixed and sustainable community.  This is particularly important if we are to 
meet the challenges of development and relieve the forecast unsustainable pressure on homes, social care and health services.
65Policy HA3: Wheelchair Accessible Housing
Development proposals for 50 dwellings or more should provide at least 2% of the dwellings to be suitable for occupation by wheelchair users to 
ensure all delivered housing is of a high quality and there is a wide choice 
of housing available.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.132 Dwellings built to wheelchair housing standards should be designed 
specifically to meet the diverse and changing needs of wheelchair users 
and the multiplicity of impairments that some wheelchair users experience.  
Lifetime homes, while suitable and offering choice for some people with impairments will not have the additional spatial requirements all wheelchair users need to access every room and facility of the dwelling.  
4.133 The Inclusive Design Access for All Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) highlights the different specifications in respect of Lifetime Homes and 
Wheelchair Accessible Housing.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.134 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Borough Council Wheelchair Accessible Housing in New Housing  
 Developments (2012)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.135 The delivery of wheelchair accessible housing shall be delivered through 
the application of this policy and through the development management process. On strategic allocations and large residential developments a cumulative approach will be taken to ensure compliance with the policy.
66Policy HA4: Subdivision of Housing and Houses  
in Multiple Occupation
a. Proposals for sub-division of dwellings into flats and for Houses in   
 Multiple Occupation (HMOs), where planning permission is required  
 shall only be permitted where:
   the internal inhabitable floorspace of the original dwelling is  
  at least 100m2;
   they will not harm the character of the area, street scene or  
  amenity of neighbouring residents including through the  
  provision of parking, refuse and cycle storage;
   the application of car parking standards does not result in the  
  loss of the majority of existing front and rear garden space  
  and landscaping;
   they will not harm traffic or pedestrian safety due to increased   
  parking pressures or exacerbate existing parking problems; and
   room sizes and internal arrangements meet the current standards  
  defined by Swindon Borough Council.
b. In order to support mixed and balanced communities, and to  
 ensure that a range of household needs continue to be  
 accommodated throughout the Borough, applications for changes  
 of use to a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO)16 shall only be  
 permitted where the proposal would not adversely affect  
 the character of the surrounding area or lead to an unacceptable  
 concentration of Houses in Multiple Occupation within a given area.
16For the purposes of this policy, dwellings in use as Class C4, mixed C3/C4 use and HMOs in sui generis 
use will be considered to be HMOs.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Section ?:4.136 Although the sub-division of dwellings can increase the number of dwellings 
available and is a means of bringing empty property back into use, they 
can have a detrimental impact on neighbouring properties. It is important 
that the subdivision does not create a building that is out of context with its surroundings. The subdivision of houses into self-contained units of accommodation should only be undertaken with great care and should 
have regard to the subsequent effects on the amenities of the neighbouring 
occupiers and the character of the area.
4.137 The policy specifies a minimum size for properties to be subdivided. Swindon has a number of smaller older properties that are effectively one room width. The experience of development management has shown that the conversion 
of these properties does cause difficulties for the amenity of potential 
occupiers, and that this minimum requirement effectively excludes these inappropriate properties.  This standard has been supported at appeals and remains an effective way of controlling subdivision. Similarly, the subdivision 
of a property should not result in unsuitably small rooms and cramped 
living conditions for the future occupiers. A Residential Space Standards Supplementary Planning Document will set out minimum standards for  
room sizes.
4.138 The availability of parking will also be a factor. The amount of parking to be allowed at subdivisions will be a factor of the intensity of the proposed 
habitation, the space available for parking and the need to avoid creating 
highway problems and annoyance for neighbouring residents. 
4.139 Houses in Multiple Occupancy (HMOs) provide more flexibility and accessibility than owner occupation and conventional affordable housing, and have an important role in sustaining the flexibility of the labour market. 
However, a concentration of HMOs can have an cumulative adverse impact 
on the local area. There are concerns in some local communities, particularly close to Swindon Town Centre, about the current proliferation of HMOs already in existence.  Proposals in these areas should be considered with 
particular regard to protecting the existing community and the character  
of the area.
4.140 In April 2010 the Use Classes Order was amended and a new Use Class (C4 Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO)) was created. The definition has been 
based on that used in the Housing Act (2004)
17.  The General Permitted 
Development Order (6) (GPDO) grants automatic planning permission for 
certain categories of development, meaning there is no need, in these 
instances, to submit a planning application. This is known as ‘per mitted 
development’ and includes cases where a change from one Use Class to another does not require planning permission. In October 2010 the GPDO 
was amended to include the change of use from a Use Class C3 ‘dwelling 
house’ to a Use Class C4 ‘HMO’ in the categories of permitted development, removing the need to apply for planning permission.
6717http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/34/section/254
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development4.141 At the same time, the Government stated that where an authority wanted 
to retain planning control by maintaining the requirement to submit a 
planning application, they could use existing powers to do so, called Article 4 
Directions. In the case of HMOs, an Article 4 Direction can be used to remove the permitted development right for a change from Use Class C3 to Use Class C4. The removal of permitted development rights in any area covered by an 
Article 4 Direction would mean that planning permission would be required for 
a change of use from C3 to C4.
4.142 At present, the Borough Council has no Article 4 direction in place in relation to HMOs. However, in order to have a policy in place to guide change of use in the event of an Article 4 direction being invoked in the future, Policy HA4 
includes HMOs as well as sub-division of dwellings.
4.143 The NPPF (para. 50) makes reference to creating sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities. An over concentration of any one particular type of 
housing or household would not be in-line with the aim of creating mixed communities. In setting a local threshold above which no further HMOs will generally be granted planning permission, a balance needs to be struck. 
There is a need to maintain a mix of dwelling types in areas of high demand 
for HMOs, whilst not reducing the overall supply of HMOs across the  
Borough and therefore limiting the housing available to meet the needs  
of the population.
4.144 At the time of issuing any Article 4 Direction the Borough Council will set a local threshold of the percentage of HMOs within a set distance of any 
proposed HMO application, based on local circumstances. For guidance  
a reasonable threshold is that the number of Houses in Multiple Occupation 
should not exceed 20% of the total number of properties within a 100 metre 
diameter buffer of the application property.  Consultation will be undertaken 
with the local community to determine the appropriate thresholds.  The Borough Council will use planning and housing records to determine  the local concentration of HIMOs in a given area.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.145 Additional information includes:
   Development management experience supported by appeal decisions.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.146 The subdivision of dwellings and larger houses in multiple occupation will be considered through the application of this policy when assessing 
development proposals and through:
   the development management process; 
   the use of Article 4 Directions where necessary for part or whole of the   
 Borough to remove permitted development rights for HMOs;
   checking the location of proposals against a database holding all existing  
 HMOs, in order to determine if the proposed location would fall within an  
 area of concentration; and
   development of supplementary guidance setting out in greater detail how  
 the policy will be applied(c).
68 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.147 In the past there has been the opportunity for Rural Exception Sites to come 
forward outside rural settlement boundaries, where housing would not 
normally be permitted, to enable the provision of affordable housing in rural 
areas.  However, these have been insufficient to meet the need for affordable housing, especially in recent years with the reduced availability of public funding.   The NPPF encourages the allocation of sites for affordable housing, 
and the Plan proposes that rural exception sites should be allowed for at rural 
settlements, adjacent to settlement boundaries, and within rural settlements where there is no defined settlement boundary.  Preferably sites will be allocated through forthcoming Neighbourhood Plans or through further site 
identification and allocation by the Borough Council, but it is not practical to 
expect that all sites will be identified in this way.  It is also proposed that rural exception sites should reflect a recommendation in the Taylor Review of Rural 
Economy and Affordable Housing Living Working Countryside (2008) regarding 
Community Led Affordable Housing.
69Policy HA5: Rural Exception Sites
a. As an exception to the rural strategy principles in Policy SD2c,   
 housing development to meet local affordable housing needs may 
  be permitted outside defined rural settlement boundaries where it   
 can be demonstrated that the following criteria can be met:
   no other suitable sites are available within the settlement   
  boundary;
   the housing shall remain affordable in perpetuity to people with a  
  local connection;
   there is evidence of local need, through the Council’s Strategic   
  Housing Market Assessment and/or a Local Needs Survey;
   the proposal is appropriate in scale and style taking into account  
  landscape value, settlement character, and site characteristics;
   environmentally sensitive sites such as SSSIs are not affected;
   good design principles are demonstrated that meet the Council’s  
  residential design standards, with the design process beginning   
  from the outset; and
   an option with the landowner is secured at an early stage in the  
  development process to ensure the scheme can proceed.
b. Where such a proposal is initiated and supported by the local   
 community and it is aligned with the Local Plan policies, there will  
 be a presumption to grant.
c. In exceptional circumstances, where it is demonstrated, by means  
 of a viability assessment, that there is insufficient public funding to  
 make the scheme viable, an element of private market housing  
 will be acceptable to provide a cross subsidy, secured through a  
  legal obligation.  The market housing would need to meet the same  
  design principles as the affordable element.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Additional Evidence Base
4.148 Additional information includes:
   The Taylor Review of Rural Economy and Affordable Housing: Living   
 Working Countryside (2008).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.149 The delivery of housing on exceptions sites shall be achieved through the 
application of this policy and through:
   engagement between the local community, developers, land owners and  
 the Council;
   the development management process; and,
   allocations to be made through development of Neighbourhood Plans,  
 Neighbourhood Development Orders or further work undertaken by   
 the Council on site specific allocations in rural areas where community-led  
 neighbourhood planning does not take place.
Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
70Policy HA6: Agricultural Workers Dwellings
a. Planning permission for a new dwelling in the countryside based  
 upon the essential needs of agriculture and forestry shall only  
 be permitted where:
   an independent appraisal is submitted with the application  
  demonstrating that there is a functional need for the proposed  
  dwelling which cannot be met by existing suitable    
  accommodation available in the area, or by rearranging duties  
  and responsibilities between workers; and
   the size of the proposed dwelling is appropriate to its  
  functional need; and
   in all cases a financial test is also submitted to demonstrate the   
  viability of the business proposed or as proposed to be  
  expanded; and
   the dwelling cannot be provided by adapting an existing   
  building on the holding; and
   the proposed dwelling is located within or adjacent to the   
  existing farm buildings or other dwellings on the holding; and
   the design of the proposed dwelling is in harmony with the  
  landscape character type and appearance of the countryside,  
  particularly in the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty; and
   occupancy is limited by way of a planning condition or    
  obligation.
b. Any proposal for a farm unit which has been subject to  
 fragmentation, or is known to be about to be affected by it, shall  
 be subject to planning obligations to tie the dwellings to adjacent  
 farm buildings to prevent them being sold separately.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.150 Policy HA6 is intended to ensure a consistent approach by the Local Planning 
Authority in determining applications for new dwellings outside the settlement 
boundaries. In the open countryside isolated new dwellings are not normally 
permitted as they conflict with strategies to protect the countryside and are generally in unsustainable locations. However, those who work in the rural economy may need to live in close proximity to where they work. 
Consequently, to conform to the NPPF, proposals of this nature are allowed  
as an exception to development constraints in the countryside.
4.151 The criteria specified are considered appropriate to determine whether such a special justification is valid and to detect possible abuse. Each appraisal should be submitted with the application and be undertaken at the 
applicant’s expense by an independent and qualified agricultural consultant. 
Where required, this financial appraisal should show in particular that the net income generated by the business is wholly capable of supporting the proposed size and cost of the dwelling, and the livelihood of its occupant,  
on a sound continuing basis.
4.152 Should these appraisals establish the need for a dwelling in principle, the 
availability of any suitable existing accommodation in the vicinity (such 
as the nearest settlement) will be regarded as material in determining the application. Where no such accommodation exists, inordinately large or extensive new dwellings relative to the needs of the enterprise, or those of 
inappropriate design for their location, will not be permitted. Where the Local 
Planning Authority is concerned about possible abuse of this exception policy, the history of the holding, the recent pattern of land use and building and recent disposals of land and property may be investigated. Such information 
will be treated as material to the Local Planning Authority’s determination  
of planning applications, as part of the consideration of the individual  
merits of each case. Such a sale could constitute evidence of lack of agricultural need.
4.153 To ensure that new dwellings permitted to meet such special needs remain 
available to meet any continuing essential needs of agriculture or forestry 
enterprises in the locality an occupancy condition will be attached by the Local Planning Authority to all permissions granted under this policy. Consideration will also be given to agreeing occupancy conditions on existing dwellings under the control of the applicant, which do not have such 
conditions, but need at the time of the application to be used in conjunction 
with the enterprise. Fragmentation has resulted in a new set of problems in relation to agricultural policy. The separate sale of farmhouses, divorced from 
the rest of the farm, has brought about the loss of much needed residential 
accommodation. To prevent this situation continuing in the future, planning obligations may be attached to agricultural workers consents to tie them to the associated unit.
4.154 Entirely new sites where there are currently no existing buildings at all are especially sensitive and could be unnecessarily damaged were partial 
implementation and/or the abandonment of a proposed enterprise to 
occur. To ensure that such opportunities are not unnecessarily denied, in circumstances where the functional and financial tests have resulted in a 
finely balanced conclusion, the Local Planning Authority will be prepared 
to consider inviting an application for a mobile home on a temporary basis, normally for three years. Such temporary permission would rarely be renewed 
71 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Developmentother than to provide continued accommodation whilst a permanent 
dwelling was promptly constructed on any such site as might have been 
permitted for that purpose.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.155 Agricultural workers’ dwellings will be considered through the application 
of this policy when assessing proposals and through the development management process. 
4.156 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (Amendment and Consequential Provisions) (England) Order 2014 created class MB which extended permitted development rights to the conversion of up to 450m
2 of redundant or under-used agricultural buildings. 
4.157 Planning applications involving the conversion and reuse for residential purposes of buildings previously used for various other purposes have become increasingly common. This trend is associated both with changes 
within the agricultural industry and greater demand from people to live in 
the countryside. Whilst applications for employment and community use, particularly of traditionally designed buildings, will prevail conversions for residential purposes will be considered where the location is acceptable and 
where the development is appropriate to the original building. Where suitable 
the conversion and re-use of a building can help to reduce the demand for new developments in the countryside. 
72Policy HA7: Conversion of Buildings to Residential  
Use in the Countryside
In the countryside outside the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and outside Conservation Areas, up to 450m
2 of redundant or under-used 
agricultural buildings (that are not listed buildings) on a farm may be 
changed to provide a maximum of three dwellings. Otherwise, proposals 
for the conversion of an existing building or structure to residential shall be permitted provided they comply with the following criteria:
  the building is worthy of retention, structurally sound and capable of  
 conversion without substantial reconstruction; and
  the conversion is in keeping with the original character of the  
 building and enhances the fabric and character of any adjacent   
 buildings, or the landscape character type generally; and
  the number of units and density of development is appropriate to the  
 building’s location; and
  the building shall have an existing curtilage or a curtilage can be   
 created which does not adversely affect the landscape character   
 type, the building itself or any adjacent structure; and
  utilities can be provided and the building has adequate access  
 to a metalled road without creating traffic hazards and without   
 involving road improvements incompatible with the character  
 of the area.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
Section ?:4.158 In accordance with the NPPF, new isolated homes will be avoided in the 
countryside, unless redundant or disused buildings will be re-used during the 
development, leading to an enhancement of the immediate setting. The 
Local Planning Authority would wish to support such proposals, provided they are appropriate in scale, enhance the original character of the building and its surrounding landscape, and minimise the impact on their countryside 
location. Proposals which result in the long term safe guarding of a heritage 
asset will also be encouraged by the Borough Council.
4.159 The NPPF attaches great importance to developments being of a high quality design; as such the Borough Council requires all proposals to improve the visual appearance and character of the area. Ensuring the vitality of rural 
communities is maintained or enhanced is also an important consideration 
during the Local Planning Authority’s decision making process. 
4.160 The Borough Council is seeking to ensure that countryside buildings are retained in their original form as far as possible, that re-use of buildings is sought for employment or community use first of all and only in circumstances where this cannot be achieved should it be residential (thereby avoiding 
the urbanisation of the rural area). Where residential conversion may in 
such cases be acceptable in principle, a proliferation of such schemes may be detrimental to a sparsely populated area. Development of this nature is therefore expected to be modest in scale and take account of the 
building’s features and its landscape setting. Avoidance of traffic hazards and 
inappropriate locations in relation to public services and utilities is also sought together with creation of a dwelling of adequate size.
4.161 Where buildings in the countryside have either become so derelict that re-use is only possible following complete or substantial reconstruction, or their 
construction and materials are such as to require considerable alteration to 
make the building suitable for the new purpose, the proposal will be assessed as if it were for an entirely new development in the countryside. In such cases proposals will be considered under Policy DE1. Any proposed dwelling which 
will be strictly for the use of a rural worker will be considered under Policy HA6. 
 Additional Evidence Base
4.162 Additional information includes:
   Wiltshire County and Swindon Borough Rural Facilities Study (2008); and
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Rural Issues Paper (2009)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies  
4.163 The conversion of buildings to residential use in the countryside will be 
considered primarily through the application of this policy through the development management process.  Applicants will be encouraged to  
have early pre-application discussions with the Borough Council.
73 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
4.164 The residential accommodation needs of gypsies and travellers are currently 
met on 2 sites within the Borough, at Hay Lane (37 plots), Small Acres 
(Kingsdown Lane - 3 plots) and at Eastrop (2 plots). Hay Lane is Council  
owned and maintained whilst Small Acres and Eastrop  (Highworth) are privately owned. In addition 12 pitches are provided at the Chiseldon Firs Council transit site. From time to time unauthorised encampments occur 
within the Borough and there is no recognisable pattern to their timing, 
duration or location.
74Policy HA8: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling    
Showpeople Pitches and Sites
a. Provision for 17 additional gypsy and traveller residential pitches  
 and one travelling showpeople site (in accordance with the latest   
 GTAA) will be made over the plan period. The location(s) of this  
 additional requirement will be identified in a Site Allocation  
 Development Plan Document. 
b. Development to accommodate gypsies, travellers and travelling  
 showpeople will be permitted provided that the site:
   is accessible to shops, schools and health facilities by public   
  transport, on foot or by cycle;
   has good access to the highway network and will not cause   
  traffic congestion or safety problems;
   has sufficient space for the parking and manoeuvring of all   
  vehicles associated with the occupiers;
   is provided with adequate on-site services for water supply;  
  power; drainage; sewage disposal; and waste disposal facilities;
   includes appropriate landscape measures to avoid any adverse  
  visual impact and to ensure adequate levels of privacy and   
  residential amenity for occupiers and adjacent occupiers, that  
  avoid the use of high walls and fences;
   does not accommodate non-residential uses that would not  
  cause, by virtue of smell, noise or vibration, significant adverse  
  impact on neighbouring business or residents; and
   is in accord with the Flood Risk Policy EN6
c. In addition, development for travelling showpeople will be permitted  
 provided that the site:
   be occupied by bona fide members of the Showmen’s Guild;   
  and
   includes sufficient space for storage and maintenance of  
  equipment separate from residential caravans.
d. Unless the site is in close proximity to an existing children’s    
 recreational area, the site should also include a designated area  
 for children’s games and recreation.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.165 The Swindon Borough Council Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) (2013) identified a need for 17 additional 
residential pitches in the next 15 years. The need is split into 5 year periods with 
7 pitches required in the initial period 2013-2018, 5 pitches in the period 2018-2023 and 5 pitches 2023-2028. The GTAA (2013) also identifies the need for one travelling showpeople site within Swindon Borough. 
4.166 Travelling showpeople require a permanent base where they can maintain, store and repair their equipment and where they can station their caravans, 
when they are not travelling for the purposes of their business. Guidance 
on the requirements for travelling showpeople is given in the Showpeople’s Guilds’ Model Standard Package for Sites (2007).
4.167 Further work to identify sites for the allocation of additional pitches has commenced and will positively progress in accordance with the Local 
Development Scheme.  The Council will continue to work with the traveller 
community to understand their requirements.
4.168 The design and layout of sites should take account of the CLG Good Practice Guide ‘Designing Gypsy and Traveller sites’ (2008).
4.169 Sites for traveller communities should follow the same basic criteria as brick and mortar housing in terms of their sustainable credentials.  However it must be recognised that there are specific aspects of such sites that need additional criteria to be specified.
4.170 Many gypsies and travellers would like to run their business from the sites on which their caravans are stationed.  It is important to ensure that where this 
occurs there is no adverse impact on existing residents in the vicinity from 
noise, fumes, or other disturbances that could arise.  Proposals will have to meet highway safety standards, especially in the manoeuvring of large vehicles and trailers.
4.171 The objective is to create sites that are well designed and are sympathetic  to the local landscape.  The use of shrubs and trees on the edge of the site  
will be encouraged in order to avoid creating the feeling of isolation,  
however it is recognised that for safety, security fences and walls will sometimes also be needed.
 Additional Evidence Base Documents
4.172 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Borough Council Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople   
 Accommodation Needs Assessment (2013);
   Showpeople’s Guilds’ Model Standard Package for Sites (2007); and
   Good Practice Guide ‘Designing Gypsy and Traveller sites’ (2008).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies
4.173 This policy will be implemented through planning decisions taken in the development management process and through:
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, 
Section ?:
75 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development   Further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site allocations  
 work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and other  
 Community Plans.
76 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
 Theme 4: Transport
4.174 Theme 4 sets out policies to:
   improve key transport gateways and corridors;
   provide good access to Swindon Central Area and key destinations;
   reduce severance caused by transport corridors and the dominance of  
 the car on the streetscene;
   minimise the environmental impact from transport (for example,  
 vehicle emissions);
   minimise congestion and therefore journey time, noise and air quality;
   promote healthy lifestyles and travel choices and maximise opportunities  
 to walk and cycle;
   support good public transport provision; and
   encourage innovative transport initiatives for rural areas.
 
 Key Issues
4.175 The transport issues faced in Swindon are common to many other towns and 
cities across the country.  These include, for example, traffic congestion at 
peak travel times, a lowering of air quality during those peak times in certain parts of the town and maintaining an effective public transport (bus) service, particularly to and from rural areas outside the town.
4.176 New development will also pose further challenges such as good integration with and minimising impact on the existing transport network, extending public transport services into those areas and achieving good level access 
throughout the day.
4.177 Effective accessibility is important in all modes of transport, from walking and 
cycling to public transport to the private car and transportation of goods, to all ages and across all parts of the economy.  Therefore, there remains a need to improve the transport network to improve accessibility and reduce journey 
times, but also to improve air quality and reduce transport emissions.  Whilst 
maintaining and improving the existing network, being able to provide the opportunity for more people to take their shorter trips by foot or bicycle, and to do this safely, is still a key issue.
 
77 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026The Transport theme’s policies flow directly from and help to implement the following Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2  
of this Plan:
SO4: Transport
SO6: Community and HealthPart 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
78 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Addressing the key issues
4.178 We are all dependent on transport to live our lives the way we do.  We use 
transport for work, leisure, shopping, the “school run” and countless other activities.  There are many factors influencing our choice of transport such as 
convenience, distance and time, the weather, our economic circumstances, 
congestion on our roads and necessity when our choices are limited.  People’s behaviour is also a key determinant of the use of transport modes.  
Many of these issues cannot be dealt with through planning policies, but 
they can provide the platform to improve transport networks (of all modes), enhance sustainability and influence how people use transport by providing the opportunities to make more sustainable access to services, facilities and 
destinations easier.  
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 4
4.179 Key evidence base documents for transport include:
   A Climate Change Action Plan for Swindon Borough 2006-2010 (2006);
   Swindon Workspace Strategy (2009);
   Swindon Transport Strategy (2009);
   Swindon Borough Local Transport Plan 3 (2011 - 2026);
   Active Swindon Strategy 2009-2015 (2009);
   Wiltshire and Swindon Strategic Plan for Accident Reduction (2008); and
   The Rights of Way Improvement Plan for Swindon 2007-2011 (2007).
Policy TR1: Sustainable Transport Networks
a. The Council will use its planning and transport powers to help reduce  
 the need to travel, and support and encourage the sustainable,  
 safe and efficient movement of people and goods within and  
 through the Borough. This will be achieved by: 
   enabling a reliable and efficient transport network that: 
  a. minimises congestion;
  b. maximises consistent journey times;
  c. prioritises trips to and from Swindon Town Centre; and
  d. supports the distribution and logistics employment sector.
   promoting and improving safety, security and healthy  
  lifestyles through:
  a. maximising opportunities to walk and cycle;
  b. reducing severance caused by transport corridors and the   
   dominance of the car on the streetscene;
  c. education, training and enforcement;
  d. engineering and design and highway maintenance; and
  e. overlooking and surveillance of bus stops, car parks,    
   footpaths and cycleways to increase safety.79 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   promoting equality of opportunity and access to services and   
  facilities for all by:
  a. delivering walkable mixed use development;
  b. inclusive design;
  c. good public transport provision; and
  d. encouraging innovative transport initiatives for rural areas.
   minimising emissions from transport by:
  a. reducing the need to travel;
  b. promoting more sustainable travel choices;
  c. personal, workplace and school travel planning; and
  d. designing the built environment to encourage healthy   
   lifestyles and travel choices.
   supporting and contributing towards improving Swindon’s sense  
  of place and quality of life by:
  a. integrating public realm and green infrastructure into the   
   design of transport schemes;
  b. minimising the impact of congestion, noise and air quality;
  c. improving the legibility and ease of movement within Swindon  
   Town Centre; and
  d. improving the image and experience of using Swindon’s  
   public transport.
   targeted investment to improve key junctions and corridors; 
   enabling the provision of a express bus network connecting  
  the strategic allocations to Swindon Town Centre; and
   medium to long distance vehicle movements will be positively  
  encouraged through site access/egress locations, road design,  
  and other highway measures to access the strategic highway  
  network at its nearest point in Swindon rather than rat-run through  
  inappropriate rural roads in the Borough, Wiltshire and  
  adjacent areas.
b. The route of the Thamesdown Drive to Barnfield Roundabout Link   
 Road as shown on the Policies Map is safeguarded to enable its   
 future construction.
4.180 Swindon’s position on the strategic transport network, with fast links by road 
and rail to London, Heathrow Airport and many other areas is a key strength 
for the town.  Within Swindon there is congestion at peak hours but it can be unpredictable in the places it affects and the times it occurs.  North-south movements are particularly affected.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
80 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.181 Generally residents have good access to services and facilities on foot or 
by public transport within Swindon, but this is more limited in the rural areas. There are also difficulties in making some bus journeys across Swindon without 
the need to change in the Town Centre. The railway line is a barrier for 
movements between the Town Centre and the northern parts of the town, particularly by walking or cycling.
4.182 The aims for transport within Swindon Borough are to deliver a vibrant local economy, improve the sense of place and reduce the need to travel.  Short 
distance trips by walking and cycling will be encouraged through design, 
mixed use development and housing density.  Encouraging trips to Swindon Town Centre is important in supporting regeneration objectives, attracting investment and jobs and diverting trips that currently leave Swindon for other 
destinations.  The Plan recognises that not all trips will be made to the Town 
Centre and therefore aims to encourage journeys within the town.  Access to the strategic transport network is critical to Swindon’s economy and it is 
essential that growth does not undermine this strength.
 Reliable and Efficient Transport Network
4.183 The transport network has an important role to play in supporting economic 
growth, regeneration and housing growth.  Congestion and poor journey time reliability results in lost productive time for businesses and impacts on the cost and time spent on journeys to and from work including those on public 
transport.  This is particularly important for freight movement in Swindon’s 
distribution and logistics sector.
4.184 To support Town Centre regeneration and Swindon’s economic growth the aim is to facilitate ease of movement into, out of and around the Town Centre. Sustainable travel choices will be enhanced so that the car does not 
dominate or have a detrimental impact on the environment, or the quality 
of the experience in the Town Centre. The strategy seeks to improve the capacity and performance of the existing road network by discouraging through traffic and reducing circulating traffic.
 Safety, Security and Health
4.185 The attractiveness of walking and cycling in Swindon will be improved to support healthy lifestyle choices but also to address climate change, congestion and improve air quality.  Reliance on car use can lead to inactive lifestyles whilst walking and cycling are a good way to improve health as it 
builds exercise into everyday activities.
4.186 Road safety at Swindon has been steadily improving since the mid-nineties.  Education and enforcement will be promoted to support responsible driving 
and continue to assist in developing practical skills needed when using our roads.  The design, layout and maintenance of the transport network will 
create a safe environment that is a pleasant and attractive place to be.  Fear 
of crime is a significant factor in discouraging travel choices for some sections of our community, especially those travelling alone and at night.  Waiting at bus stops and taxi ranks, entering multi-storey car parks, isolated footpaths 
and cycleways and poor security of cycle racks all discourage sustainable 
travel choices and personal mobility.81 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Minimising Emissions from Transport
4.187 Swindon must play its part in reducing greenhouse gas emissions whilst 
facilitating economic growth. CO2 emissions from transport account for 
around 26% of Swindon’s total and are in line with regional and national 
averages. Decarbonising transport is a key aspect in mitigating climate 
change nationally. Swindon’s approach will largely focus on influencing travel behaviour by promoting low carbon alternatives to the car. Electrification of the Great Western main line will help in reducing emissions. Where possible, 
new industry should be sited where it can be serviced by rail. The Borough 
Council will liaise with neighbouring authorities and the Swindon and Wiltshire Local Economic Partnership with a view of increasing access to rail services in Swindon’s catchment area.
4.188 Travel planning, promotional activities, access to travel information, investment in walking, cycling and public transport infrastructure and better integration between travel modes is at the heart of Swindon’s Transport 
Strategy.  Mixed-use development and sustainable urban design also have 
an important role in reducing the need to travel. There are opportunities for 
Swindon to investigate and pioneer alternative fuels and vehicle technology.
 Air Pollution
4.189 In relation to transport and air pollution, the Habitats Regulations Assessment concluded the plan is unlikely to have a significant effect on the Special Area 
of Conservation (SAC) sites. However it does recommend that the Council place strong emphasis on the delivery of sustainable transport solutions. This is 
particularly important for those developments taking place in north Swindon 
that will potentially increase traffic on the A419 which may impact upon the condition status of North Meadow and Clattinger Farm SACs. 
 Sense of Place and Quality of Life
4.190 The railway lines and road corridors sever communities and act as a barrier 
to movement especially by walking and cycling.  This will be particularly 
important to address at the ‘New Eastern Villages’. It will be expected that transport infrastructure in Swindon should go beyond a traditional engineering solution to make a positive contribution to Swindon’s sense of place, image 
and the quality of life of its residents.
4.191 Delivering a high quality, safe and easy to understand transport network 
through the Town Centre with clear links to the wider urban area is an essential part of the strategy to make it a more attractive place to visit and invest in. A joined up cycle route network and clear cycleway signage from existing 
and new communities and cycle parking will be important in supporting travel 
choice to the Town Centre.
 Swindon’s Transport Priorities
4.192 The Swindon Transport Strategy aims to reduce reliance on the car by improving travel choices. A combination of public transport, cycling and 
walking will maximise that choice, but infrastructure investment and a 
comprehensive parking strategy must support it.  It recommends delivery of a high frequency express bus network linking the strategic allocations, through Swindon’s existing communities to Swindon Town Centre. The Strategy 
supports the provision of a new Town Centre Bus Exchange and a new 
orbital bus service providing for trips that do not need to travel through the Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
82 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Town Centre and Urban Traffic Management and Control systems (UTMC). 
UTMC will improve network efficiency and provide priority for public transport removing key conflict points across busy and congested highway links.  
Targeted investment in the following priority transport corridors to promote 
travel choices, will support trips to Swindon Town Centre:
   Covingham Drive / Dorcan Way;
   Cricklade Road; 
   Great Western Way;
   Marlborough Road / Queens Drive;
   Mead Way;
   Oxford Road / Drakes Way; and
   Thamesdown Drive / Oakhurst Way Corridor. 
4.193 From Swindon’s first Local Transport Plan (LTP) and into Local Transport Plan 2 (LTP2) the Council pursued the idea of a Major Scheme bid around increasing highway capacity on the Thamesdown Drive to Barnfield Roundabout 
(formerly known as the Purton Road to Iffley Junction) corridor in the north 
and north west of Swindon. Substantial S106 developer contributions were secured from the Northern Sector urban extension in order to mitigate the traffic impacts of the development. The scheme that was identified provided 
increased capacity from Thamesdown Drive through to Great Western 
Way either through a new road on one of a number of alignments or by upgrading the existing link provided by Mead Way. To reflect changes in the 
transport policy background during LTP2 the potential Major Scheme bid was 
re-focussed as the “North Swindon Transport Strategy” which combined a public transport priority corridor between the Northern Sector and the Town Centre with measures to address the traffic issues on the Thamesdown Drive to 
Barnfield Roundabout corridor.
4.194 The delivery of the Thamesdown Drive to Barnfield Roundabout Link Road remains a long-term ambition of the Council. It is important that  
development proposals do not prevent its construction and therefore the 
route is safeguarded. At present there is not sufficient funding to deliver  
the relief road.
4.195 Investment in completing the cycling network in particular and increasing  
the permeability of walkways where there are barriers and a perceived  
lack of safety will be a critical in complementing the priority transport  
corridor approach.
 Access to Services and Facilities
4.196 Swindon’s communities should be walkable neighbourhoods, well served  
by public transport to ensure all people are able to access health and education facilities, employment, retail and leisure facilities.  This is particularly important to people without access to a car, on low incomes, living in rural areas, with disabilities and young and old people.  In general Swindon has 
good access to services and facilities and bus coverage is good to Swindon 
Town Centre. However cross-town trips require passengers to change in central Swindon. This is time-consuming, inconvenient and in effect limits personal choice for certain members of the community.  In rural areas 83 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026opportunities for walking, cycling and access to public transport is limited  
due to its isolated nature. Conventional rural public transport will be  
promoted and cost-effective community-based and demand responsive 
transport schemes will be explored. 
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies
4.197 Sustainable transport networks will be delivered through the application of this 
policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   Framework plans and masterplanning for new communities;
   Public funding where it can be secured, developer contributions and/or  
 the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   The Local Transport Plan 3; 
   Implementation of the Swindon Transport Strategy; and 
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan.
Policy TR2: Transport and Development
a. New development should be located and designed to reduce   
 the need to travel and to encourage the use of sustainable transport  
 alternatives, particularly walking and cycling, and provide the   
 potential to maximise bus travel.
b. Development shall be permitted where proposals provide access   
 that is appropriate to the scale, type and location without detriment  
 to highway safety and local amenity, and where there is an existing  
 safe and convenient pedestrian and cycle access or provision is   
 made for such access.
c. Development shall be permitted where proposals will not prejudice   
 or impede an existing or planned cycle route, or provision is made   
 for a more satisfactory route.
d. Development that results in the loss of existing rights of way or their  
 disruption shall only be permitted when adequate, acceptable  
 alternative provision or diversions are arranged. 
e. Development shall not be permitted where proposals remove,   
 narrow or materially impair the approved line of the Thames Path  
 or Ridgeway National Trails, and/or public access to them.
f. Development shall provide appropriate mitigating measures to  
 offset any adverse impacts on the transport network at both the  
 construction and operational stages. 
g. To assess and mitigate the impact of development and to promote   
 sustainable travel choices, the following information will be  
 required to support planning applications:Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
84 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.198 It is desirable for new developments to be located where there is good public 
access, in order to reduce the need to travel by car. In all cases development 
should provide a level of access that is appropriate to its location, and the 
type and nature of the vehicles that will use it. All proposals must ensure that they do not constitute an unacceptable impact on local amenity as a consequence of inadequate access and must not compromise highway 
safety. Development should provide for access by public transport, cycling 
and walking, including proper provision for access for all sections of the community in accordance with Policy DE1.
4.199 As well as the need to improve the cycle network, there is a need to make sure development proposals do not harm existing provision. As new routes 
may be included in further Local Transport Plan (LTP) they cannot all be known 
at present, this policy seeks to protect any future routes that may be identified through a revised LTP.
4.200 The rights of way within the Borough provide a range of important functions including access and recreation. Where rights of way are affected by development, adequate and acceptable diversions should be put in place. 
Permission to divert, remove or create rights of way must be sought through 
the appropriate legislation.
4.201 Two national trails pass through the Borough, the Thames Path and the Ridgeway, and are shown on the Policies Map. The Borough Council recognises their national and local importance and will ensure that these 
routes are protected from any development which would adversely affect 
the route itself or the character of the area through which they pass.
4.202 The requirements of this policy will be achieved through the preparation of comprehensive documents to support a planning application.  Applicants are encouraged to seek advice from the Borough Council at the pre-application stage to ensure that the content and structure of these documents meets the 
requirements of the policy. The documents will take a holistic approach to the 
impact of development on the transport network.  The documentation should have regard to the Council’s other policies on transport.   A Transport Assessment: where the proposed development is  
  likely to have significant transport and related environmental   
  impact (in accordance with Department for Transport guidance);
   A Transport Statement: where the development has relatively  
   minor transport implications (in accordance with Department for  
   Transport guidance); and
   A Travel Plan: where the proposed development is likely to  
  have significant transport and related environmental impact  
  (in accordance with Department for Transport guidance).
h. Parking provision, including secure cycle and motorcycle parking,  
  should be provided in accordance with the Council’s adopted   
 parking standards.85 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.203 The Borough Council’s Transport Requirements for Development guidance 
sets out the thresholds for the above documents. However, such requirements 
are not exhaustive and additional information may be required depending 
upon scale of development and local circumstances. The key factor is that applicants liaise with the Council at the earliest opportunity preferably at the 
pre-application stage, thus ensuring that the content and structure of the 
documentation submitted meets the required standard. 
 Additional Evidence Base
4.204 Additional information includes:
   Department for Transport guidance on travel assessments and  
 transport statements. 
 Delivery and links with other key policies  
4.205 Transport requirements placed upon development proposals will be considered through the application of this policy as development proposals are brought forward and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above; 
   The implementation of Local Transport Plan (including any  
 subsequent reviews);
   The development management process; and,
   Early discussion with developers about transport requirements, preferably  
 at the pre-application stage will help to ensure that requirements are  
 understood and met.
 
Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
86 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Theme 5: Infrastructure Needs
4.206 Theme 5 sets out policies to:
   require strategic, local and site-specific infrastructure to be provided as a  
 result of needs generated by new development;
   ensure that the particular issues related to wastewater and water supply  
 resulting from new development are addressed;
   support and require ICT infrastructure to be in place to support Swindon  
 Borough’s residents and businesses; and,
   encourage the development of low carbon and renewable forms of  
 energy generation.
 Key Issues
4.207 Infrastructure is critical to support the provision of all development.  Whether 
transport infrastructure, Information Communication Technology (ICT), utilities such as water supply or sewerage (wastewater) systems, or energy generation, 
such supporting infrastructure must be in place for new development.  Whilst 
much of this type of infrastructure is provided through statutory undertakings (for example, essential water, wastewater, gas or electricity provision), new 
development can put additional pressure on existing infrastructure requiring 
upgrades or new facilities to cope with the change.  This is particularly the case with utility infrastructure.
4.208 As well as the identification and provision of new infrastructure, ensuring that it is provided at the right time can be critical, both from a deliverability and cost point of view, as well as ensuring that the capacity is in place to serve new 
development when it becomes occupied.
4.209 Set against rising demand from new and existing development and the 
impact of a changing climate, water supply is an issue which will need to be monitored.  Likewise, the capacity to treat wastewater to required standards in Swindon Borough as a result of additional development during the plan period 
will also need to be monitored.
4.210 With ICT and in particular broadband speed becoming increasingly more 
important to business and commerce, ensuring that Swindon Borough maintains or exceeds industry standard high speed communication will be  
a key factor in helping the recovery of the economy particularly in some  
high-tech sectors and multi-national companies.The Infrastructure Needs theme’s policies flow directly from and  
help to implement the following Strategic Objectives set out in  
Part 2 of this Plan:
SO2: Infrastructure Requirements
SO6: Community and Health
SO7: Transport
SO8: Culture and Leisure
SO9: Green Infrastructure87 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.211 As Theme 1 has already demonstrated, climate change mitigation is leading 
to innovations in sustainable construction and measures to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to comply with legislation and regulation.  With the cost of energy rising and the security of supply becoming an issue, opportunities are 
being taken to develop low carbon and renewable energy technologies  
from the small to large scale.
 Addressing the key issues
4.212 The planning system and in particular the policies set by this Plan will play 
a key role in helping to ensure that key strategic, local and site-specific 
infrastructure is provided at the right time and in the right place to absorb 
the impact of and provide for new development.  Other mechanisms, in particular statutory requirements related to provision for new development, will play a key role.  It is particularly important that planning policies, through 
their application to proposals for new development, help to ensure that 
unnecessary additional burden is not placed upon existing infrastructure and needs generated by new development are provided for satisfactorily.
4.213 In addition to the policies in this plan, the Infrastructure Delivery Plan will play a key role in helping to identify, co-ordinate and deliver key infrastructure in 
Swindon Borough. 
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 5
4.214 Key evidence base documents for infrastructure include:
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005);
   Swindon Transport Strategy (2009);
   Swindon Local Transport Plan 3 (2011-2026);
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-26:  
 Revised Consultation Document (2011);
   Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2008);
   Swindon Water Cycle Study Phase 1 (2007);
   Swindon Water Cycle Study Phase 2 (2014)
   Swindon School Place Planning Study Update (2011);
   Delivering Excellence for Swindon 2008-2013 (2008);
   Wiltshire County and Swindon Borough Rural Facilities Survey  
 (Wiltshire Council and SBC, 2008);
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Rural Issues Study (2009); and
   Various New Eastern Villages, South Marston and West of Swindon Studies. Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
88 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.215 In order to achieve sustainable development it is important that infrastructure 
and services are provided to support new and existing communities and facilitate economic development.
4.216 The coordinated delivery of adequately funded infrastructure at the right time 
and in the right place is key to a successful and sustainable Swindon Borough. 
Identifying and securing sources of funding to facilitate the provision of, or directly deliver infrastructure to support housing and economic growth is vital.
4.217 This policy reflects infrastructure provision across the following levels:
 1. Strategic Infrastructure will usually be delivered off-site and is outlined in the  
 Infrastructure Delivery Plan, which includes a phased identification of   
 needs to support Borough-wide growth to 2026. These infrastructure items  
 have been identified through relevant supporting studies and evidence  
 based documents. Some infrastructure needs may be cross-boundary.
 2. Local Infrastructure  can be delivered in a variety of ways including on-site  
 delivery integral to larger scale developments and through off-site  
 investment in existing infrastructure within the vicinity of the development  
 to mitigate the cumulative impact of development. These infrastructure  
 items are identified through relevant evidence based documents.
 3. On-site or site specific Infrastructure  relates to needs arising where there is 
  direct linkage between the new development and supporting    
 infrastructure and should be delivered integral to the development, such  
 as affordable housing or open space.  In exceptional circumstances,   
 where off-site provision is considered an acceptable alternative, a   
 contribution in lieu of on-site delivery may be sought.Policy IN1: Infrastructure Provision
a. In order to make a positive contribution to the sustainable growth in  
 Swindon Borough, all development, including development adjacent 
  to but outside the Swindon Borough boundary, shall where  
 appropriate, and within the context of economic viability make   
 provision to:
   meet the cost of new infrastructure made necessary  
  by the development;
   mitigate the impact of development on existing infrastructure;
   provide for the on-going maintenance of infrastructure delivered  
  as a result of development where appropriate;
   contribute to the delivery of strategic infrastructure to address the  
  cumulative impacts of development; and,
   contribute to initiatives to increase the effectiveness  
  and efficiency of infrastructure.89 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.218 Infrastructure items covered by this policy include:
   Education and Children’s Services18;
   Transport Infrastructure;
   Green Infrastructure, including open space (including maintenance);
   Affordable Housing;
   Public Art;
   Cultural Facilities;
   Leisure Facilities;
   Public Realm;
   Adult Social Care;
   Community, Faith and Neighbourhood Facilities;
   Waste;
   Water Supply and Treatment;
   Local and Strategic Health Facilities;
   Emergency Services; and
   Community Forest.
4.219 This list is not exhaustive. Where a development has unique and/or significant 
impact on an area, scope may exist to secure provision to address such impact. Furthermore, where service areas or the community are in a position 
to draw attention to a newly generated need for infrastructure resulting from 
development, or the cumulative impact of development, scope may exist to secure its provision by legal agreement, or as a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) chargeable item as appropriate.
 Legislative Framework
4.220 The Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA) (as amended) and supported by the Planning Act 2008 alongside the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations 2010 (Statutory Instrument 2010 No.948) as amended 
under the Localism Act 2011, (or any regulations that supersede these) sets 
out the Government’s approach for securing development contributions towards future infrastructure provision.  The Government’s approach is to scale back the scope of section 106 of the TCPA 1990 (as amended) to focus 
on site specific mitigation in favour of the application of a standardised 
CIL tariff secured under a local charging schedule as the framework for managing delivery of infrastructure that is required as a consequence of the 
cumulative impact of development.
4.221 The Borough Council will update and amend local policy and guidance as required to reflect a transition from the delivery of infrastructure under 
planning obligation that constitutes a CIL chargeable item into a localised charging schedule. Thereafter it will ensure that its policy and guidance remains reflective of future legislative change.
18Incorporates Primary schools, Secondary schools, Early years and Children’s Centres, Post 16,  
Special Education Needs and Child Social CareSection ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
90 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 The Market 
4.222 The Local Plan is a long-term plan and must incorporate a degree of flexibility. 
This is increasingly important given fluctuations in market conditions. A policy framework should be in place for the Borough Council to make practical, commercially sensitive decisions about development that facilitates its 
delivery without disadvantaging established or new communities.  This 
demands a balance of interests across private and public sectors.
 The Economic Viability of Development
4.223 Development furthermore can, on occasion, face genuinely abnormal 
costs that could threaten its economic viability, thus compromising sites 
from being brought forward.  The viability of development is material to any decision and requires consideration in the context of the future delivery of 
infrastructure provision.  Exceptional circumstances may arise under which 
benefits of development outweigh the harm of not providing for infrastructure contributions e.g. bringing buildings back into use, key regeneration schemes and regenerating important listed buildings. 
4.224 In adopting a CIL charging schedule for Swindon Borough, economic viability 
will inform rate setting.  The assessment of the viability of the development 
reflects a snapshot of time.  For this reason it is important to ensure that policy 
and guidance incorporate flexibility to accommodate and consider the 
commercial reality of changes in market conditions over the lifetime of a planning permission and its development construction period.
4.225 It is important to safeguard against the banking or extending of planning permissions granted during challenging economic periods, 
for implementation at a time of improved market conditions, as the 
implementation of permissions will assist in the stimulation of continued development activity.  The drafting of guidance and the application of local 
policy will address such matters.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.226 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Borough Community Infrastructure Viability Report (GVA) (2012)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies  
4.227 The required strategic, local and on-site infrastructure to support development will be secured through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   The Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Public funding where this can be secured, developer contributions, the   
 Community Infrastructure Levy and/or other funding mechanisms;
   Testing of the economic viability of sites where appropriate; 
   The development management process; and,
   The development of a Supplementary Planning Document which will in  
 the context the type and scope of infrastructure needs (supported by  
 evidence) arising as a consequence of development Borough-wide,  91 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 and adjacent to but outside the administrative boundary:
  i. explain how and when infrastructure requirements are to be secured 
   and delivered by planning obligations;
  ii. explain the process by which infrastructure requirements are to be  
  administered and monitored;
  iii. explain the mechanism(s) to be used to support infrastructure  
  delivery both on-site and off-site, through for example:
      community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule;
      commuted sums; and,
      section 106 agreements. 
  iv. explain the mechanism for the operation of the impact of economic  
  viability and development, in the local context.
4.228 The Duty to Co-operate Statement also signposts where co-operation and 
collaboration with key stakeholders has influenced decision-making on the 
approach to infrastructure provision. 
Policy IN2: Water Supply and Wastewater
a. Future water supply will be addressed through the implementation   
 of demand management measures, particularly in new development 
  to reduce the use of water, and the prevention of leakages,    
 complimented by sustainable new water resources.
b. The development or expansion of water supply or sewerage    
 waste/water treatment facilities, including sewage sludge, shall  
 normally be permitted either where needed to serve existing or  
 proposed new development, or in the interests of long-term water  
 supply and waste water management provided that the need for  
 such facilities outweighs any adverse land use or environmental  
 impact that any such adverse impact is minimised.  There should  
 be no adverse impacts on sensitive ecosystems, particularly SSSIs  
 and the River Kennet. 
c. Future wastewater treatment and improvements in related river  
 quality will be addressed through the timely expansion of the  
 Rodbourne Sewage Treatment Works and/or an additional Sewage 
 Treatment Works to the east of Swindon to serve the New Eastern  
 Villages developments, if proven to be the most sustainable option,  
 particularly to ensure delivery of the housing trajectory.
d. Development proposals should take account of the capacity of  
 existing off-site water and sewerage/waste water treatment  
 infrastructure and the impact of development proposals on them.  
 Where necessary, the Council will seek improvements to water and/  
 or sewerage/waste water treatment infrastructure related and  
 appropriate to the development so that the improvements are  
 completed prior to occupation of the development.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
92 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.229 Water supply and wastewater treatment are issues which cover a much 
wider area than Swindon Borough’s boundaries, with both fitting more closely to utility company areas and river catchments.  This Plan’s proposals 
need to be seen within that wider functional context which is reiterated in 
the Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA). The HRA Report states the Plan should recognise that the growth proposed, when combined with growth in neighbouring authorities, may indirectly lead to adverse effects on the Special 
Areas of Conservation, given the known pressures on the water resource.  
The Plan should therefore make explicit commitments to addressing water demand and promote work on cross boundary solutions, where appropriate, 
to avoid and mitigate potential impacts. 
4.230 A key part of the evidence base for this Plan has been the Water Cycle Study.  It was developed to provide an understanding of the needs which could arise 
for future water supply and wastewater treatment from the scale and possible location of development proposed.  The study was undertaken to ensure that proposed growth does not adversely impact on the existing water cycle 
environment and that new water services infrastructure can be planned for 
and provided alongside new development in a sustainable, timely, phased and cost effective manner. 
4.231 The main water and wastewater issues which have been explored in relation to the proposed growth in the Local Plan are:
   uncertainty over water resources environmental capacity;
   uncertainty about the capacity of the river systems to accept any increase  
 in treated effluent without worsening water quality; and,
   the ability to supply required freshwater to new development.   
4.232 Further exploration of these issues through the Phase 2 Water Cycle Study highlighted the following conclusions.
4.233 In terms of wastewater, additional infrastructure can be provided in the longer term which will allow development to proceed within acceptable environmental standards, with the exception of achieving “good ecological 
status” for the discharge of phosphate.  Notwithstanding this, the study found 
that additional development of the scale proposed will not lead to further deterioration of current status of the watercourses in terms of phosphate.   However, any action taken to improve compliance with phosphate targets 
will need to be managed and coordinated on a whole river catchment 
basis as part of the Thames River Basin Management Plan.  Whilst outside the remit of this Plan it is likely, therefore, that a programme of water quality improvements to manage phosphate discharges, in line with the Water 
Framework Directive will need to be initiated.
4.234 The Local Plan is limited in the policies it can set out to help improve 
phosphate levels, with many actions being outside the remit of the planning system.  However, Policy IN2 introduces a requirement to reduce demand for water in new developments, which will reduce the risk of a deterioration of 
standards.  This policy criterion is also effective in helping to manage demand 
and increase water efficiency in line with sustainable building standards and to mitigate against the potential impacts of water extraction.93 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.235 Thames Water has plans in place to provide the necessary sewerage 
infrastructure to increase capacity in line with proposed new developments, and to fulfil requirements identified by Ofwat. However, sewerage plans will not be finalised until the details of the proposal are submitted for approval.
4.236 Whilst there are still uncertainties about the availability of water for Swindon Borough, it is not considered by the Water Cycle Study findings to be a barrier 
to the Local Plan’s proposed scale of and locations for development.  Thames 
Water and the Environment Agency consider that the demand for water within the Severn and South West Oxfordshire (SWOX) resource zone, in the 
period to 2026, can be met with a combination of demand management 
measures and planned water resource infrastructure schemes.
4.237 In light of the study’s conclusions, policy IN2 seeks to ensure that there is adequate water supply, surface water, foul drainage and sewerage treatment capacity to serve all new developments.  Developers will be required to demonstrate that there is adequate capacity both on and off 
the site to serve the development and that it would not lead to problems 
for existing users.  In some circumstances this may make it necessary for 
developers to carry out appropriate studies to ascertain whether the 
proposed development will lead to overloading of existing infrastructure.  Where there is a capacity problem and no improvements are programmed by the water company, the Borough Council will require the developer 
to fund appropriate improvements which must be completed prior to 
occupation of the development.
4.238 The policy also provides for the development or expansion of water supply or sewerage waste/water treatment facilities, including sewage sludge, to normally be permitted either where needed to serve existing or proposed  new development, or in the interests of long term water supply and waste 
water management (provided that the need for such facilities outweighs  
any adverse land use or environmental impact that any such adverse  
impact is minimised).
 Additional Evidence Base
4.239 Additional information includes:
   Thames Water Resources Management Plan 2010-35;
   Thames Water Resources Five Year Plan 2010-15; and
   Swindon Water Cycle Study Phase 2 (2014).Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
94 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies  
4.240 Future wastewater treatment and water supply related to the provision of  
new development, will be addressed through the application of this policy and through:
    Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans   
  identified in the evidence base above;
    Working closely with the Environment Agency and Thames Water  
  (as the responsible utility service infrastructure provider for wastewater  
  and water supply) to continue to assess, understand and monitor   
  requirements;
    Developer contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
    The development management process; and,
    The implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
4.241 The Duty to Co-operate Statement also signposts where co-operation and collaboration with key stakeholders has influenced decision-making on the approach to water supply and wastewater.
Policy IN3: ICT and Telecommunications
a. All Information Communication Technology (ICT) and  
 telecommunications proposals should be sited and designed in 
  such a way that the appearance of the surrounding area is  
 considered. Proposals for ICT and telecommunications  
 developments shall be supported provided that:
   the siting of the proposal and any other additional equipment   
  involved with the development does not unduly detract from the  
  appearance of the surrounding area or form an adversely   
  intrusive addition to the street scene; and
   the amenities of any neighbouring sites are not unacceptably   
  harmed by the proximity of the proposed telecommunication  
  development; and
   the colour and profile are sympathetic to the sites surroundings   
  and the size of the development is kept to a technical minimum  
  to ensure any adverse impact on the environment is minimised;  
  and
   there is justification demonstrating that all alternative sites and  
  potential mast sharing opportunities which fulfil the functional  
  requirements of the development have been assessed, including  
  the use of existing buildings and structures.
b. Development should where possible make provision to incorporate   
 super-fast broadband.95 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.242 Information Communication Technology (ICT) and telecommunications 
equipment, especially mobile communications has fast become integral 
to the growth of many business operations as well as being widely used by individuals. It is therefore essential that everybody should have access to a wide range of services and have the opportunity to use the latest 
technologies. The NPPF also states that the development of high speed 
broadband and other communication networks can play a vital role in enhancing the provision of local community facilities and services. Through the Local Plan, the Local Planning Authority will support the facilitation of 
telecommunication growth whilst ensuring adverse impacts to the character 
of the built form or physical environment is minimised.
4.243 This criteria based policy aims to provide a thorough assessment for all telecommunication proposals, whether they are prior approval applications or developments requiring full planning permission. It provides guidance for 
both new and replacement masts, whilst providing the flexibility to allow for 
an efficient expansion of the network and to meet the demands imposed by technological advancements.
4.244 Appropriate camouflage and screening may be necessary where the proposed development would cause an intrusive visual impact on the surroundings. Reasonable justification should be provided by the applicant 
to demonstrate why the chosen site is the preferred option.  In order to 
ensure this has been reasonably considered, the Local Planning Authority will require evidence demonstrating that mast sharing has been investigated and that alternative sites have been explored. The onus is on the developer 
to demonstrate that the preferred site is the most suitable for the proposal; 
without sufficient information being provided the Local Planning Authority have the right to refuse an application. They should also seek to demonstrate how the needs of the occupiers will be met. 
4.245 The NPPF also requires the applicant to supply information relating to the 
outcomes of any consultations with local communities or other organisations 
which have an interest in the proposal. It is especially important to gain these views if the proposed siting is close to a sensitive location such as a school or hospital. In accordance with the Mobile Operators Association’s (MOA) Ten Commitments, the proposal must be able to demonstrate that it complies with 
the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 
Guidelines for public exposure. 
4.246 Fast broadband connection is an increasing critical factor for businesses and residents alike. Developers are encouraged to engage with broadband providers at the earliest opportunity to enable the highest possible internet 
connection speeds to be provided in new developments.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.247 Additional information includes:
   Mobile Operators Association’s (MOA) Ten CommitmentsPart 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
96 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.248 The provision of ICT and telecommunications proposals will be addressed 
through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   Working closely with the Telecommunications Industry and their   
 representatives to continue to assess, understand and monitor    
 requirements;
   The development management process; and
   The implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Policy IN4: Low Carbon and Renewable Energy
 a. Appropriate renewable and low carbon energy infrastructure  
 which has benefits for local communities and the local economy  
 will be encouraged and supported. Proposals for low carbon and  
 renewable energy infrastructure, including large-scale freestanding  
 installations, will be assessed under national policies and against  
 the following:
   social and economic benefits (including local job  
  creation opportunities);
   the impacts on, and benefits to local communities; and,
   environmental impact.
 Any heat produced as part of a renewable energy or combined heat  
 and power (CHP) installation should be productively used on-site   
 or linked to a district energy network. Progress will be measured   
 against a local low carbon electricity target of 200MWe by 2020.
b. A locally delivered modular district energy network shall be enabled  
 and supported which is:
   focused around areas of high and constant heat demand; and
   capable of incorporating additional low and zero carbon energy  
  sources and generation technologies e.g. biomass, waste and  
  combined heat and power.
c. Energy efficiency and low carbon energy generation schemes   
 brought forward by communities, or with major community benefits,  
 will be encouraged and supported in principle.
d. Proposals for wind turbines, including any ancillary buildings and  
 structures, shall be permitted only where there is no unacceptably  
 adverse impact due to noise, shadow flicker, amplitude modulation,  
 reflected light or electronic disturbance on:
   the built and natural heritage; and/or
   the amenity of properties; and/or
   areas important for tourism or recreational use of the countryside.
 Visual impact shall be minimised through siting, landscaping, design  
 and use of materials.97 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Energy Infrastructure
4.249 The UK Renewable Energy Strategy sets out to achieve 15% of energy to be 
generated from renewable sources by 2020.  Policy IN4 aims to contribute to 
this and to facilitate a secure, sustainable and affordable energy supply for 
communities and businesses in Swindon Borough. The policy seeks to achieve an increase in the level of renewable energy generation in Swindon Borough through integrating renewable / low carbon energy in new development 
and providing a positive framework for considering large scale proposals for 
renewable/low carbon development.
4.250 Local sources of renewable and low carbon energy currently meet less than 1% of Swindon Borough’s current energy demand (RegenSW).  The 
development of local and more sustainable sources of electricity and heat 
is therefore a priority to support a long-term low carbon growth and secure energy future for Swindon Borough, whilst addressing wider climate change 
issues.  The main large-scale opportunities for renewable and low carbon 
energy in Swindon Borough are likely to be from wind, energy from waste, biomass and solar. In October 2013, the Council adopted a target to install 
200MW of low carbon electricity by 2020. Work by Regen SW, the South West’s 
independent centre of sustainable energy expertise, indicates this figure aligns well with a local contribution to the national target of 15% of energy from low carbon sources by 2020 and is therefore a useful measure to monitor 
renewable energy projects in the lead up to 2020.
4.251 Whether through direct connection to an energy scheme (e.g. district heating) or through access to a more sustainable energy supply and jobs 
associated with the low carbon economy, communities and businesses are well placed to benefit from renewable energy schemes.  The policy aims to maximise community and business benefits of renewal energy development 
whilst providing a robust framework for assessing potential impacts. 
4.252 The Borough Council has adopted a Sustainable Energy Framework to ensure that new skills and jobs are secured locally as we move to a low carbon 
economy. Linked to this, a business focused Energy Partnership, which brings together key stakeholders in Swindon, has been formed to ensure best 
practice is shared and development occurs in an integrated way.
 District Energy Network
4.253 A local district energy network supplying heat, cooling, and electricity and 
utilising waste to energy, biomass and other efficient energy sources has the potential to deliver a sustainable and cost effective energy supply to business and residents in Swindon Borough. Greatest potential in the short term is within 
Swindon’s urban area where heat demand is high from employment areas in 
South Marston, Stratton and Swindon Central Area. In the medium to longer term the network could include additional heat sources and benefit existing 
communities in east Swindon, and support Town Centre regeneration. Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
98 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.254 An integrated approach to waste and energy is a significant opportunity in 
Swindon Borough.  Swindon Borough’s approach seeks to minimise waste, maximise reuse, recycling and composting and the delivery of additional 
waste treatment capacity.  The strategy aims to develop a waste to energy 
solution for non-recyclable municipal waste, which is a key opportunity to contribute to a more sustainable energy supply for Swindon Borough.
 Community Schemes
4.255 There are growing opportunities for communities to benefit from sustainable energy schemes. Whether brought forward through neighbourhood planning or otherwise, such schemes are encouraged and will be supported in principle.
 Wind Turbines
4.256 Wind turbines are a potential source of renewable energy in the Borough but should be considered in the context of their surroundings. The NPPF (para. 97) 
states that Local Planning Authorities should design their policies to maximise 
renewable and low carbon energy development while ensuring that adverse 
impacts are addressed satisfactorily, including cumulative landscape and 
visual impacts. It adds that in assessing the likely impacts of potential wind energy development in identifying suitable areas, and in determining 
planning applications for such development, Local Planning Authorities should 
follow the approach set out in the National Policy Statement for Renewable Energy Infrastructure (read with the relevant sections of the Overarching National Policy Statement for Energy Infrastructure, including that on aviation 
impacts). Large scale wind-turbines (individual or collectively) are unlikely to 
be supported in close proximity to residential properties, but will be assessed on a site by site basis according to the height of the turbine and local factors 
such as land-form, orientation, vegetation and other buildings
19. 
 North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
4.257 The North Wessex Downs AONB is particularly sensitive to developments  that are visually prominent, of an urban, suburban or industrial nature or  
are noisy.  Within or in close proximity to the AONB, large-scale renewable 
energy developments are unlikely to be supported, unless it can be proven that there are no detrimental effects on the environment, landscape and 
recreational opportunities and there are clear and assessed national or  
local economic benefits.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.258 Additional information includes:
   The UK Renewable Energy Strategy (2009);
   Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Site Allocations Local Plan (2013);
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Sustainable Development Policies (2009);
   Swindon District Energy Pre-Feasibility Study (2011);
19England has no separation distance, although noise limits suggest a minimum separation distance 
of 350 metres for a typical wind turbine (Deleted companion guide to PPS22). Scotland has guidance 
suggesting 2km (largely on visual impact) and Wales suggests 500m between a wind turbine and housing, however neither imposes a blanket restriction on development within these distances.  
This footnote is for information only.99 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   North Wessex Downs AONB - A Study of Landscape Sensitivities and   
 Constraints to Wind Turbine Development (2006); and
   North Wessex Downs AONB Position Statement on Renewable  
 Energy (2012).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.259 The delivery of renewable and low carbon energy schemes shall be achieved 
through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies  and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base above”; 
   Development of a Sustainable Design and Construction Supplementary  
 Planning Document setting out the detailed issues involved in determining  
 applications for large scale renewable energy infrastructure including   
 factors such as noise, emissions and visual impact; 
   Ad hoc advice on key emerging issues as necessary, due to the rapidly   
 changing nature of related issues;
   Working in partnership with key stakeholders such as the Swindon Energy  
 Partnership, local communities, businesses, Parish councils and  
 amenity groups;
   The application of the Swindon Sustainable Energy Framework which sets  
  out a co-ordinated approach to the delivery of infrastructure through the  
 formation of an energy partnership involving key energy users in Swindon  
 Borough. Working in partnership with Forward Swindon, a further aim of the  
 Framework is to put in place an approach to reap the benefits of the   
 “green” economy by ensuring Swindon Borough benefits from jobs and   
 skills related to renewable energy and environmental technology; and,
   The development management process.
Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
100 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026    Theme 6:  
 Healthy and Supported Communities
4.260 Theme 6 sets out policies to:
   protect existing facilities where there is a demonstrable need for their   
 continued presence;
   provide new and/or expanded schools, colleges and higher  
 education provision;
   increase opportunities to use and access sport, leisure, cultural and   
 community facilities;
   ensure that required health and emergency service facilities are  
 provided; and,
   to integrate and co-locate services and facilities in flexible, multi-use   
 buildings which complement each other in terms of type of provision,   
 requirements and physical space needs.
4.261 Facilities which are covered by this theme include education, sport, leisure, 
social care, health, faith, library, youth, community and other “cultural” 
facilities, as well as facilities for the fire, ambulance and police services. Together, these types of facility play a key role in creating and sustaining healthy, inclusive communities.  Other, related facilities which also play a 
key role in the wellbeing of local communities include formal and informal 
green infrastructure spaces which are covered in Theme 7 “Natural and Built Environment” and particularly in Policy EN1: Green Infrastructure.
 Key Issues
4.262 Education, community and health facilities and services are central to maintaining our welfare and a healthy lifestyle throughout our lifetime.   
From schools to care facilities, they are important to all sections and all  
ages of society. 
4.263 The provision of these types of facility is key to the development of sustainable 
and inclusive communities, particularly given the scale of new development 
proposed in Swindon Borough. In turn, such provision will help to support the area’s ambition to grow and sustain the local economy, with an accessible and high quality urban environment.  The provision of green infrastructure as a 
key component of wider community provision, giving people the opportunity 
to access and use outdoor space and have active and healthy lifestyles, is covered in Theme 7 of the Plan. Whilst the retention and improvement of 
existing facilities is important, current gaps in provision and needs arising from 
new development will also need to be met.The Education, Community and Health Facilities theme’s policies flow directly from and help to implement the following Strategic Objectives set 
out in Part 2 of this Plan:
SO2: Infrastructure Requirements
SO5: EducationSO6: Community Facilities
SO8: Culture and Leisure
SO9: Green Infrastructure1014.264 The provision of such facilities is undergoing change, with less funding 
available since the start of the recession for the development of new public 
service buildings and providing the services themselves.  New solutions 
are likely to be a key part of future provision including integrated services, providers and buildings, particularly as the role of the public and private sectors in their provision changes.  At the same time, the impact of the 
recession has meant that there is less funding available to be secured 
through developer contributions (section 106 payments) and other funding mechanisms used to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities arising from needs generated from new development. 
 Addressing the key issues
4.265 In order to support community facilities, the Local Plan introduces policies 
which require new facilities as a result of needs placed upon facilities and 
services arising from the additional resident population in the Borough. This will ensure that new development pays for new community infrastructure where 
necessary.  Policies will also help to ensure that provision is made in the right 
places at the right time.
4.266 In addition to the policies in this Plan, the Infrastructure Delivery Plan has a key role in helping to identify, co-ordinate and deliver wellbeing facilities. 
4.267 Although Swindon Borough is relatively prosperous there are challenges around health, education and economic inequality between communities. As well as a growing population, Swindon Borough is experiencing a large 
increase in the proportion of elderly residents, which presents a particular 
challenge in meeting that part of the population’s health and social needs. It is also important to meet the needs of Swindon Borough’s young population, the more deprived communities, the ethnic minority population and those 
with other specific needs.
4.268 Development will be located and designed in order to promote social 
inclusion and community cohesion. The physical environment cannot determine social outcomes; however it can contribute to and influence them. Facilities for social, community and faith purposes are important in promoting 
social cohesion. Such facilities can be in public ownership, including Parish/
Town Councils, as well as community and voluntary groups. Such facilities should be accessible to all and well located to the population they serve.
4.269 The Active Swindon Partnership highlights significant health inequalities between affluent and deprived communities. There is a particular need to 
invest in deprived communities.
4.270 Part of the response to this issue and also in response to the desire for healthy 
and active communities in the Borough is dealt with in Theme 7 “Natural and Built Environment”, where active and healthy lifestyles are supported 
through the application of policies which cover the provision of green 
infrastructure, protection and management of outdoor space and protection and enhancement of sports and leisure facilities.  The provision of new and 
improved green infrastructure will help to increase opportunities to walk and 
cycle, thereby encouraging more sustainable travel choices, and promote good health and mental wellbeing.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
102 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.271 The Borough Council is promoting the concept of Lifetime Homes and Lifetime 
Neighbourhoods.  Lifetime Homes aim to ensure a home is flexible enough to 
meet existing and changing needs of most households, from young families to older people and those with temporary or permanent physical impairments. 
Lifetime Neighbourhoods are welcoming, accessible, and inviting for 
everyone, regardless of age, health or disability.  They are sustainable in terms of changing climatic conditions, and provide housing, transport, service, public services, civic space and amenities which make it possible for 
everyone to take part in the life of the community around them.
4.272 There are 62 primary schools and 11 secondary schools within the Borough. As Swindon has expanded it has led to peaks and troughs of school place 
demand. At present there is significant pressure for places in the north of Swindon, the Town Centre and Old Town and there is an increasing surplus  
of places in the east of Swindon. There are 3 primary and 3 secondary  
special schools, supported by 12 Special Resource Provisions attached to 
mainstream schools.
4.273 Post-16 provision is supplied predominately by Swindon College and New College, complemented by Sixth Forms at Ridgeway and St Josephs, Swindon Academy and Uplands. The proportion of Swindon Borough’s residents with a degree or equivalent qualification is lower than the national average
20, in part 
due to the lack of a university in the town.
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 6
4.274 Key evidence base documents for healthy and supported communities include:
   The Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2013-2016) 
   Cultural & Leisure Strategy for Swindon 2003-2013 (2003);
   Delivering Excellence for Swindon 2008-2013 (2008);
   Strategy for Major Sports Facilities Provision 2009-2026 (2009);
   Swindon Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (2009) and Review (2012);
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2012-26:Revised    
 Consultation Document (2011);
   Swindon Playing Pitch Strategy (2007);
   Wiltshire Fire and Rescue Service’s Community Risk Strategy for Swindon  
 Borough 2006-2026 (2011);
   Policing Plan for Wiltshire 2012/13 (2012); and
   Swindon Borough Council Library Strategy 2011 (2011).
202011 Census103 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.275 The Community Strategy aims to ensure children and young people are safe 
and healthy, enjoy and achieve, make a positive contribution and achieve economic well-being. The aim is to create a ‘learning town’ at Swindon, with 
a seamless partnership of schools, a university, colleges and early years. This 
approach will develop the quality and skills of Swindon Borough’s workforce ensuring business needs are met and to provide the best opportunities for 
young people in Swindon Borough gaining levels of achievement above  
the national average.Policy CM1: Education
 a. To meet the long-term primary and secondary school place needs   
 the provision for the following should be made:
   11 new primary schools (or 24 new forms of entry in total);
   3 new secondary schools, expansion of existing schools and the  
  use of projected surplus places (or 35 forms of entry in total); and
   Additional temporary primary and secondary school  
  accommodation to manage the temporary demographic  
  peak in pupils
b. To meet the long-term needs for post-16 education provision,  
 the following will be enabled: 
   expansion of Swindon College and New College;
   provision of a 13-19 year-old Specialist Vocational Centre;
   provision of new 6th Forms at existing and new Secondary  
  Schools; and,
   a new university or enhanced tertiary facility in Swindon’s  
  Central Area.
c. To meet long-term Special Education Needs (SEN) the following  
 will be enabled:
   the extension of existing SEN facilities;
   provision of Special Resource facilities at new and existing   
  primary and secondary schools; and
   provision of a new 0-19 SEN facility as part of an integrated  
  education campus for severe, profound and multiple  
  learning difficulties.
d. To meet the long-term early years needs the following will  
 be enabled:
   the provision of nursery facilities at all new primary schools; and
   the provision of facilities by the private and voluntary sector.
e. Schools should be sited within the heart of their communities and  
 be designed to provide safe walking and cycling access.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
104 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Schools
4.276 There will be a need for an additional 24 forms of entry for primary schools and 
35 forms of entry for secondary schools to accommodate growth in the child population and changes in school organisation. Additionally the temporary peak in pupil demand must be managed without over-providing schools 
that would create a revenue burden and possibly lead to school closures in 
the longer-term. Creative strategies will be required in order to manage any peak generated from needs, having regard to the wider provision for primary 
schooling at the time and including the possible temporary use of other 
buildings, or providing schools earlier than programmed.
 Post-16 Provision
4.277 Growth in post-16 places is anticipated both as a consequence of growth and to meet changing national requirements.  In practice this will only apply 
to young people not in education, employment or training  (NEET).  Based 
on Swindon Borough’s existing NEET figures, this will be at around 600 pupils a year, or 6 forms of entry across the Borough. 
 Special Education Needs
4.278 Swindon’s Special Education Needs Inclusion Policy aims to give children and 
young people with Special Education Needs (SEN) every opportunity to reach 
their full potential in an inclusive environment.  The strategy aims to maximise integration of SEN at mainstream schools where possible, largely through attached Special Resource Provision.  However there will remain a need to 
educate children and young people with severe learning difficulties and 
profound and multiple learning difficulties in a specialist provision.
4.279 A new 0-19 special school for severe, profound and multiple learning disabilities will be needed to accommodate the impact of housing growth, ideally co-located with a secondary school.  There may also be a need 
to expand existing schools catering for children and young people with 
behavioural, emotional and social difficulties if demand increases.
 Early Years Provision
4.280 For the purposes of long-term planning a nursery should be provided with every new primary school. The private sector will provide the remaining proportion of nursery facilities to meet market demand.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.281 Additional information includes:
   Swindon School Place Planning Study: Future Demand to 2026 (2009);
   Swindon School Place Planning Study Update (2011);
   Children and Young People’s Plan for Swindon 2008-2011 (2008); and
   Swindon Borough School Organisation Plan 2010-2013 (2010).105 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies  
4.282 New education related development will be managed and assessed through 
the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the   
 “Evidence Base” above; 
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document; 
   Any subsequent DPDs;
   New community development framework plans, design codes  
 and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private or academic sector  
 funding, developer contributions and/or the Community  
 Infrastructure Levy;
   The development management process; and
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, further work on the  
 detailed location and specification of individual development sites  
 undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site allocations work,  
 development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and other  
 Community Plans.
Policy CM2: Active, Healthy and Safe Lifestyles
 a. Active, healthy and safe lifestyles will be enabled by:
   increasing opportunities to walk and cycle and encouraging  
  more sustainable travel choices;
   increasing access to green spaces to promote health and  
  mental wellbeing;
   designing out crime and designing in health;
   the provision of open space, sports and leisure facilities;
   the protection and improvement in the stock of playing pitches; 
   the provision of cultural, health, fire, police, faith and multi-use   
  community facilities; and
   Increase opportunities to experience and engage with nature.
b. To meet demand, promote sporting participation and achievement,  
 the following will be enabled:
   measures to increase the capacity and quality of existing  
  sports centres; 
   the provision of new sports centres;
   the development of  a network of sporting centres; andPart 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
106 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.283 This theme encompasses not only health and social care but also the 
promotion of active and healthy lifestyles, community safety, inclusiveness 
and social cohesion. To realise a greater benefit from a coordinated approach to these issues, Swindon Borough is adopting an integrated service delivery process.
4.284 Design will play an integral part in the delivery of successful facilities which 
encourage active and healthy lifestyles.  In order to help ensure that the 
opportunities that new facilities can provide are realised and their full potential met, good design will play a key role in ensuring that facilities and environments are safe and designed in a way to encourage return use.
 Sport and Activity
4.285 There is a good distribution of sports facilities across the Borough, but there are issues around age and capacity of some. Sports facilities in the Borough include Oasis, the Link Centre, Croft Sport Centre, Dorcan Recreational 
Complex, the Health Hydro, the County Ground and the Haydon Centre, 
as well as a range of tennis, golf and other specialist facilities. Some sport facilities are owned and maintained by Parish/Town Councils, and the private sector also has an important role in provision and offering choice.
4.286 Although physical activity levels within Swindon Borough are increasing, there is a high proportion of the Borough’s population that is not achieving 
the level of activity required to impact positively on their health. The Borough 
Council aims to increase physical activity, promote it as part of everyday life and increase the capacity of facilities to support it. The Local Plan has 
an important role to play in creating an environment that promotes activity    the co-location of sports centres with schools.
c. To improve the cultural offer in Swindon Borough the following  
 will be enabled: 
   the development of  a cultural quarter in Swindon Central Area  
  as a focus for cultural activities; 
   the promotion of Swindon Central Area as a key centre for the  
  arts and creative industries; and
   the enhancement of tourism and cultural venues to help sustain  
  their viability, particularly:
    The Wyvern Theatre;
    The Steam Museum;
    The Science Museum at Wroughton;
    The Swindon & Cricklade Railway; and
    The Wilts & Berks Canal.
d. Proposals for the redevelopment of Swindon Town Football Club  
 at the County Ground will be supported where they deliver  
 enhanced facilities and do not conflict with Town Centre    
 regeneration.107 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026through high quality design, access to playing pitches and green space and 
creating opportunities to walk and cycle safely, and ensuring that existing facilities and opportunities are protected and enhanced.
4.287 Policy EN1 and EN3 will also play a key role in meeting these aspirations, 
facilitating the provision of informal and formal green networks and open 
space. 
4.288 Protecting and investing in existing sports facilities is the most efficient way of increasing capacity in the network. Community use of school and college facilities contribute towards local access to both indoor sports facilities and playing pitches without great cost and supports the role of schools in the 
heart of their community. New facilities will also be needed to serve new 
communities and to increase access for existing communities, particularly where co-location with schools is not achievable.
4.289 The following have been identified in the Strategy for Major Sports Facilities Provision for Swindon as means of delivering a network of specialist sports 
centres:
   The re-development of the Oasis as a regional leisure facility at the heart of  
 the network; and
   Increased capacity at local sports centres including the County Ground,  
 Oakfields, Dorcan Recreation Complex, Espirit Academy, Haydon Leisure  
 Centre, Croft Sports Centre and the Link Centre to establish a sporting  
 specialism such as athleticism cricket, football, rugby, netball, hockey,  
 gymnastics, indoor sports, ice sports and swimming, whilst continuing to  
 serve the local community.
 Leisure and Culture
Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
108 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.290 Leisure and culture has a distinct role to play in Swindon’s physical, economic 
and social development. Leisure and cultural activities include; the historic environment, arts and theatres, museums and galleries, leisure, sport and 
recreation and libraries. Examples are the Wyvern Theatre, STEAM Museum, 
the Science Museum at Wroughton, Swindon Art Gallery, Richard Jefferies Museum and the Museum of Computers. Swindon Central Area, as the most 
accessible location, should be the main focus for this type of development.
4.291 The attractiveness and diversity of activities for residents and visitors will be crucial in driving regeneration, attracting inward investment and supporting 
recruitment and retention, especially of higher skilled and higher earning workers.  Leisure and culture also has a role to play in community cohesion and social inclusion breaking down barriers and bringing people together. It 
also has a role to play in promoting Swindon’s sense of identity and the image 
of the town.
4.292 Swindon Town Football Club plays an important role in the town’s cultural identity, providing a source of inspiration with the potential to encourage sporting excellence. With the costs involved in redeveloping an ageing 
stadium, a commercial approach to redevelopment is recognised. The scale 
and mix of uses should not conflict with Town Centre regeneration.
4.293 The Swindon & Cricklade Railway is an important visitor attraction and heritage asset. The Borough Council is supportive of the Swindon & Cricklade Railway Society’s ambitions to extend the track and provide a link to the Swindon to Kemble mainline where it is compatible with the delivery of the 
Cricklade Country Way, the role and amenity of the Mouldon Hill Country 
Park, the re-instatement of the Wilts & Berks Canal and the re-doubling of the mainline rail track.
4.294 The Science Museum at Wroughton is also an important visitor attraction and heritage asset. The Borough Council supports development in support of the 
museum activities as long as they are in line with the sustainability principles 
and in accordance with other policies in this plan as set out in Policy RA2.
4.295 Although Swindon Borough caters well for young children, the community 
have identified that investment is needed to provide activities for older 
children and young people, such as internet access, pool and table football and recreational spaces where young people can meet. Integrating facilities for young people with other community facilities will be key to their delivery.
4.296 This need for closer integration and multi-use of facilities and services across 
community, cultural, faith, voluntary and public sector services in particular is 
recognised in Policy CM3: Integrating Facilities and Delivering Services.109 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.297 Active, healthy and safe lifestyles will be promoted and leisure and sports 
opportunities delivered through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the   
 “Evidence Base” above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document; 
   Any subsequent DPDs; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding,   
 developer contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The development management process; and,
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish  
 and other Community Plans.
Policy CM3: Integrating Facilities and Delivering 
Services  
a. Increased local and integrated service delivery will be supported  
 in conjunction with local communities, particularly:
   flexible multi-use buildings in public and community ownership;
   co-location of sports centres and playing pitches with schools;
   agreements to use schools and other public buildings for  
  community use;
   co-location of doctor, dentist and pharmacy facilities; and
   to share and integrate police, fire and ambulance facilities.
b. To meet the long-term health, social care and emergency service   
 needs in the Borough and the wider population the following  
 will be enabled:
   expansion of the Great Western Hospital as required;
   enhanced and new social care and local healthcare facilities;   
  and
   a reorganisation of existing fire infrastructure and provision of  
  new fire stations.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
110 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Emergency Services
4.298 The Fire Service provides cover from Central, Westlea and Stratton Fire 
Stations. Current operational effectiveness and response times for the Fire Service cannot be met at proposed growth areas by the existing distribution 
of fire stations. Therefore a redistribution of assets is proposed including the 
provision of new fire stations and co-location with other emergency services, particularly the Ambulance Service to manage growth.  To meet future provision the following have been identified :
   shared emergency service facilities at Drove Ambulance Station;
   a new fire station in the northeast of Swindon if required;
   a new fire station in the southeast of Swindon if required; and
   increased capacity of Westlea Fire Station.
4.299 Wiltshire Police are likely to continue to operate from Gablecross Police Station supported by shared public service facilities where possible and appropriate.
 Health and Social Care 
4.300 The Great Western Hospital provides acute and emergency health care supported by a range of GP surgeries, dentists, optometrists and pharmacies.  
Swindon Borough is adopting an integrated approach to health and social 
care that aims to increase access to services, increase patient choice, provide more personalised services and deliver services more locally. The 
Plan aims to increase capacity and widen the scope of services provided 
at existing local health and social care facilities and to provide new facilities to support the increase in population as a consequence of growth. The NHS Trust has identified a need for further land to accommodate growth adjacent 
to the Great Western Hospital, which will continue to deliver acute and 
emergency healthcare. The Swindon Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG)  have indicated that the typical ratio is 1,750-1,850 patients per GP.
 Multi-Purpose Community Facilities
4.301 The Borough Council and its public sector partners are committed to increasing access to facilities for the community, increasing value and the efficient use of public assets and delivering services more locally.  Providing access to existing schools, their playing pitches and public buildings can 
create a local community resource without the need for major investment 
and provide a more efficient and cost effective way of utilising public assets.  Co-location of local healthcare facilities will reduce costs and create a  one-stop-shop for healthcare needs, and the co-location of ambulance,  
fire and police services will also help increase the efficiency and reduce  costs for the public sector.
 Social Inclusion
4.302 Homes and other buildings should be designed to overlook streets and spaces to reduce the fear of crime and opportunities to commit crime. 111 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.303 The delivery of integrated facilities and services shall be achieved through the 
application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence base” above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document;
   Any subsequent DPDs; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding,   
 developer contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The development management process; and,
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, further work on the   
 detailed location and specification of individual development sites   
 undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site allocations work,  
 development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and other  
 Community Plans.
 Provision of New or Extended Facilities
4.304 Proposals for new facilities or the extension of existing community facilities will be supported where they promote the principle of creating and/or maintaining sustainable communities, for example through the co-location 
of services on a single site. The development of new sites should be located 
within or adjacent to existing settlements, and be well located to the intended catchment population to maximise the opportunity to travel to these facilities 
by sustainable transport means, particularly walking and cycling.Policy CM4: Maintaining and Enhancing  
Community Facilities
a. Proposals for new or extended community facilities will be  
 supported, particularly where:
   the site is located within or adjacent to existing settlements; 
   it is accessible for all members of the community and promotes  
  social inclusion, and
   if possible they can be co-located with other community uses.
b. Proposals that result in the loss of established community facilities   
 shall only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that:
   commercial facilities have been genuinely marketed for the   
  established use for at least one year; and
   the facility is no longer economically viable for the established  
   use, or there is a suitable and sustainable alternative to that  
  facility nearby, or the facility is no longer required.  
Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
112 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.305 For larger developments, more significant community facilities should be 
provided, facilities that would normally not have been delivered by the private sector such as the provision of swimming and sports halls and fit for 
purpose full sized synthetic turf pitches.
 Protection of Established Facilities
4.306 In order to create and maintain sustainable communities it is also important to 
retain existing community facilities, such as GP surgeries and community halls. 
4.307 There continues to be increasing concern over the loss of existing community facilities, and particularly so in rural areas. Typical examples include small convenience stores, post offices and pubs, which can perform a vital function in terms of the economic and social well-being of such areas, although other 
facilities to which this Part relates may also be under threat during the course 
of the plan period. 
4.308 Where a development proposal comes forward which involves the loss of an existing community facility, this may be appropriate where sufficient evidence 
is provided to demonstrate that there is either a suitable and sustainable 
alternative and/or that the facility is no longer required and/or that the facility is longer economically viable.
4.309 Community facilities include:
   Public Halls (including community/youth centres), 
   Church Halls;
   Post Offices;
   Local shops within both urban and rural areas;
   Indoor and outdoor sports facilities;
   Schools and non-residential education and training centres;
   Places of worship;
   Libraries;
   Day nurseries/crèches;
   Health centres, clinics, consulting rooms (including GP surgeries and  
 dental practices);
   Museums, art galleries;
   Public Houses;
   Leisure facilities;
   Open space;
   Emergency services;
   Cultural event space; and
   Cemetery/ burial ground.
4.310 This above list is not exhaustive and all proposals will be considered on a  
case by case basis, taking into account the importance of the facility to  
the local community.113 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.311 During the lifetime of the Plan existing facilities may become no longer ‘fit for 
purpose’, through for example legislative requirements; or where it can be 
demonstrated there is no longer a need for that particular facility. In these 
circumstances then the re-use for purposes other than community use may be appropriate. The appropriate use for such sites will need to be determined on a site-by-site basis.
4.312 An established facility may become economically unviable, particularly where this involves a commercially run facility, for example a post office or 
pub. The Local Planning Authority would expect clear and genuine efforts 
to be made and demonstrated to market the premises for the established use, over a period of at least one year. In some instances, multiple use or 
investigation of assistance (e.g. new technologies, grants) may significantly 
improve economic viability, particularly where there is active community support to retain the facility.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.313 Additional information includes:
   Wiltshire County and Swindon Borough Rural Facilities Survey (2008);
   Swindon Borough Sustainable Neighbourhoods Study (2009); and,
   Shaping Your Community Report (2011).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.314 Maintaining and enhancing community facilities will be enabled through the 
application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document;
   Any subsequent DPDs; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding,   
 developer contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The development management process; and,
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, further work on the  
 detailed location and specification of individual development sites  
 undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site allocations  
 work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and other   
 Community Plans.Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
114 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Theme 7: 
 Natural and Built Environment
4.315 Theme 7 sets out policies to:
   protect, enhance and manage the natural and built environment; and
   ensure that the appropriate provisions are in place to deliver green and  
 open space as part of new development.
 Key Issues
4.316 The protection of and improvement to both Swindon Borough’s natural  
and built environment is important to those living in, working in and visiting  
the Borough.  
4.317 In the context of the natural environment, Swindon Borough has a wealth of 
natural and “man-made” green spaces, open spaces and habitats. These spaces are part of our everyday lives: where we work, do business and 
learn, the way we travel around, where we play, celebrate and spend our 
leisure time.  They play host to wildlife, are part of our cultural heritage and sit in a landscape shaped over the centuries.  Their presence, cumulatively, 
contribute to providing cleaner air in the urban environment, help attenuate 
flood risk, and help mitigate against carbon dioxide emissions and the wider challenge of a changing climate.
4.318 Given its importance, high quality green infrastructure will need to continue to be integral to new development in the Borough, which will also need to respect flood risk areas and not exacerbate existing flood risk.  
4.319 The need for improvement to Swindon Borough’s built environment is captured through Theme 1 and whilst there is a need to make the town’s urban landscape of much higher quality than exists at present, there are, 
nonetheless, heritage assets which will play a key role in any long-term urban 
renaissance.  Heritage assets in rural areas can also play a key role in cultural, historic and landscape terms.  Where heritage assets are not protected by 
national designations but are valued locally, policies within this theme can 
afford them some protection.
4.320 Valued green spaces and urban landscapes play a major role in enriching our quality of life, environment and the economy.  They give us a sense of place and are important to our physical and mental health.  The policies in 
this theme will play a key role in helping to ensure such value is recognised, 
retained and enhanced.The Natural and Built Environment theme’s policies flow directly from and help to implement the following Strategic Objectives set out in 
Part 2 of this Plan:
SO1: High Quality Sustainable Development;
SO2: Infrastructure Requirements;
SO6: Community and Health;
SO9: Green Infrastructure; and,
SO10: The Natural and Built Environment.115 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Addressing the Key Issues
4.321 Planning has a key role to play in helping to respond to many of these issues.  
Whilst the Local Planning Authority’s and planning system’s key role in helping 
to deliver positive change is as an enabler, other mechanisms, legislation 
and bodies (private and public sector) have key roles in the protection and enhancement of the natural and built environment (including, but not 
limited to, the Environment Agency, Natural England, Historic England, private 
developers and the Council’s Environmental Health team).
 Key Evidence Base for Theme 7
4.322 Key evidence base documents for natural and built environment include:
   A Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026: Revised Consultation  
 Document (2011);
   Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Report (2004);
   Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Review  
 (2011 and 2014);
   Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan (2005 and 2010);
   Great Western Community Forest Plan (1994, 2002-2027);
   Swindon Water Cycle Study (Phase 1) (2007);
   Swindon Water Cycle Study (Phase 2) (2014);
   Swindon Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2008); 
   Swindon Borough Core Strategy Sustainable Development Policies (2009);
   Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Development Framework;
   Swindon Municipal Waste Management Strategy (2007);
   Swindon District Energy Pre-Feasibility Study (2011);
   The North Wessex Downs AONB Management Plan 2009-14 (2009); and
   A Climate Change Action Plan for Swindon Borough 2006-2010 (2008).
Policy EN1: Green Infrastructure Network
a. In accordance with the Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure  
 Strategy development shall protect and enhance green  
 infrastructure and assets as identified in Appendix 4.  This includes  
 the requirement that development must provide for the protection  
 and integration of visually or ecologically important existing trees,  
 hedges and woodlands. Development that would result in the loss  
 or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats, including ancient  
 woodland and the loss of aged or veteran trees found outside  
 ancient woodland will only be permitted where the need for,  
 and benefits of, the development in that location clearly  
 outweigh the loss.
b. Development shall provide and design green infrastructure to  
 integrate with existing green corridors identified on the Policies Map,  
  to maximise its connections and functions and ensure the  
 sustainable maintenance and management of it.Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
116 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.323 Swindon Borough is set within a beautiful landscape context including the 
North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Upper Thames Vale.  It includes sections of the Ridgeway National Trail and is part of the Great Western Community Forest.  Swindon has a wealth of green spaces 
including Lydiard Park, Coate Water Country Park, Mouldon Hill Country Park, 
Stanton Park, The Lawns and the River Ray and River Cole corridors.  There are a range of biodiversity areas within the Borough including farmland, 
water and wetlands, grassland, gardens and woodland, including ancient 
woodland.  Protected species present include bats, water vole, white-clawed crayfish and great crested newts.  There are 9 nationally protected Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) including two geodiversity sites, 91 locally 
designated County Wildlife Sites and 5 Local Nature Reserves.
4.324 Community consultation has highlighted the importance of green spaces to 
the Borough’s residents.  Swindon Borough’s green infrastructure will continue to play a key role in Swindon Borough’s sustainable growth and regeneration and will sit at the heart of a far-reaching network of interconnected green 
spaces that:
   Connect and enrich biodiversity habitats and ecological networks;
   Enable the provision of education and visitor facilities to improve access   
 and opportunities for recreation and tourism;
   Contribute to the health and wellbeing of the residents of Swindon;
   Enhance landscape character and respect local distinctiveness;
   Help meet the challenges of climate change; and
   Realise the potential of historical and cultural heritage features to   
 contribute to local identity and sense of place.
4.325 The Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure (GI) Strategy provides a 
comprehensive plan for the protection of existing and the creation of new green infrastructure in the Borough. 
117 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
	  Figure 7: Green Infrastructure Concept Map
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
118 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.326 Where trees, hedges or woodlands are present on or adjacent to a 
development site a full report to BS5837:2012 ‘Trees in relation to design, 
demolition and construction – recommendations’ will be required when considering the proposal. This will define the minimum distance between 
construction and retained trees and hedges which the Borough Council may 
increase where appropriate to account for site specific circumstances and to eliminate post development pressure on trees, hedges and woodlands.
4.327 Where it is apparent that trees are at risk the Borough Council will make Tree Preservation Orders to protect individual trees, groups of trees or woodlands. 
4.328 The Green Infrastructure Strategy aims to realise a multifunctional and connected green infrastructure network throughout the Borough of Swindon, 
extending into adjoining areas.  Within developments it is important to 
ensure that green infrastructure is designed in such a way that opportunities to provide connectivity at Boroughwide and local level are taken forward.  Consideration of sustainable maintenance and management of the green 
infrastructure must be provided at the application stage.
4.329 In September 2012, the Wiltshire and Swindon Local Nature Partnership was formally recognised by the Secretary of State for Environment and Rural 
Affairs.  The Partnership, launched on the 6th March 2013 as Link2Nature,  has a key role in working with the Council in the preparation of the Local Plan to help protect and improve the natural environment in the Borough.  
 Additional Evidence Base
4.330 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026: Revised   
 Consultation Document (2011);
   Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Review  
 (2011 and 2014);
   The Natural Choice: Securing the Value of Nature (2011);
   The South West Regional Woodland and Forestry Framework (2005); and
   The Historic Environment Topic Paper (2012). 
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.331 Green infrastructure will be delivered through the application of this policy 
and through:
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026 Revised   
 Consultation Document (2011);
   Open Space Audit and Assessment Review (2011 and 2014);
   A Green Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document; 
   Swindon’s Urban Landscape Scale Conservation Framework (the   
 Landscape Scale revision of the Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan);
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Working in partnership with key stakeholders such as the Wiltshire Wildlife  
 Trust and the Local Nature Partnership;119 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document; 
   Any subsequent DPDs; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding,   
 developer contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The development management process;
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual  
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by  
 Parish and other Community Plans.
4.332 The Duty to Co-operate Statement also signposts where co-operation and 
collaboration with key stakeholders has influenced decision-making on the approach to the provision of green infrastructure.
4.333 The Great Western Community Forest (GWCF) covers the whole of Swindon Borough and reaches into neighbouring Oxfordshire and Wiltshire.  The purpose of GWCF is to create a multi-purpose forest throughout Swindon Borough from the centre of the town and into the surrounding countryside. Multi-purpose forestry encompasses the creation and use of a diverse natural 
and built environment including trees and woodland, grassland, wetlands, 
hedgerows, ponds and rivers.  A Forest Plan (1994, 2002- 2027) sets out GWCF objectives to meet environmental, social and economic aims. The GWCF is an integral part of developing Swindon Borough’s green infrastructure.
4.334 A priority for the GWCF is to achieve a substantial increase in tree and 
woodland cover across Swindon Borough. The range of functions and benefits 
trees provide are highlighted in Swindon’s GI Strategy and include carbon capture, biomass production, and control of micro-climate in addition to landscape, recreation, biodiversity and other eco-system service benefits. 
The GWCF has an overall target of achieving 30% woodland and tree cover 
across the Borough although the target for increasing woodland cover in particular areas will depend on location and landscape character. The Forest 
Plan gives further detail. The contribution made to increasing tree cover will 
be dependent to the scale and nature of the development.Policy EN2: Community Forest
Development shall contribute towards the aims and objectives of the Great Western Community Forest (GWFC) in Swindon. This will be achieved by:
  ensuring a net increase in tree cover through the planting of   
 new woodland and trees;
  creating or enhancing habitats for biodiversity, including built   
 structures in accordance with Polices EN1 and EN4; and
  ensuring access to local woodlands and opportunities for     
 communities and businesses to benefit from GWCF.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
120 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.335 The GWCF aims to deliver biodiversity improvements other than those 
associated with trees. By seeking to create a mosaic of bio-diverse habitats 
within a framework of woodland and trees, the GWCF provides a basis for a landscape scale approach to nature conservation throughout the town 
and into the surrounding countryside. Swindon Borough’s Green Infrastructure  
Strategy calls for the creation of a greater patch-work of semi-natural habitats across the town and, in that context, built structures can play an important role for example through installation of  green roofs and green walls.
4.336 The GWCF aims to provide opportunities for the Borough’s residents  
and businesses to directly benefit from multi-purpose forestry. Associated 
activities include:
   recreation, community events and activities and health promotion;
   tourism, food production, wood products and the developing carbon   
 economy; and
   land-based education and training.
4.337 By seeking to integrate social, environmental and economic functions 
of woodlands, trees and other habitats, GWCF will play a crucial role 
in contributing to Swindon Borough’s approach to developing green infrastructure. The spatial scale of GWCF provides the opportunity to link 
across authority boundaries into Wiltshire and Oxfordshire.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.338 Additional information includes:
   Great Western Community Forest Plan (1994, 2002-2027).
 Delivery and links with other key policies and strategies
4.339 The Community Forest will be delivered through the application of this policy 
and through: 
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Community Forest Supplementary Planning Guidance (2004);
   The development management process; and, 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which  
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then  
 consequently adopted by the Council, and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual   
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning,  
 site allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish  
 and other Community Plans.121 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
 Public Open Space
4.340 All open space of public value can be defined as primarily open land, whether 
green or hard surfaced, which offer important opportunities for sport and 
recreation and can act as a visual amenity.  This includes parks and gardens, public amenity areas, play areas, allotments, private and public playing fields, rivers, lakes, canals, nature reserves and other outdoor sports provision such as 
bowling greens. 
4.341 The value of open space is well acknowledged and the importance of protecting important areas is made clear in national guidance.  The Local 
Planning Authority considers that important open spaces should be protected from development unless particular circumstances apply.  There is considerable 
variation in the provision of open space across the Borough.
4.342 Whilst the Borough has a good level of access to a diverse range of open spaces, particularly to local and major open space, there is an unequal 
provision of open space within local communities.  The Open Space Audit and Assessment Review highlights these shortfalls in local provision, and also provides an assessment of quality and accessibility of open space.  The Swindon 
Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy highlights the requirement to improve 
quality of open space within the Borough.Policy EN3: Open Space
a. Residential development shall provide or contribute towards public   
 open space in line with open space standards as set out at  
 Appendix 3, including: 
   children and teenager’s play areas;
   outdoor sports facilities;
   general recreational areas; and
   allotments.
 Residential development of 25 dwellings or more should provide   
 open space on site.
b. Public open space assets defined on the Policies Map will be   
 protected from development unless:
   it can be demonstrated that alternative provision can be made   
  locally of equivalent or better size, quality and accessibility; or
   the proposed development is ancillary to the main use of the site  
  and protects its public open space function; or 
   the proposed development is subject to an open space    
  appraisal to ensure it does not adversely affect local needs and/ 
  or existing quality of open space within the area in accordance  
  with the Council’s Standards, as set out in Appendix 3 and in the  
  most recent Open Space Audit and Assessment; or
   when assessed against the open space appraisal, the proposed  
  development provides community benefit which outweighs the  
  loss of open space.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
122 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.343 The Borough Council acknowledges the particular importance and role of 
allotments, not only as open space but also in the production of local food and the health and social benefits they provide to the local community.
4.344 In terms of assessing local needs the Council will consider the wider community benefits of the development, together with the submitted open space 
appraisal work, which, may outweigh the loss of open space.  Such proposals 
may include a new school or community centre.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.345 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Report (2004) 
   Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Review (2014)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.346 The protection of existing and provision of new open space will be ensured through the application of this policy when considering proposals for 
development and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Implementation of the adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan;
   Discussion with developers at an early (preferably pre-application) stage of  
 requirements for open space;
   A Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document;
   Any subsequent DPDs; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; 
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding, developer  
 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   The development management process; and, 
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which   
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then consequently  
 adopted by the Council, and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual   
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site  
 allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and  
 other Community Plans.123 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 
4.347 Biodiversity applies to the variety of life on earth and describes the richness  
and variety of all living things, from the tiniest microscopic organism to the 
largest tree.  All development proposals have an impact in some way on a 
habitat and the species that use them.  Specific contributions will be sought 
to improve existing biodiversity sites, as defined on the Policies Map, and to create new sites to compensate for or mitigate the net biodiversity impact 
of development. This includes the preservation, restoration and re-creation 
of priority habitats, ecological networks and the protection and recovery of priority species populations. 
4.348 Biodiversity sites are varied both in scale and type.  Sites with national designation, such as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) are protected nationally.  In addition, North Meadow and Clattinger Farm, located within 
Wiltshire near Cricklade, are identified as a Special Area of Conservation (SAC).  
Local Nature Reserves are also protected and are of local importance.   County Wildlife Sites are sites designated as being of local conservation interest.  
4.349 It is vital that where development is proposed which would generate increased recreational pressure on protected biodiversity sites, suitable alternative 
provision is made to offset this impact. In addition, care should be taken in the 
design of development proposals to ensure compatibility between GI functions, for instance, where sustainable drainage systems are proposed.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.350 Additional information includes:
   Great Western Community Forest Plan (1994, 2002-2027)
   Swindon’s Urban Landscape Scale Conservation Framework (the Landscape  
 Scale revision of the Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan); and
   Landscape Character – A Landscape-scale framework for conservation in  
 Wiltshire and Swindon (July 2013)Policy EN4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity
a. Development will avoid direct and indirect negative impacts upon  
 biodiversity and geodiversity sites as identified on the Policies Map.  
 This will be achieved through sensitive site location and layout, and   
 by maintaining sufficient buffers and ecological connectivity with  
 the wider environment.  Damage or disturbance to local sites will  
 generally be unacceptable, other than in exceptional circumstances 
  where it has been demonstrated that such impacts are:
   unavoidable and reduced as far as possible or are outweighed  
  by other planning considerations in the public interest, and
   where appropriate compensation measures can be secured
b. All development, where appropriate shall protect and enhance  
 biodiversity and provide net local biodiversity gain.  Where this is  
 demonstrably not achievable, mitigation and compensation  
 measures will be agreed.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
124 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.351 Habitats and species which could be affected by development proposals 
will be protected and enhanced through the application of this policy and 
through:
   The application of national and local habitat designations;
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document;
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding, developer  
 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy; 
   New community development framework plans and masterplans;
   The development management process; and
   Nature Conservation Development Control Guidance Note (2007)
   
125 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.352 Landscape character and the historic landscape form an integral part of the 
green infrastructure (GI) network as detailed in Appendix 4. Development proposals should take account of their natural surroundings, incorporating and 
harmonising with the surroundings and the local landscape features.  In specific 
circumstances, Landscape Visual Impact Assessments or Environmental Impact Assessments may be required to fully assess landscape impacts and mitigation. 
It is essential that new development should help sustain and/or create 
landscapes with a strong sense of place and local identity and takes account of the following features:Policy EN5: Landscape Character and Historic 
Landscape 
a. Proposals for development will only be permitted when:
   the intrinsic character, diversity and local distinctiveness of   
  landscape within Swindon Borough are protected, conserved  
  and enhanced;
   the design of the development and materials used are    
  sympathetic to the surrounding landscape;
   unacceptable impacts upon the landscape are avoided; and,
   where other negative impacts are considered unavoidable, they  
  are satisfactorily mitigated.
b. In meeting the requirements of EN5a, applicants for development   
 should demonstrate how they have taken into account Landscape   
 Character Assessments and assessed the potential impact of the  
 proposal upon the following attributes of the landscape:
   existing landscape form, features, topography and character;
   the contribution of the landscape to biodiversity and wildlife;
   local geology and geo-diversity;
   views, visual amenity and the landscape setting;
   valuable historic and heritage areas and assets; 
   environmental amenity such as tranquillity & noise, pollution and  
  light pollution; and,
   the existing social, physical, economic and environmental roles  
  and functions of the landscape at the local and strategic scale  
  (for example as a place of cultural and leisure activity, living,   
  employment and separation of settlements).
c. The North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB)  
 is a nationally recognised area of landscape protection.  Proposals   
 within the Borough which are within and or abuts the North Wessex  
  Downs AONB must accord with relevant criteria set out in the AONB  
 Management Plan and paragraph 115 and 116 of the NPPF.  
 Proposals outside the AONB should not adversely affect its setting.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
126 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Biodiversity - locally distinctive and characteristic pattern and species   
 composition of natural features such as trees hedgerows, woodland field  
 boundaries watercourses and water-bodies;
   Geology - locally distinctive and characteristic landforms and    
 topographical features throughout the Borough such as locally important  
 views, visually sensitive sky lines, ridges and valleys;
   History - locally distinctive settlement patterns, building materials, and  
 heritage assets;
   Views both in and out - visually sensitive skyline, geological and  
 topographical features; and
   The separate identity of settlements and the transition between man-made  
 and natural landscapes at the urban fringe.
4.353 The North Wessex Downs AONB lies to the south, partly within Swindon Borough.  
Its landscape is predominantly a chalkland landscape of scarp slopes and moulded dip slopes that reflects the underlying chalk geology.  National 
guidance has confirmed that great weight should be given to conserving 
landscape and scenic beauty in AONBs which have been confirmed as having the highest status of protection in relation to landscape and scenic beauty.  AONBs are protected under the existing statutory requirements of the 
Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, specifically under Section 85 it is a 
legal duty for all relevant authorities to have regard to the primary purpose of AONBs to conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the area.
4.354 The North Wessex Downs Management Plan sets out a planning and management approach to the North Wessex Downs and should be used to inform relevant development proposals. Furthermore additional guidance is 
provided within the North Wessex Downs AONB Position Statements. 
 Additional Evidence Base
4.355 Additional information includes:
   An Urban Fringe Action Plan for Southern Swindon (2006); 
   Swindon Borough Landscape Character Areas Supplementary Planning   
 Guidance (2004);
   Conservation Area Appraisals;
   The North Wessex Downs AONB Management Plan (2009 – 2014);
   The North Wessex Downs AONB Position Statement on Renewables  
 (October 2012);
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010 – 2026: Revised   
 Consultation Document (2011); 
   National Character Area Profile 109: Midvale Ridge;
   National Character Area Profile 116: Berkshire and Marlborough Downs;
   Guidelines for Landscape and visual Impact Assessment (3rd Edition); and
   Neighbourhood Plans
 
 127 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.356 Landscape character and the historical landscape will be protected and 
enhanced through the application of this policy and through:
   The application of national and local landscape, wildlife and nature   
 designations and protected status;
   The application of the Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy  
 2010 – 2026: Revised Consultation Document
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document;
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding, developer  
 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy;
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; and,
   The development management process.  
Policy EN6: Flood Risk 
a. The risk and impact of flooding will be minimised through:
   directing development to areas with the lowest probability  
  of flooding;
   ensuring that all development addresses the effective    
  management of all sources of flood risk;
   ensuring that development does not increase the risk of flooding  
  elsewhere including on adjoining and surrounding land; and
   ensuring wider environmental benefits of development in relation  
  to flood risk.
b. The suitability of development proposed in flood zones will be  
 assessed using the Sequential Test, and, where necessary, the  
 Exceptions Test.  A sequential approach should be used at site level.
c. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required for development  
 proposals of one hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1 and for all  
 proposals for development (including minor development and  
 change of use) in Flood Zones 2 and 3 and Critical Drainage Areas,  
 and also where proposed development or a change of use to  
 a more vulnerable class may be subject to other sources of  
 flooding. Appropriate mitigation and management measures must   
 be implemented.
d. All development proposals must be assessed against the Local  
 Flood Risk Management Strategy to address locally significant  
 flooding including that affecting neighbouring authorities.  
 Appropriate mitigation and management measures must  
 be implemented.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
128 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.357 The Local Authority together with the Environment Agency (EA) and other 
partners such as Thames Water, play a key role in the management of local flood risk.  Whilst the EA has overall responsibility for managing flood risk, 
including flood risk associated with main rivers (fluvial), Swindon Borough 
Council has the requirement as Lead Local Flood Risk Authority to consider local flood risk, including surface water flooding, which has been identified as a major flood risk issue within Swindon Borough.  Together with the requirements 
of the Flood Risk Regulations 2009, Flood and Water Management Act 2010 
and national strategy, local authorities should ensure that local strategy and policy reduces the risk and impact of flooding and that appropriate mitigation measures are implemented.  Early consultation with all partners is essential to 
ensure that proposed development addresses flood risk and impact.
4.358 The aim of the sequential test is to steer new development to areas with the 
lowest probability of flooding.  Within the Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework, the process to the sequential and exceptions test is set out.  The sequential approach should also be used at site level, directing 
the most vulnerable development to area of lowest flood risk, matching 
vulnerability of land use to flood risk.  The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 provides data and information required to apply the Sequential Test and where necessary, the Exceptions Test.
4.359 An appropriate site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) will be required to demonstrate how flood risk from all sources of flooding to the development 
itself and flood risk to surrounding development will be managed now and 
taking climate change into account.  The FRA should also provide details on escape and evacuation routes shown by the developer to be operational 
under all conditions.
4.360 The Local Flood Risk Management Strategy provides an approach to flood risk 
management and mitigation measures, including surface water management. Sources of surface water flooding include surface water run-off, flooding from 
groundwater, sewer flooding, watercourse flooding and overland flow.
4.361 Swindon Borough will require a considered approach to sustainable 
drainage from the outset of the proposed development, including drainage management.  This will include specialist input from the outset of the  
design and agreement of eventual ownership and management of the 
components involved.e. All development shall be required to provide a drainage strategy.  
  Developments will be expected to incorporate sustainable drainage  
 systems and ensure that run-off rates are attenuated to greenfield  
 run-off rates.  Higher rates would need to be justified and the  
 risks quantified.
f. Sustainable drainage systems should seek to enhance water quality  
 and biodiversity in line with The Water Framework Directive.129 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.362 The design of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) should be in accordance 
with design criteria as required by the SuDS Approval Body (Swindon Borough) 
and current best practice guidance.  The Flood and Water Management 
Act, 2010 requires that the SuDS Approval Body (SAB) assess and approve sustainable drainage systems and if approved adopt and maintain these systems.  It is required that the SuDS design enables good masterplanning and 
design within the proposed development.  Early consultation with the Local 
Planning Authority is therefore essential.  For major development, a complete and functional SuDS system that supports the masterplanning should be designed at outline stage.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.363 Additional information includes:
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005);
   Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 (2008); 
   Swindon Water Cycle Study Phase 1 (2007);
   Swindon Water Cycle Study Phase 2 (2014);
   Environment Agency Flood Risk Mapping (2011);
   Emerging Surface Water Management Plan;
   Upper Thames Catchment Management Plan: Consultation Draft (2010);
   Swindon Borough Council Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment (2011); 
   Flood Risk Sequential Testing of Potential Development Areas in Swindon   
 Borough (2012);
   Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework (2012);
   The Flood Risk Regulations (2009); and
   The Flood and Water Management Act (2010).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.364 Minimising of and mitigating against the impact of flooding as a result of new development proposals will be addressed through this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base” above;
   Public funding where this can be secured, private sector funding, developer  
 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy;
   New community development framework plans and masterplans.
   Working closely with the Environment Agency to continue to assess,   
 understand and monitor flood risk and associated requirements;
   The implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Development of Flood Risk guidance; 
   The application of National Planning Policy Framework Technical Guidance  
 to development proposals;
   The implementation of appropriate sustainable drainage systems;Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
130 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   The development of masterplans for major development which incorporate  
 measures to minimise flood risk;
   The development management process; and,
   Neighbourhood Plans and Neighbourhood Development Orders which   
 might be developed by Neighbourhood Forums and are then consequently  
 adopted by the Council, and/or, 
   further work on the detailed location and specification of individual   
 development sites undertaken by the Council (through masterplanning, site  
 allocations work, development briefs and so on) augmented by Parish and  
 other Community Plans.
4.365 The Duty to Co-operate Statement also signposts where co-operation and 
collaboration with key stakeholders has influenced decision-making on the approach to flood risk. 
4.366 The policy is aimed at all forms of development including residential, retail, industrial and commercial premises, ensuring the protection of the environment from potentially polluting neighbours, and the protection of users of any 
proposed development from existing pollution within the environment.  In most 
cases this may entail controls placed on incoming development to ensure that the amenities of existing occupiers in the adjoining area are not adversely affected from potentially polluting neighbours and that future occupiers of the 
development itself enjoy good environmental quality.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.367 The control of pollution in respect of development will be through the  
application of this policy and through:
   The application of national and local landscape, wildlife and nature   
 designations and protected status;
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the evidence base;
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; and,
   The development management process.Policy EN7: Pollution 
a. Development that is likely to lead to emissions of pollutants such   
 as noise, light, vibration, smell, fumes, smoke, soot, ash, dust, grit  
 or toxic substances that may adversely affect existing development  
 and vulnerable wildlife habitats, shall only be permitted where such  
 emissions are controlled to a point where there is no significant loss  
 of amenity for existing land uses, or habitats. 
b. Similarly; where development would be adversely affected by  
 the emission of pollutants from an existing use; the proposal will  
 only be permitted where the users of the future development are  
 protected from loss of amenity from those emissions in accord  
 with Policy DE1.131 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.368 This policy aims to ensure that where development occurs it can 
accommodate the specific physical conditions of the land.  Development that 
does not take account of unstable ground conditions can potentially suffer 
severe structural problems in later life.  The situation can result in rebuilding and high financial costs to occupiers/owners.
4.369 There are numerous activities that can generate ground instability, both natural and man-made.  Within Swindon Borough the risk arising from man-made 
activities such as mining will be extremely limited.  However, natural causes such 
as sub soil or geological conditions may be more prevalent on slopes.
4.370 It will remain the responsibility of any developer to demonstrate to the Local Planning Authority’s satisfaction the precise nature, extent and effects of unstable ground conditions, as well as any remedial, preventative or 
precautionary measures required to overcome unstable ground conditions. 
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.371 The control of development in respect of unstable land will be through  
the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence Base”;
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; and,
   The development management process.Policy EN8: Unstable Land 
a. Development of land that is either known to be unstable,  
 or is strongly suspected of instability, shall only be permitted when:
   an evaluation has been submitted of the level and precise   
  nature of any instability; and
   there are no significant adverse effects on adjacent sites; and
   the extent of remedial measure required to achieve a level of  
   land stability suitable for the propose use, capable of supporting  
  future development loads has been identified.
b. Where planning permission is granted, conditions may be imposed  
 requiring the execution of any necessary remedial works. 
c. Where a site is affected by land stability issues responsibility for  
 securing a safe development rests with the developer and/or  
 landowner, who will be required to carry out the above.Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
132 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.372 It is the responsibility of the prospective developer to investigate the existence 
and extent of any contamination and to assess the viability of development in 
economic terms.
4.373 In considering proposals for development, the Local Planning Authority should take account of the risks of and from land contamination and how these can 
be managed or reduced.  As a consequence, the Local Planning Authority may, when granting planning permission on a site which may potentially be contaminated impose:
   Conditions requiring the developer to first investigate and assess the extent  
 of contamination, and
   Where necessary, require that remedial action be taken to neutralise the  
 hazard prior to development commencing.
4.374 Development proposals which are adjacent to an uncontrolled ‘gassing’ landfill site will require the developer to demonstrate to the Local Planning 
Authority that adequate precaution has been taken to ensure that any gas 
leaking into the development site will be trapped and safely vented away.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.375 The control of development in respect of contaminated land will be through the application of this policy and through:
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies and plans identified in  
 the “Evidence base”;
   New community development framework plans and masterplans; and,
   The development management process.Policy EN9: Contaminated Land 
a. Development of land that is either contaminated, or is strongly   
 suspected of being contaminated, shall only be permitted when:
   an evaluation has been submitted of the level and precise   
  nature of any contamination and need for removal or treatment;  
  and
   the potential of existing contaminants to pollute both surface   
  water and ground water, both during and after construction has  
  been established; and
   the decontamination measures required to achieve a level   
  of land quality suitable for the proposed end use have been   
  identified; and
   measures are taken to ensure that migrating gas is safely dealt  
  with where development is proposed on land adjacent to an   
  uncontrolled ‘gassing’ landfill site.
b. Where planning permission is granted, conditions may be imposed   
 requiring the execution of any necessary remedial works.
c. Where a site is affected by land contamination responsibility for  
 securing a safe development rests with the developer and/or  
 landowner, who will be required to carry out the above.133 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.376 Once the necessary remediation work has been completed, the land should 
not be capable of being determined as contaminated land under Part “a”  
of the Environmental Protection Act 1990.
 Policy EN10: Historic Environment and Heritage Assets 
a. Swindon Borough’s historic environment shall be sustained and   
 enhanced. This includes all heritage assets including historic   
 buildings, conservation areas, historic parks and gardens,  
 landscape and archaeology. 
b. Proposals for development affecting heritage assets shall conserve  
 and, where appropriate, enhance their significance and setting.  
 Any harm to the significance of a designated or non-designated  
 heritage asset, or their loss, must be justified. Proposals will be  
 weighed against the public benefits of the proposal, whether it has  
 been demonstrated that all reasonable efforts have been made to  
 sustain the existing use, find new uses, or mitigate the extent of the  
 harm to the significance of the asset; and whether the works  
 proposed are the minimum required to secure the long term use  
 of the asset.
c. Any alterations, extensions or changes of use to a listed building,  
 or development in the vicinity of a listed building, shall not be  
 permitted where there will be an adverse impact on those elements  
 which contribute to their special architectural or historic significance,  
 including their setting.
d. Scheduled monuments and other nationally important  
 archaeological sites and their settings will be preserved in situ, and   
 where not justifiable or feasible, provision to be made for excavation  
 and recording. Development proposals affecting archaeological  
 remains of less than national importance will be conserved in a  
 manner appropriate to their significance. An appropriate  
 assessment and evaluation should be submitted as part of any  
 planning application in areas of known or potential  
 archaeological interest.
e. Development within or which would affect the setting of the    
 Borough’s Conservation Areas will conserve those elements which  
 contribute to their special character or appearance.
f. Features which form an integral part of a Park or Garden’s historic  
 interest and significance will be conserved and development will  
 not detract from the enjoyment, layout, design, character,  
 appearance or setting of them,  including key views into and out  
 from, or prejudice future restoration.
g. Any development proposal that would affect a locally important  
 or non-designated heritage asset, including its setting, will be  
 expected to conserve its significance, and any harm should be  
 weighed against the public benefits of the proposal, including  
 securing its optimum viable use.Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
134 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.377 The NPPF attaches ‘great weight’ to the conservation of heritage assets and 
their significance (para. 132, NPPF). Through Strategic Objective SO10 the Borough Council will protect, conserve and enhance the historic environment. Opportunities to protect and better reveal the significance of those assets will 
be sought to ensure the historic environment plays an integral and positive 
role in place-making, to positively support and integrate the value of heritage, enhancing the cultural and economic environment. 
4.378 Swindon Borough contains a rich historic environment including 28 conservation areas, around 1000 listed buildings, 52 scheduled monuments, and over 1000 
other features documented as being of archaeological significance/interest. 
The wealth of assets in the Borough is varied and includes a rich archaeological heritage, Industrial heritage, in particular that associated with the Great Western Railway. Other assets include Swindon’s Old Town and Lydiard Park as 
well as the varied villages and hamlets in the Borough’s rural areas. 
4.379 The Historic Environment Topic Paper provides baseline information and 
evidence on the issues, challenges and opportunities facing the Borough’s cultural heritage, its historical landscape, townscape, local distinctiveness and heritage assets. It has informed the Plan’s positive strategy for the conservation 
and enjoyment of the Borough’s historic environment. In particular it highlights 
the opportunity for the heritage led regeneration of the GWR railway area and the role of the historic environment in support of the Plan’s place making ambitions, ensuring the past informs and inspires future local distinctive development. 
4.380 To support a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the 
Borough’s historic environment the Council will:
   Apply Policy EN10 to inform development management decisions to help  
 sustain and enhance the historic environment;
   Encourage heritage led regeneration, particularly within the historic railway  
 area, and support the conservation of heritage assets to strengthen the   
 Borough’s distinctive identity and attractiveness;
   Support the appropriate conservation and re-use of historic farm buildings;
   Support development to generate a sustainable energy supply and improve  
 environmental performance that maintains the significance of any heritage  
 assets and their settings which may be affected;
   Work with the Local Highways Authority and infrastructure providers to   
 ensure historic streets, townscapes and the public realm will be designed   
 to conserve and enhance the historic environment having particular regard  
 to the Borough’s 28 Conservation Areas Appraisals and related    
 management proposals; 
   Promote and support opportunities to reduce the number of heritage assets  
 at risk by, for example, preparing development briefs to encourage   
 the repair and reuse of dilapidated buildings and, to support Monument   
 Management Schemes;
   Undertake a rapid survey of grade II listed buildings and other local heritage  
 assets to determine their condition and provide an opportunity to improve  
 monitoring, management and conservation initiatives;
   Seek to complete an updated ‘Local List’ of significant local heritage assets; 135 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Consider, where appropriate, the use of Article 4 Directions to support, for  
 example, the 28 conservation appraisals and management plans;
   Update its portfolio of SPDs relating to the historic environment to assist the  
 effective conservation of the Boroughs heritage assets; and
   Support the maintenance of a publicly accessible Historic Environment   
 Record to manage the identification and conservation of heritage assets.
4.381 The government through the NPPF recognises the importance of all heritage 
assets both those that are designated and those that have been noted and defined locally. The NPPF defines the term “Designated Heritage Asset” to include listed buildings, conservation areas, Scheduled Monuments and 
Registered Parks and Gardens.  Locally defined heritage assets may include 
buildings, sites, monuments, places, areas, landscape and archaeology. An understanding of the historic environment’s significance will be expected to inform future development. Information to do so is available from a number 
of sources including the Swindon and Wiltshire Historic Environment Record, 
Historic Landscape Characterisation Project and Conservation  
Areas Appraisals.
 Listed Buildings
4.382 It is required by law
21, that in considering whether to grant permission for 
development that would affect a listed building or its setting, regard must be 
had to the desirability of preserving the building, its setting or any features of 
special architectural interest.
4.383 The Borough Council will consider favourably development proposals (including 
alterations) affecting listed buildings where they preserve or enhance the 
building’s character, appearance or setting and not result in a reduction in the buildings significance or the loss of a listed building or its viability by virtue of development proposals negatively affecting opportunities of use.
4.384 The adopted Listed Buildings Supplementary Planning Guidance will aid 
decision-making with regard to preserving or enhancing the significance of 
listed buildings.
 Conservation Areas
4.385 Conservation areas are places that the Local Planning Authority has designated as having special architectural or historic interest whose character 
and appearance it is desirable to preserve or enhance. Swindon currently has 
28 such designated areas and these are defined on the Policies Map. 
4.386 By law, special attention must be paid, in the exercise of planning functions, to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character and appearance of conservation areas.
4.387 The impacts of development on a conservation area may relate to matters affecting its balance of land uses, pattern of daily activity, vitality and viability, layout or form pattern of spaces between buildings and design. 
21Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
136 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.388 Matters of design, including: scale, height, bulk shape, massing, and 
proportions, patterns of opening, vertical or horizontal emphasis, materials and 
colour are of particular importance and may play a major part in the historic significance of an area. In respect of design, regard will also be made to the 
Borough’s design Policy DE1.
4.389 The Borough has prepared appraisals of each of the 28 designated areas to provide a proper assessment of character and appearance. These documents 
are a material consideration in the determination of planning applications and conservation area consents.
 Historic Parks & Gardens
4.390 Swindon Borough has three parks that are included on the Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest
22. These parks are Lydiard Park, Queen’s Park 
and Town Gardens. Some parks contain listed buildings and/or are designated 
as conservation areas with the additional statutory protection.
4.391 There are other parks which although do not afford the status of being Registered nonetheless are valuable heritage assets, examples of such  park 
includes the GWR park in the Railway Village Conservation Area and the Lawns Park in Swindon’s Old Town.
4.392 Development proposals which conserve and opportunities to enhance the character, appearance and significance of such assets will be treated 
positively.
 Scheduled Monuments and Archaeology
4.393 Scheduled Monuments as designated
23 and other known significant 
archaeological sites are defined on the Policies Map.  The NPPF notes that “Local Planning Authorities should either maintain or have access to a historic 
environment record”. (NPPF para 169). Sites of known local or regional significance are contained within the Historic Environment Record (HER), which can be accessed via the Wiltshire County Archaeology Service offices 
(Chippenham) or via the Internet (http://history.wiltshire.gov.uk/smr/)
4.394 In addition to the HER, to aid decision-making, information gained from the historic landscape characterisation project will be utilised. This project 
is the examination of historic and archaeological processes which have influenced the form and use of the whole modern landscape and allows an 
understanding to be gained of the origins and evolution of rural and urban 
areas (http://www.wshc.eu/about-wshc/archaeology/581.html).
4.395 Development affecting the Borough’s archaeological heritage must preserve in-situ archaeological remains and landscapes of acknowledged significance (as shown on the Policies Map) and protect their settings.  Investigation via evaluation or other discovery may uncover additional sites to which this policy 
will apply. 
4.396 In addition, the Borough Council will require the preservation by record of 
archaeological remains that are not defined on the Policies Map but which are subsequently discovered.  Such heritage assets will be preserved in situ unless it is proven to the Local Planning Authority to be neither practical nor desirable.  
22National list compiled by English Heritage
23Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979137 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026In such circumstances, appropriate provision for the excavation, recording, 
publication and conservation of the remains must be ensured before planning permission is granted.  The storage of such remains must also be detailed within 
a written scheme of investigation as part of the planning process.
4.397 The Borough Council has an adopted Archaeology SPG relating to 
archaeological assets.
 Buildings of Significant Local Interest
4.398 Throughout the Borough there are a number of buildings, structures and facades that, whilst they may not merit listing or have the protection conferred by being situated with a conservation area, nonetheless have local historic or 
architectural importance to warrant retention and protection.
4.399 The government recognises such heritage assets as noted in the NPPF, and  
the Borough Council seeks to ensure these are identified, retained and 
enhanced through adopted SPG (Buildings of Significant Local Interest, 2004  
or updated guidance).
 Additional Evidence Base
4.400 Additional information includes:
   National Heritage List for England;
   Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest;
   Conservation Area Appraisals;
   Sites and Monuments Record / Historic Environment Record;
   Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990; and,
   Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.401 The protection and enhancement of heritage assets as a result of development proposals will be secured through the application of this policy and through: 
   New community development Framework Plans and masterplans;
   The development management process;
   The Swindon Central Area Action Plan; and
   The Swindon Town Centre Masterplan. 
4.402 The Swindon Borough Heritage Strategy will set out in more detail the priorities for conserving and enhancing the Boroughs historic assets.Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
138 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.403 Part of this policy specifically refers to the indicative canal route as shown 
on the Policies Map. Within the Borough there are the remains of two canals; the Wilts & Berks Canal which connected the Kennet and Avon Canal at Semington to the River Thames at Abingdon, and the North Wilts Canal which 
connected the Wilts & Berks Canal at Swindon to the Thames and Severn  
Canal at Latton, near Cricklade. This route subsequently became part of  
the Wilts & Berks Canal.
4.404 The Government waterways former advisory body, the Inland Waterways 
Amenity Advisory Council re-classified the status of the Wilts and Berks Canal 
to a nationally important scheme and identified it as being a priority project. 
As part of the Wilts & Berks Canal Partnership, the Borough Council proposes to facilitate restoration of the canal within the Borough to obtain maximum environmental and economic benefit for the community.
4.405 Canals are recognised for the value they add to developments and their role as catalysts for development. The Council aspires to recreate the canal  
through the Borough with the aim of linking the Wilts & Berks Canal to the  
North Wilts Canal.Policy EN11: Heritage Transport 
a. The alignments of the Wilts & Berks Canal and North Wilts Canal,  
 as shown indicatively on the Policies Map, shall be safeguarded  
 with a view to their long term re-establishment as navigable    
 waterways, by:
   ensuring that development protects the integrity of the canal   
  alignment and its associated structures; and 
   ensuring that where the canal is affected by development, the   
  alignment is protected or an alternative alignment is provided;   
  and
   ensuring associated infrastructure of development does not   
  prejudice the delivery of the canal.
b. Proposals will be permitted that are designed to develop the canal’s  
 recreational and nature conservation potential, in particular, the use  
 of the old line of the canal for walking, cycling and interpretation.
c. Proposals shall only be permitted if it can be demonstrated that  
 there is no unacceptable risk to ecology, flood risk, water resource  
 and water quality.
d. A deviation route for the Swindon and Cricklade Heritage Railway  
 will be safeguarded from its present terminus at Taw Hill Halt south  
 to a new terminus in the Mouldon Hill Country Park as shown on  
 the Policies Map. Proposals for development should not adversely  
 impact on the integrity of this alignment, or the Swindon and  
 Cricklade Railway’s ability to operate the alignment as  
 a heritage railway.139 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20264.406 Although much of the canal line and associated artefacts remain, particularly 
in the rural parts of the Borough, within the urban area of Swindon, parts of the original route have been built over. Proposals for the reinstatement of the canal along these historic alignments will need to demonstrate that the 
cultural, historic and natural environment will be protected and enhanced, 
with no overall adverse effect, and that potential impacts on ecology, landscape, flood risk, water resources (abstraction) and water quality have 
been fully assessed and taken into account. Proposals for the reinstatement of 
discrete sections of the canal will also need to demonstrate that the potential environmental impacts of the restoration project as a whole have been assessed and taken into account, including Catchment Area Management 
Strategies and the Water Framework Directive.
4.407 The Swindon and Cricklade Railway currently operates a heritage railway from 
Blunsdon Station north to Hayes Knoll in Wiltshire and south to a temporary terminus at Taw Hill Halt. Heritage railways provide a valuable historic resource, generate tourism and have the potential to provide a more sustainable means 
of transport than the private motor car. The Railway holds a long term aspiration 
to link their line with Network Rail, with a first phase terminating in the Mouldon Hill Country Park. The section between Taw Hill Halt and the proposed terminus at Mouldon Hill incorporates an embankment bespoke built along a deviation 
from the historic route of the line, built by the developers of the Northern 
Development Area through legal agreement. It is considered that it is important to safeguard the route south from Taw Hill Halt to Mouldon Hill to ensure that 
alternative development does not impact on the alignment or introduce land 
uses that would be bad neighbours to a heritage railway. The Policies Map shows the protected route to the station site at Mouldon Hill, in accord with the approved Mouldon Hill Country Park Master Plan. The route of the railway from 
Mouldon Hill to the Borough boundary will be safeguarded in any future review 
of the Local Plan or other appropriate Development Plan Document once the route is confirmed and agreed.
 Additional Evidence Base
4.408 Additional information includes:
   Restoration of the Wilts and Berks Canal Feasibility Study (1998);
   Swindon Central Canal Route Study (2007);
   Swindon Eastern Development Area WBCT Preferred Canal Route (2012);
   The Kennet and Pang Catchment Abstraction Management Strategy  
 (May, 2004);
   Kennet and Vale of White Horse Catchment Abstraction Licensing Strategy  
 (December, 2012);
   Thames Corridor Abstraction Management Strategy (June, 2004); 
   Mouldon Hill Country Park Masterplan; and
   North Wiltshire District Council Living Landmarks Project Swindon & Cricklade  
 Railway Feasibility Report (Feb, 2007) Section ?: Part 4:  Enabling Sustainable Development
140 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies 
4.409 Policy EN11 is a discreet policy designed to safeguard the remaining  
non-developed route of the Wiltshire & Berkshire Canal through Swindon 
Borough and connect to the network beyond the Borough boundary, and  
the proposed route of the Swindon and Cricklade Railway into the Mouldon  
Hill Country Park. 
Part 5: 
Delivering Sustainable Growth 
and ChangePart 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
1415.1 Whilst Parts 3 and 4 of this Plan set out  what the strategy plans to deliver and 
how that delivery will be managed, Part 5 provides the ‘spatial articulation’ 
of the Plan, i.e. answering the question of “where should the development 
go and what are the requirements of that development?.”  The key to managing change and delivering sustainable economic and housing growth will be to ensure that change happens in the right places at the right time, in 
accordance with the policies in the Plan and in accord with the principles of 
sustainable development set in policy SD1.  It requires an appropriate spatial strategy for all parts of the Borough, from dealing with regeneration, growth and change in existing urban and rural communities, to new major housing 
development and forming cohesive communities.  The Strategic Policies set out 
the policy framework for the delivery of this sustainable growth and change 
in Swindon’s existing communities, new communities and rural settlements, 
providing a more detailed spatial articulation of policies SD2: The Sustainable Development Strategy and SD3: Managing Development in particular.Strategic Objectives
The Strategic Policies flow directly from and help to implement all Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2 of this Plan.
Policy SC1: Swindon’s Central Area
In order to improve and enhance Swindon’s Central Area:
a. High quality design shall be required of all development in Central  
 Swindon, in particular delivering clearly defined public and private  
 space, improved public realm and access for all.
b. The following areas will have their own specific role within  
 Swindon’s Central Area: 
   The Retail Core - the focus of retail-led development;
   The Promenade (Cultural Quarter)- the focus for cultural    
  activities, but will also provide civic and leisure facilities;
   The Commercial Quarter - the focus for a flagship new office   
  area;
   The Railway Corridor - the focus for a vibrant, high-density,  
  mixed-use development scheme;
   North Star - the location for a new regional leisure facility; 
   Railway Heritage Area - the focus of visitor activities that are   
  sympathetic to the historic character of the area, would not  
  adversely impact on the amenity of Railway Village residents,  
  and would complement and not undermine the Town Centre   
  offer; and
   Old Town - the focus for niche shopping and leisure uses,  
  complementing the shopping and leisure offer in the  
  Town Centre.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and Change
 Strategic Policies
Swindon’s Existing Communities142c. Provision shall be made in the Central Area for: 
   at least 53,700m2 net comparison retail floorspace in the Town   
  Centre Primary shopping area (Retail Core);
   at least 90,000m2 of new office floorspace;
   about 1,000 additional homes;
   a new bus interchange;
   a new 1,000 space car park to the north of the railway line; and
   a community wide approach to renewable energy
d. The provision of a ‘Green Spine’ will provide: 
   a primary north-south green route that will link Old Town, the  
  Town Centre and North Star; and 
   a focal point connecting Swindon’s green infrastructure corridors. 
e. High quality, safe and continuous pedestrian routes and cycling   
 networks will be provided, including:
   a new rail crossing to address the severance from the Town   
  Centre to North Star. 
f. To secure Central Swindon as the focal point for Swindon’s network  
 of specialist leisure facilities:
   the Oasis Leisure Centre will be enabled to be redeveloped and  
  expanded to reinforce its role as Swindon’s flagship regional   
  leisure destination; and 
   the historic role of the Health Hydro will be enabled to be   
  enhanced for water sports and as a spa facility.
g. Education provision will be made for:
   a new university and/or higher education facilities; and
   2 new primary schools (or 3 forms-of-entry) if required. 
h. Carfax Street Health Centre will be enabled to be relocated to  
 increase the capacity and improve the quality and accessibility of  
 health facilities within Central Swindon.
i. The route of the Wilts & Berks Canal, as set out on the Policies Map,   
 will be safeguarded to enable the re-instatement of it as a navigable  
 water body, subject to detailed route assessments
j. The regeneration and development of Swindon’s Central Area must   
 integrate positively with, and contribute towards improvement of and  
 mitigate their impact upon existing adjacent communities.
k. The following key junctions will be enhanced:
   Whalebridge from the east;
   Groundwell Road/Victoria Road from the south and east;
   Whitehouse Roundabout; and 
   Westcott Place.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  ChangeFigure 8: Swindon Central Area Diagram
143
 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 20165.2 Despite the success of Swindon’s historic growth, the town has seen 
comparative under-investment in infrastructure, particularly in the Town 
Centre.  Although Swindon is the 30th largest settlement in the country the Town 
Centre ranks 65th in the order of centres24. This lower quality offer does little to 
contribute to the overall image and attractiveness of Swindon as a place to 
live, work, shop or spend leisure time. 
5.3 The regeneration of the Central Area is therefore the top priority for Swindon. A vibrant and attractive Central Area is key to commercial and individual 
investment in Swindon, and in turn, uplift in the economy of the Town Centre will see benefits for the rest of the Borough and its communities.  Improvements in terms of shops, jobs, leisure and cultural activities and higher education 
facilities will help to re-establish and promote the Central Area as the civic and 
economic heart of the town.  Improving the Central Area is the principal way all of Swindon’s communities can benefit from planned economic growth. 
5.4 A Swindon Town Centre Masterplan has been produced and forms an important framework to guide and steer development at a detailed level in  
the Central Area.
 Retail
5.5 A key part of this regeneration will be the creation of strong retail focus in 
the Town Centre on which major retail-led development opportunities will 
be actively promoted. The aim for the Retail Core is to create a competitive 
shopping centre, which realises Swindon economic potential in terms of footfall and spending but complemented by leisure, entertainment and community uses.  The Retail Core represents Swindon’s Primary Shopping Area, defined in 
the NPPF
25, which is set out in the Swindon Central Area Action Plan.
5.6 The Swindon Retail Capacity Update 2009 indicates a potential for Swindon 
Town Centre to accommodate around 53,700m2 of comparison goods 
floorspace by 2026. The Update also forecasts further additional potential 
capacity for 34,500m2 of retail floorspace by 2026 in the Borough which could 
be located in the Central Area.  In terms of the location at which this should be delivered the Update states that some or all of this floorspace should be 
delivered in central Swindon using a sequential approach, which is elaborated further in the NPPF.
 Office and Employment
5.7 The Commercial Quarter will be the focus for delivering office floorspace in the Central Area and will therefore help to deliver improved economic 
performance in the Borough.  It will also be complemented by a good mix of 
other uses (including residential, retail, leisure, cafés and restaurants), to help generate a range of activities and throughout the day and evening.  The Railway Corridor will aim to create an attractive gateway to the Town Centre 
and to overcome the physical barrier caused by the railway line.
14424Venue Score system, 2010. Javelin Group
25Annex 2 of the National Planning Policy Framework defines the Primary Shopping Area as the “Defined 
area where retail development is concentrated (generally comprising the primary and those secondary 
frontages which are adjoining and closely related to the primary shopping frontage).”
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
1455.8 The ‘New Life for New Swindon Regeneration Framework’ report concluded 
that Swindon has the potential to accommodate up to 90,000m2 of (B1) 
office floorspace. Land is allocated in the Swindon Central Area Action Plan 
to accommodate 85,000m2 over the period to 2016.  This reflects the status 
of the Central Area being the primary focus for commercial development and, in principle, signals a non-restrictive approach to development for these uses in the Town Centre.  Additional floorspace above this quantum will be 
acceptable where it is aligned to the Policy; the Swindon Central Area Action 
Plan; and the Town Centre Masterplan. In particular, there is potential for growth in the business and finance and ICT and creative industries sectors in the Central Area. The Central Area will also provide significant jobs through retail, 
leisure and education development.
 Town Centre Living
5.9 A key element of the regeneration of the Central Area is providing homes 
in order to create and promote a strong and vibrant central community, including greater activity through all parts of the day and evening.  The 
downturn in economic conditions means that in the short term opportunities 
to deliver this type of development will be limited.  Revised housing forecasts, 
indicating lower levels of growth than indicated in the Central Area Action 
Plan, have been used as the basis for this Plan, although there remains a longer-term commitment to increase the opportunity for town centre living if and when market conditions recover sufficiently to support it. The Borough Council 
will seek to ensure that an appropriate range and balance of dwelling types is 
provided in the Central Area including in particular those for families, students, older and disabled people. Communal accommodation for students in support of higher education provision in the Central Area will also be required
26. 
 Design
5.10 Good design plays a critical role in raising the profile of Swindon. This requires 
consideration of public realm, connections and architecture together, as 
advocated in good urban design principles and policy DE1.  In effect this may be summarised as: good urban structure; strong; clear connections; and high quality urban grain.  Good design may be achieved through well-designed 
public spaces to reinforce a sense of place and civic identity, along with those 
strong connecting routes that form the structure underpinning these spaces 
and finally high quality landmark buildings and architecture to create identity 
and variety. Care should also be taken to ensure that the Central Area’s high quality older buildings are protected and enhanced to retain the inherent character and variety of built form.
5.11 High quality architecture and sustainable forms of development is expected of all new buildings in the Central Area. Compact forms with mixed-uses encourage walking, cycling, public transport and boosts vitality in the built environment over time.  New housing in the Central Area should make efficient 
use of land, be functional and employ good standards of internal space and 
amenity in order to attract more family accommodation and a balanced community over the long-term. Design will be assessed in respect of the 
requirements of Policy DE1.
 
26Communal Accommodation does not count against housing targets.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Green Spine
5.12 The green spine is a key component of the regeneration of Swindon’s Central 
Area and an essential element of the urban structure discussed above.  It 
will contribute to the improvement of the quality of the Town Centre and 
contribute towards the shift in attitude around Swindon’s image. The green spine will bring greenery and seasonal variety to the Town Centre and create a vitally important north-south route sewing together the Town Centre with Old 
Town and North Star.  It will incorporate strategic cycle and pedestrian routes to 
reinforce its role as a key corridor of activity.  The character of the green spine will vary along its route in response to the context and it will perform a major role in local legibility and movement around the Central Area.
5.13 This will be delivered through on-site landscaping within and adjacent to the spine route, and alternative funding mechanisms.
 Leisure and Culture
5.14 The Promenade - will be Swindon’s cultural quarter.  Uses that support and 
complement its development will include leisure and food and drink facilities.  
The Big Arts Plan and Cultural & Leisure Strategy for Swindon highlight that 
current facilities do not meet the needs or aspirations of the town, particularly for dance, theatre and music.  The Wyvern Theatre, or a future replacement,  
is likely to form a key hub for performing and digital arts including creative studio spaces.
5.15 North Star - will be the location for regional leisure facilities. The Oasis is an important Borough leisure destination; however it is in need of investment. North Star is a highly accessible site, but would benefit from additional railway 
crossing for pedestrians and cyclists. There are opportunities to realise significant 
leisure development opportunities there, and achieve one of the key priorities of the Swindon Borough Economic Strategy.
 Education
5.16 As a consequence of housing growth and the changing demographic make-
up of Swindon’s Central Area there is increasing pressure for primary school places in the Central Area.  A further two primary school sites are likely to be 
needed to manage pressures on school places in the short to medium term.  
The availability of land is limited, therefore more innovative and creative school designs may be required to meet this need using a smaller footprint of land than would be traditionally provided.
5.17 Swindon Central Area remains the preferred location for the delivery of a 
university. North Star is allocated in the Central Area Action Plan for a university, 
however opportunities to deliver a university and/or technical college presence in the Central Area would be supported in principle.  Such an institution would promote economic growth, and raise aspirations and achievement.  Locating 
such an institution within the Central Area will support Swindon’s regeneration. 
A university in a more peripheral location has the potential to undermine the regeneration of the Central Area.
 
146 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change The Railway Village
5.18 The Railway Heritage Area within Central Swindon is home to a rich and varied 
historic environment, encompassing the Swindon Railway Works Conservation 
Area to the north of the railway and The Swindon Railway Village Conservation 
Area to the south of the railway. Developments in or adjacent to the Railway Heritage Area should be especially sympathetic to this character area.
 Old Town
5.19 Swindon’s Old Town provides services and shopping for local people as well as a ‘specialist’ function for the wider area. Development proposals within or 
near the Old Town Area will be required to contribute towards public realm and 
wider environmental improvements to the area. This would be in accordance with the Conservation Area Appraisals, the Old Town public realm scheme and 
Swindon Central Area Action Plan.
 Access and Movement
5.20 The guiding principles for transport in central Swindon are to facilitate ease 
of movement into, out of and around the area and to support its economic growth and regeneration. The Council seeks to increase the choice of travel options so that the car does not dominate or have a detrimental impact 
on the environment, or the quality of the experience in the Central Area. In 
alignment with the Swindon Transport Strategy, the Local Plan seeks to improve the capacity and performance of the existing road network by discouraging through traffic and reducing the amount of circulating traffic.  Traffic 
management will ensure road systems operate efficiently to allow the road 
network to cope with traffic movement.
5.21 Promoting the use of public transport together with enhancing provision for pedestrians and cyclists will be key to reducing the dominance of the car.  
A well-located bus exchange will provide a new gateway for the Town Centre 
at the heart of an express bus network with links to the north, east and south, 
together with bus priority measures to improve public transport accessibility to the Town Centre. Improving accessibility to the rail station will make the most 
of its role as conduit to the Central Area from beyond the town. Creating a 
balance between restraint and adequate parking provision within the Central Area will be important in enhancing accessibility and supporting economic development in the area.
5.22 The railway effectively severs the Central Area. Overcoming this barrier to movement within central Swindon is critical to its regeneration, and in  
particular linking the Great Western Designer Outlet Centre and North Star  
to the Town Centre.
 Canal
5.23 There are long-standing ambitions to re-establish a canal through Central 
Swindon. It could provide significant economic benefits, be a tourist attraction 
in its own right and bring a water feature to the Central Area where there is 
presently none. The long-term aim is to link the North Wilts and the Wilts & Berks through or around the Town Centre, subject to detailed route assessment. 
147 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Key Evidence Documents
5.24 Key evidence base documents include:
   Swindon Central Area Action Plan (2009);
   New Life for New Swindon Regeneration Framework;  
 New Swindon Company (2004);
   Swindon Retail Capacity Study Update (2009);
   Retail and Leisure Study Update (2007);
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026:  
 Revised Consultation Document (SBC, 2011);
   Swindon School Place Planning Study: Future Demand to 2026 (2009);
   Swindon School Place Planning Study Update (2011);
   Strategy for Major Sports Facilities Provision 2009 -26 (2009); and
   Swindon Central Canal Route Study (2007). 
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.25 The Central Area is a key component of the development strategy for the 
Borough and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base. Effective management of development will be achieved through the application of this policy, the Swindon Central Area Action Plan and through:
   Swindon Central Area Action Plan Implementation Plan; 
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership;
   The work of Forward Swindon Ltd; 
   Swindon Town Centre Masterplan; 
148Policy SC2: Swindon’s Existing Urban Communities
a. In Swindon’s existing urban communities, the priorities are: 
   the regeneration of Swindon Central Area; 
   the protection and enhancement of existing built, semi-natural  
  and natural assets of economic, social and/or environmental   
  value to residents, employees and visitors;and,
   regeneration at targeted areas in need of renewal and    
  investment, particularly at the Local Centres.
b. These priorities will be implemented through application of the   
 adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan and other policies of  
 this Plan, in particular:
   the protection and delivery of green infrastructure and open   
  space in accordance with Policy EN1 and EN3;
   the provision of educational facilities in accordance with Policy   
  CM1;
   the provision of sports facilities in accordance with Policy CM2;
   the provision of emergency service facilities in accordance with  
  Policy CM3;
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
1495.26 Alongside other policies in Part 5 which identify the spatial strategy for the 
new communities and rural areas, policy SC2 confirms the spatial priorities for 
Swindon Borough’s existing urban communities.  Many of these priorities have 
already been articulated and justified in Parts 3 and 4 of this Plan and are drawn together in spatial terms in SC2.  
5.27 At the heart of the successful implementation of sustainable growth and change in Swindon’s existing urban communities will be a need to ensure that:
   current levels of economic activity are maintained, from which recovery  
 and growth can be developed;
   the Borough’s existing built, semi-natural and natural assets are protected  
 and enhanced; and,
   the socially, economically and environmentally poorer areas are a focus   
 for neighbourhood renewal and change, including where appropriate,   
 deliverable large or small scale physical regeneration.
5.28 Whilst Swindon Borough is relatively prosperous overall, this picture masks 
inequality between different communities.  There are concentrations of families 
with worklessness, poor health and low skills and the challenge is to improve their opportunities to gain employment and improved life chances.
5.29 The centre of Swindon already benefits from an adopted Central Area Action Plan, where the focus is on the enhancement of the centre through regeneration and high quality design.  Swindon Central Area has unique 
characteristics, which indicate a need for a different approach to the 
Borough’s other existing communities.  Central Swindon is not homogenous.  There is a concentration of social housing at the Railway Village but other parts of central Swindon have a more equal tenure mix.
5.30 Outside of the Central Area, the Borough’s other existing communities and urban areas should also benefit from improvement and enhancement where 
necessary, of the built, semi-natural and natural environment, raising the quality 
of living in social, economic and environmental terms.  
5.31 There is a particular need for this in the wards identified as having high levels of deprivation.  Seven areas in the Borough, outside of the Central Area, are amongst the 10% most deprived in the country and a further ten are amongst the 20% most deprived
27.  These communities include; Penhill, Parks, Pinehurst, 
Walcot East, Meadowcroft and parts of Moredon and Toothill.  They show similar 
characteristics and problems regardless of tenure, with a concentration of 
social housing (although far from exclusively so) and issues relating to income, skills, employment and health.  However, residents of these communities have good access to services, facilities and transport and have a resilient sense of    the provision of a district heating network in accordance with  
  Policy IN4; and
   improvements to the transport network in accordance with  
  Policy TR1.
27IMD2008
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026belonging.  In these wards in particular, there is a case for physical and social 
regeneration in targeted areas through a programme of neighbourhood 
renewal and management.
5.32 Policy SC2 gives the spatial representation of the Themes within Part 2 of the existing Swindon Urban Area. The evidence base is listed at each Theme.
 Key Evidence Base
5.33 Key evidence base documents include:
   Swindon Sustainable Neighbourhood Study (2009);
   Shaping your Community Report (2011)
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.34 The spatial strategy for Swindon’s existing urban communities will be delivered 
through a combination of:
   the Adopted Swindon Central Area Action Plan; 
   Neighbourhood Plans (where developed by Neighbourhood Forums);
   further work undertaken by the Borough Council on specific  
 development sites;
   the development management process; and
   developer contributions and ‘locality working’ associated with the locality  
 cluster groups.
5.35 This work is likely to be augmented by other community plans.   Policy LN1 provides further direction on how this will be achieved.
150 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change New Communities
151Policy NC1: Wichelstowe
a. Land at Wichelstowe, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated  
 for a mixed-use development.
b. The development at Wichelstowe shall provide:
   a total of 4,500 homes (including those already completed) at an  
  average density of 40 dwellings per hectare and a mix and   
  percentage of affordable homes in accordance with Policy HA2;
   12.5 hectares of employment land within Use Class B1 and B2;
   a total of 4 local centres, one of which includes a food store with  
  2,000 – 2,500m2 floorspace in the central neighbourhood;
   a total of 3 (2 forms-of-entry) primary schools  
  (or an additional 6 forms-of-entry);
   a secondary school (or contributions towards the delivery of 6  
  forms-of-enty off-site);
   public open space in accordance with the Borough Council’s  
  Open Space Standards and extending the River Ray green  
  corridor to the wider countryside;
   high quality public realm
   community facilities as follows:
    a leisure centre associated with the secondary school; or a  
    combination of on-site leisure facilities and increased  
   capacity and improvements at Croft and Ridgeway; and
    buildings for use by the community, service providers and for  
   worship, including dual-use facilities at all schools;
    police / emergency services point; and
    health care facilities including GP surgery, dentist and  
   pharmacy in the central neighbourhood.
   a community wide approach to renewable energy, preferably  
  with a district heating system.
c. Development at Wichelstowe shall protect, enhance and integrate   
 with existing environmental assets, including:
   the historic environment including the Scheduled Monument of   
  Westleaze Medieval Village;
   biodiversity, including Old Town Railway Path County Wildlife Site,  
  the river corridors and natural springs;
   the North Wessex Downs AONB landscape and views from it; and
   off-site landscape and biodiversity mitigation south of the M4. 
d. The development at Wichelstowe shall provide sustainable transport  
 links that integrate with Swindon including:
   an express bus link to Swindon Town Centre and additional  
  public transport links within the site;
Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.36 Wichelstowe covers a gross area of around 310 hectares between the London 
to Bristol railway line , the former railway line between Rushey Platt and Old 
Town and the M4 to the south of the town. Wichelstowe was identified in the 
Swindon Development Appraisal Study 1998. Outline planning permission for the 4,500 dwelling, mixed-use development was granted in May 2005 and construction started in Spring 2007. Although development is underway, 
economic conditions have delayed delivery and created uncertainty over 
the implementation of the existing consent. Even though Wichelstowe has outline planning permission, future uncertainty over the implementation of the scheme in its current format necessitates its allocation in this Local Plan.  Any 
amendments to the existing scheme or future alternative application will be 
considered in light of this policy.
5.37 The Croft Road to Hay Lane Link is a necessary part of the Wichelstowe Development, to provide access to the development. Although the alignment of the road takes it to the south of the M4 and therefore beyond the Urban 
Area boundary, this shall not establish a precedent for development south of 
the M4. It will link Wichelstowe to the A4361 at Pipers Way in the east and the B4005 in the west.
 Key Evidence Base
5.38 Key evidence base documents include: 
   Swindon Development Appraisal Study (1998);
   Wichelstowe Environmental Statement Supplement Volume 1(V1.1),  
 Volume 2 (2013);
152   walking and cycle links to Swindon’s existing communities and   
  the wider countryside; 
   a link to Junction 16 of the M4;
   a link from Croft Road to Hay Lane; and
   a Park and Ride site.
e. The risk of flooding shall be minimised, both within the development  
 and adjacent properties, in accordance with Policy EN6.
f. The route for the Wilts & Berks Canal, as set out on the Policies Map,   
 shall be safeguarded and protected from development.
g. The character and identity of Wroughton will be protected by a  
 principle of non-coalescence between the settlements. The land  
 between Wichelstowe and the village shall remain part of the   
 countryside. However, small scale development within this area, as  
 defined on the Policies Map, will be permitted where it retains or  
 enhances the existing character of the countryside and: 
   involves the re-use, conversion or extension of existing buildings  
  at a scale appropriate to their location, in accordance with the  
  criteria specified in Policy DE1; or
   is an essential requirement directly related to the economic or   
  social needs of the rural community.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change   Wichelstowe Master Plan Report (October 2013); and
   Wichelstowe Off-site Landscape and Nature Conservation Proposals   
 (September 2013). 
 Delivery and Links with other Key Policies and Strategies
5.39 Wichelstowe is a key component of the development strategy for the Borough 
and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base. Indicative phasing of the delivery of Wichelstowe is shown on Figure 9 to clarify 
when development will be delivered in accordance with the consented outline 
application.  Effective management of development will be achieved through the application of this policy and through: 
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the  
 “Evidence Base” above; 
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership;
   Development framework plan, design codes and masterplan; 
   Continuing dialogue between the Borough Council, local community and  
 developers; and
   The development management process.
153 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
154Figure 9: Wichelstowe Inset Diagram
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
155Policy NC2: Commonhead
a. Land at Commonhead, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated  
 for a mixed-use development.
b. The development at Commonhead shall provide: 
   a total of 890 dwellings at an average density of 35.5 dwellings  
  per hectare;
   affordable homes in accordance with Policy HA2;
   15 hectares of employment land within Use Class B1 and/or B2
   a local centre of a maximum of 1000m2 retail floorspace ;
   a primary school (or 1 form-of-entry) incorporating  
  community facilities;
   contributions towards the delivery of 1 form form-of-entry   
  secondary school places off-site;
   temporary accommodation to manage the demographic peak  
  at primary, and contributions as such at secondary schools;
   green infrastructure in accordance with Policy EN1 and which   
  connects to the urban area and wider countryside;
   sport, leisure and community facilities in accordance with  
  Policy CM2; 
   high quality public realm; 
   a community wide approach to renewable energy; and
   5.5 hectares of land safeguarded for future expansion of the  
  Great Western Hospital, incorporating provision for emergency   
  services if required.
c. Development at Commonhead shall provide sustainable transport   
 links that integrate with Swindon including:
   public transport links to Swindon Town Centre;
   walking and cycle links to Swindon’s existing communities,  
  Coate Water Country Park and Great Western Hospital; and
   access to the site from Marlborough Road.
d. Development at Commonhead shall protect, enhance and integrate 
  with existing environmental assets including:
   Coate Water Country Park and Day House Copse; 
   views to and from the North Wessex Downs AONB and  
  Coate Water Country Park;
   protection of the existing historic environment, including the  
   setting of listed buildings and on-site archaeological features;   
  and
   habitat connectivity and enhanced biodiversity.
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026156 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026e. The area between Coate Water and the new development, as   
 indicated on the Policies Map will be protected from development  
 to preserve the setting to the Coate Water Country Park, and the  
 function of Day House Lane as a green corridor will be safeguarded.
f. The route for the Wilts & Berks Canal as set out on the Policies Map   
 will be safeguarded and protected from development.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
157 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Figure 10: Commonhead Inset Diagram
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016158 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.40 The Adopted Swindon Borough Local Plan 2011 contained an allocation for 
a mixed-use urban extension incorporating a university campus on land at Commonhead. The scale of residential development associated with the development was required to enable the development of the university and 
employment land.  The rationale behind this allocation related to a specific 
campus model, which can no longer be implemented. The residential element of the allocation (without the presence of a university campus) and the economic and social benefits associated with it was re-assessed through the 
Small Scale Urban Extensions Study.  Consequently Commonhead is now re-
allocated for a reduced scale of development.
5.41 In April 2012, following an Appeal in December 2011 outline permission was granted for 890 dwellings at Commonhead with employment land and land safeguarded for future expansion of the Great Western Hospital.  It is 
considered necessary to maintain a policy in this Local Plan to guide reserved 
matter applications or in the event of a revised outline planning application.
5.42 The Great Western Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and Great Western Hospital have identified that there is a need for land adjacent to the hospital to be safeguarded to accommodate future growth needs.
5.43 Given their status, there is a requirement to protect the Day House Copse County Wildlife Site, Coate Water Nature Reserve and Burderop Wood Country Wildlife Site. It is important that the setting and role of Coate Water County Park 
is protected over the long-term and therefore the land between it and the 
Commonhead allocation is safeguarded from development. This area may also aid the local interpretation of the literary associations of the area.
5.44 Commonhead will be a sustainable community in terms of design, transport, construction, energy and waste management in accordance with other 
policies in this Local Plan.
5.45 Key design principles include:
   To protect Coate Water Country Park and the landscape context of the   
 North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty; and
   To ensure that the employment offer complements Swindon Town Centre
 Key Evidence Base
5.46 Key evidence base documents include:
   Swindon Principal Urban Area Study (2003); and
   Swindon Small Scale Urban Extension Study (2008).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.47 Commonhead is a key component of the development strategy for Swindon 
Borough and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence 
base. Indicative phasing of the delivery of Commonhead is shown on Figure 10 
to provide clarity when development will be delivered in accordance with the consented outline application. Effective management of development will be achieved through the application of this policy and through: Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
159 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the   
 “Evidence Base” above;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership;
   Development framework plan, design codes and masterplan; 
   Continuing dialogue between the Borough Council, the local community  
 and developers; and
   The development management process.
160 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Policy NC3: New Eastern Villages - including 
Rowborough and South Marston Village Expansion
a. Land to the East of the A419, as defined on the Policies Map, is  
  allocated for a mixed-use development. The form of the  
 development shall comprise a series of new inter-connected distinct  
 villages and an expanded South Marston village defined by the  
 network of green infrastructure corridors.
b. The development shall provide: 
   a design led approach to housing density leading to an overall  
  average density of 40 dwellings per hectare; comprising:
    about 6,000 dwellings at the New Eastern Villages  
   (south of the A420);
    about 1,500 dwellings at Rowborough (north of the A420).
    500 dwellings at South Marston.
   Affordable housing shall be provided at Rowborough and  
  south of the A420 in accordance with Policy HA2.  Separate   
  proposals are made in Policy RA3 in relation to South Marston
   high quality public realm including outdoor civic public space; 
   sustainable transport links including: 
    walking and cycle network improvements that integrate with  
   existing networks and provide good connectivity within the   
   development and to the surrounding area;
    an express bus network through the District Centre that   
   connects the Eastern Villages to Swindon Town Centre as  
   part of phase 1 of the development, which includes   
   residential development north of the A420, the District Centre  
   and the employment allocation;  
   additional public transport services to connect with Swindon   
  and internally within the development; 
   an improved gateway junction at White Hart to manage    
  additional demand and deliver high quality public realm; 
   improvements to the Oxford Road/Drakes Way and    
  Covingham Road/Dorcan Way transport corridors;
   a green bridge across the A419 near Covingham Drive to   
  provide for walking, cycling and public transport; 
   a new road link to the Commonhead Roundabout; 
   a new road link under the Bristol to London railway line    
  connecting the development north and south at Rowborough;
   New and/or improved accesses to the A420 for proposed  
  residential and employment uses;
   a 1000 (3ha.) space Park and Ride site; and
   measures to minimise rat-running through existing adjacent  
  villages and east Swindon. Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
161 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026     an extensive green infrastructure network that maximises  
  opportunities for habitat connectivity and enhanced  
  biodiversity including extending the River Cole green    
  infrastructure corridor and connecting with Nightingale Wood;
   sports and leisure facilities, including playing pitches a leisure  
  centre and a 25m swimming pool;
   about 40 hectares net of employment land in total (B Class Uses)  
  to be located south and east of the A420 and A419 respectively  
  adjacent to the White Hart Junction, in a form that complements  
  the mixed-use District Centre, and safeguards its connection with  
  the wider residential development in the Eastern Villages and   
  distributed as follows:
   2.5 hectares within B1a use-class to be located at and/or   
   adjacent to the District Centre;
   7.5 hectares. within B1b/c or B2 use-class; and
   30 hectares within B8 use-class. 
   about 12,000m2 (gross) of retail floorspace including a high  
  quality District Centre with strong connectivity to the adjacent  
  residential areas, comprising an anchor food store and  
  complementary uses, and a network of Local Centres that   
  offer retail provision of a scale that meets the daily shopping   
  needs of the communities they serve, including the existing   
  community at South Marston. 
   educational requirements comprising:  
   a minimum of 8 forms-of-entry of secondary provision;
    a minimum of 8 forms-of-entry of primary provision with  
   early learning facilities
    a site for a special school for children and young persons  
   with profound, multiple and severe learning difficulties for   
   ages 0-25
    measures to manage the demographic peak at primary and  
   secondary schools;
   community facilities by the means of safeguarded land and/  
  or developer contributions, including where appropriate, flexible,  
  multi-purpose buildings for use by the community, the public  
  sector and for worship at the District Centre, local centres and   
  educational requirements;
   a health care facility with GP, dentist and pharmacy at the  
  District Centre;
   safeguarded land for a fire station towards the southern part of  
  the site, and
   a sewage treatment works if required.162 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.48 Previous drafts of the Local Plan (which took the form of a developing Core 
Strategy) identified the Eastern Development Area (EDA) for up to 12,000 
homes to comply with the draft Regional Spatial Strategy for the South West.  This area was identified through the Swindon Joint Study (2005), and the 
evidence remains in place for this area to be identified as the most sustainable 
location for a large scale mixed-use development. In line with the overall reduction in the housing requirement in the Borough as a whole, a lower level of housing development is now proposed in this area which is more deliverable 
and which also better reflects local views gathered during consultation.
5.49 However the proposed development is of a sufficient scale to provide the large-scale infrastructure to mitigate the impact of development and provide 
facilities within the development such as District Centre and secondary school.c. The development will ensure:
   the landscape context and views to and from the North Wessex  
  Downs AONB are respected, including potential off-site    
  mitigation;
   the risk of flooding from the development is minimised, both  
  within the development and at existing neighbouring    
  communities in accordance with Policy EN6;
   biodiversity, including the River Cole Corridor and River Cole  
  Meadow County Wildlife Sites, is protected, integrated and  
  enhanced; and
   the historic environment, including the Scheduled Monument,  
  Earlscourt Manor, Great Moorleaze Farm and other Listed  
  Buildings are protected, acknowledged and enhanced.
d. The route for the Wilts & Berks Canal as set out on the Policies Map  
 will be safeguarded and protected from development.
e. The character and identity of Wanborough, Bishopstone and  
 Bourton will be protected by a principle of non-coalescence  
 between the settlements. The land between the New Eastern Villages  
  site boundary and the existing villages shall remain part of the  
 countryside. However, small scale development within this area, as  
 defined on the Policies Map, will be permitted where it retains or  
 enhances the existing character of the countryside and:
   involves the re-use, conversion or extension of existing buildings  
  at a scale appropriate to their location, in accordance with the   
  criteria specified in Policy DE1; or
   is an essential requirement directly related to the economic or  
  social needs of the rural community.
f. The character and identity of South Marston will be protected as  
 set out in Policy RA3.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
163Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.50 A secondary school will be important in establishing a sense of community 
within the New Eastern Villages and reducing the impact on existing secondary 
schools in east Swindon. If there is no secondary school within the area, the 
traffic impact on east Swindon will be amplified.  Development must be of sufficient critical mass to enable other infrastructure items such as improved 
access to east Swindon at White Hart, and the green bridge.  
5.51 The impact on existing communities, particularly in east Swindon and South Marston is a key consideration.  The aim is to maximise the benefits and 
minimise the negative impacts of the proposed development.  The most significant potential impact on existing communities in east Swindon is the 
traffic impact of journeys from the New Eastern Villages towards Swindon Town 
Centre.  To alleviate potential traffic impact on Oxford Road, Covingham Drive and Greenbridge Roundabout there should be more than one access point towards Swindon Town Centre.
5.52 The vision for the New Eastern Villages is to create sustainable well-designed places where people want to live, work and spend time.  Flood risk zones and 
archaeology within the site prevent development in certain areas, but they 
also provide the opportunity to provide strong green links through the new community. A series of new villages will be created structured around these green links, which connect the communities together and provide a focus of 
activity for residents.
5.53 The New Eastern Villages will be well integrated with east Swindon and well connected to Swindon Town Centre. They should deliver a variety of character 
and design, including innovative and contemporary design that represents an exemplar in sustainable living.
5.54 In total, the scale of development will be capitalised upon to deliver strategic infrastructure that could not be achieved by smaller developments.  However, 
development must not compete with Swindon Town Centre or undermine its 
regeneration.  The identity and character of South Marston, Wanborough and Bourton will also be protected and retained. 
 Design and Development Form
5.55 The site boundary, as shown on the Policies Map, has been drawn on the 
basis of it being a sustainable location, particularly in regard to access to the 
existing urban area and Swindon Town Centre.  Consultation in previous drafts of the Local Plan during the Core Strategy process highlighted the concern 
over impacts on existing nearby rural settlements. The revised site boundary 
and scale of development seeks to ensure villages near to the proposed development retain their rural character and identity, and the impact upon them is now reduced. The specific details of land use and landscape 
requirements in and around the New Eastern Villages development will be 
established through more detailed masterplanning work to ensure a graduated transition between the new communities and the countryside beyond.
5.56 The design concept for the development is based on individual “villages” each 
with its own separate identity, whilst integrating with each other and the existing 
urban area. The green infrastructure corridors between these settlements is the principal defining site feature and the village concept works well within these 
existing constraints.      
164 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Homes
5.57 A design led approach to development is being promoted for the New Eastern 
Villages at an average density of 40 dwellings per hectare.  The New Eastern Villages development will: 
   Respond to the landscape and existing site conditions;
   Deliver the range of infrastructure needed to support a new community of  
  around 18,000 residents, including a secondary school and other    
 educational requirements; and
   Meet Swindon’s long term housing demand and need. 
5.58 Policy DE1 and HA1 promote a design-led approach to density, which reflects 
the character of the surrounding area.  A variety of area characters and a 
range of urban forms will be expected within the new villages. This will extend from more concentrated development around the centres to support local 
shops, leisure and community facilities and public transport to more dispersed 
lower densities towards the rural edge.  An average of 40 homes per hectare will be established as a target across the New Eastern Villages as a whole, in order to define the site boundary and minimise unnecessary additional 
greenfield development. However, this should be flexibly applied to ensure that 
the density reflects the design objectives and not the other way round.
 Employment
5.59 To support long term economic and job growth at Swindon, employment provision is made as part of the development to:
   Deliver jobs and employment land to support growth in Swindon’s key   
 economic sectors; 
   Create vibrancy within the development; 
   Provide opportunities for people to live and work in the area; and
   Create an eastern gateway to Swindon.
5.60 There is strong potential in the east of Swindon to deliver an advanced manufacturing hub associated with existing business, particularly Honda and BMW.  Proximity to such large-scale employment and opportunities to develop synergies with them was a key aspect in identifying the area to the 
east of Swindon for development.  Access to the strategic transport network 
is also a key opportunity to further develop the distribution and logistics sector.  These sectors are less appropriate in the Town Centre and will be important in delivering a balanced and diverse economy across Swindon.
5.61 Office development will be an important component of a vibrant  
mixed-use District Centre. The office floorspace at the new District Centre should be marketed primarily towards office users less appropriate to the Town 
Centre. As the development strategy is delivered, the population increase of 
Swindon should support the delivery of complementary office sites that do not undermine the role of the Town Centre.
5.62 Office development (Use Class B1a) should be concentrated within the design and built form of the District Centre supported by small-scale office premises above shops within the Local Centres.  Land adjacent to the A419 / A420, 
should provide opportunities for the development of advanced manufacturing 
and distribution and logistics activities (Use Classes B1b-c / B2 / B8).   
Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
165 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.63 In addition, provision may be made for small scale employment opportunities 
at accessible locations within the New Eastern Villages, specifically at local 
centres provided the amenity of adjacent uses, and future uses is not  
adversely affected. 
 Centres
5.64 The District Centre must be large enough and provide a wide enough range 
of activities to create a strong identity for east Swindon, which will anchor 
and provide a focus for new and existing communities.  However it must not 
undermine the regeneration or role of Swindon Town Centre or provide a counter-weight to the Town Centre. Retail schemes will be expected to be supported by a retail impact assessment, in accordance with Policy EC3, which 
demonstrates that the development is of a scale and type that would not 
damage the vitality or viability of the Town Centre.
5.65 Retail units (excluding any anchor foodstore) will be limited in size, and the District Centre should be exemplary in design. The District Centre should also provide civic public space to host outdoor events and activities, community 
facilities and high quality public realm, innovative and contemporary buildings 
to signal its role as the heart of east Swindon and gateway to the town.
5.66 In addition to the District Centre, Local Centres will be provided as focal points for the villages, serving smaller catchments.  These will be small groups of shops that meet the day-to-day shopping needs of the community and which are 
accessible easily by walking or cycling.  There will also be provision for small-
scale employment and the Local Centres will also contain multi-use facilities for worship, public sector use and leisure, community and cultural uses, especially in the evenings.
5.67 Each Local Centre should also provide a smaller scale public realm feature, 
such as a small square, widened street or managed green space to help 
create community identity, a sense of place and to signal its location as a community focal point.  The design should maximise opportunities to co-locate Local Centres with primary schools, to generate a scale or activity and to share 
facilities.
5.68 The 12,000m
2 (gross) of retail floorspace that would serve the New Eastern 
Villages has been calculated on the basis that the existing floorspace at the Sainsbury’s Store on Oxford Road would be subsumed within any development.
 Health and Emergency Services
5.69 The scale of development will generate the need for a new health care 
facility.  The Clinical Commissioning Group has identified that a GP can serve a population of around 1,750 residents, therefore a 11 GP surgery or two smaller surgeries, will be needed, which should be located at the District Centre. 
To support health and social care objectives set out in Policy CM2, the GP 
surgery(ies) should be co-located with a dentist and pharmacy and be fit for integrated public sector use (see Policy CM3).
5.70 The Wiltshire Fire and Rescue service will not be able to maintain current operational effectiveness and response times with the proposed development 
without a reorganisation of assets.  A new fire station will be required to the 
southeast of Swindon to serve the New Eastern Villages and existing south and eastern areas of the Borough.  The preferred site of the Fire Service is      
166 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026land adjacent to Great Western Hospital. However if that site proves to be 
undeliverable then land at the southern end of the New Eastern Villages area in the employment area should be safeguarded for a new fire station.
 Schools
5.71 The New Eastern Villages will generate a need for additional secondary and 
primary education facilities. This will be provided by a new secondary school 
and eight form entry primary school provision as well as the expansion of the existing primary school at South Marston. These schools should be at the heart 
of each village. Initially, secondary school places needs will be met by existing 
education infrastructure.  As development is built out, a new 8-form entry secondary school will be provided on-site.  One of the new primary schools will be co-located with the secondary school and specialist leisure and sports 
centre.
5.72 In order to manage the projected peak in pupil numbers, each primary school 
will be capable of expanding to temporarily accommodate an additional form of entry. To manage the projected peak in secondary pupil numbers the new secondary school will be capable of expansion of up to 4 forms-of-entry.  
Prior to this physical improvements and capacity may also be required  
at existing schools.
 Green Infrastructure
5.73 The development form at the New Eastern Villages will be structured around green spaces, particularly associated with the River Cole corridor and its 
tributaries. Development will protect and enhance existing green infrastructure, 
defined in policy EN1, and provide new green infrastructure in accordance  
with that policy.
5.74 There is a range of existing heritage and biodiversity assets within and near to the proposed development.  These will be protected, enhanced and 
integrated within the development.  The site will demonstrate net biodiversity 
gain, through the creation of new habitats on-site as well as the protection and enhancement of the existing biodiversity present.  The impact on views to and from the North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty will be 
mitigated through measures identified in the landscape assessment, including 
off-site mitigation if necessary, and considered in the context of Swindon’s existing position in relation to the North Wessex Downs such that there is no net detriment to the AONB, accepting that development will be visible. 
5.75 Proposals for development must integrate and connect with the wider Swindon green infrastructure network extending the River Cole Corridor through the site 
to Nightingale Wood and the wider countryside. 
5.76 The Green Infrastructure network will provide leisure routes and perform flood 
alleviation and water storage functions, but not exclusively.  Public open space and allotment facilities will be provided in accordance with the Council’s standards (as set out in Appendix 3).
 Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
167 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Transport
5.77 The scale of the development facilitates the provision of an express bus network 
system between the new development and Swindon Town Centre and will enable longer distance bus services which will utilise the express bus route 
and infrastructure. Such a system should be fast, frequent, safe, reliable and 
cost-effective. Above all it should be attractive to those who have a choice of transport means. Opportunities to walk and cycle should be maximised, 
particularly along the green corridors and to integrate with existing networks.
5.78 The green bridge will provide an additional walking and cycling link across the A419 and public transport route.  It will create an attractive and safe route to 
connect the new development and the existing communities.
5.79 The White Hart junction is a critical part of the local and strategic road 
network, principally providing an interchange between the A420 and the 
A419 Trunk Road. The White Hart Junction also has a critical role in high quality urban design and should provide a gateway to the town. Its reconfiguration 
should not only facilitate vehicular access to the development but should 
also facilitate enhanced pedestrian and cycling access. It is important that a second access to the A419 is provided to disperse traffic from the development, and this will be provided in the form of a link road to the 
Commonhead roundabout from within the southern part of the development.
5.80 North-south routes under the railway line will be provided to strengthen walking 
and cycling links. New vehicular access should be the primary route to the new Rowborough Village, and to avoid rat-running through South Marston. Transport 
measures should also seek to avoid rat-running through Wanborough and the 
existing communities of East Swindon, Stratton and Covingham including by the provision of the Commonhead link road. 
5.81 In alignment with the Swindon Transport Strategy a Park and Ride should be 
provided as part of the development to help reduce the volume of traffic 
entering Swindon.
5.82 Impacts on the A419 and Junction 15 of the M4 must be considered in terms of 
journey time reliability and safety.
 Canal
5.83 In order to not prejudice the long-term ambition of linking the Wilts & 
Berks Canal to the River Thames a route should be safeguarded between 
Commonhead and Acorn Bridge. The proposed alignment will be further defined in any subsequent DPDs in partnership with stakeholders.  
 Existing Communities
5.84 The development to the east of Swindon could benefit existing communities in 
East Swindon. These include direct benefits by providing of new facilities nearby 
such as; 
 
  upgrades and improvements to east Swindon secondary school(s);
   health, retail and community facilities at the District Centre at the north west  
 of the site to provide a focal point for the whole of east Swindon; and
   new physical links to deliver good quality walking, cycling and public   
 transport links between new and existing communities.168 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.85 Indirect benefits include access to new transport links into Swindon Town 
Centre, the creation of new jobs within the development and potential energy benefits associated with new energy infrastructure, and developer contributions 
in general.
5.86 The maintenance of the separate identity of the villages adjacent to the 
proposed development is an important consideration, which has been emphasised through consultation and community engagement. The land between the development and the villages shall remain part of the countryside 
with the policy restrictions that apply to development in the countryside in 
place. It is recognised that there is some development which is appropriate in countryside locations and the policy makes allowances for such development to come forward as appropriate.
 Design Principles
5.87 The design principles include:
 
  To create new distinct villages with individual identities linked together by  
 green spaces, which integrate with the existing urban area;
   To create a new District Centre and focus of activity in the north west of the  
 site to serve new and existing communities at east Swindon;
   To deliver innovative, sustainable, diverse and contemporary development  
 and strategic enabling infrastructure that benefits Swindon as a whole;
   To respect the landscape context, natural and historic environmental   
 features and the identity of the surrounding villages; and
   To create a new eastern approach to Swindon and help redefine and   
 improve the image of Swindon. 
 Key Evidence Base
5.88 Key evidence base documents include:
   Swindon Joint Study 2026 (2005);
   East of Swindon Evidence Base Update (2011);
   East of Swindon Evidence Base Update Addendum (2012);
   Eastern Villages Transport Study (2011);
   Eastern Villages Transport Study Update (2012); 
   Swindon Eastern Development Area Framework (2009);
   Swindon Transport Strategy (2009);
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026: Revised   
 Consultation Document (SBC, 2011);
   Draft EDA Supplementary Planning Document (2009) and  
 comments received;
   New Eastern Villages Draft SPD (2013);
   Swindon Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 (2008);
   Strategy for Major Sports Facilities Provision 2009-2026 (2009);
   Swindon Retail Capacity Update (2009);Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
169 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026   Swindon School Place Planning Study Update (SBC, 2011);
   Swindon School Place Planning Study: Future Demand to 2026 (2009);
   Swindon Eastern Development Area WBCT Preferred Canal Route (2012);
   Eastern Villages Southern Connector Road Feasibility Study (2014); and
   New Eastern Villages Mitigation Works West of A419 and Apportionment  
 of Impacts (2014).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.89 The New Eastern Villages, Rowborough and South Marston are a key 
component of the development strategy for the Borough and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base. Figure 11 illustrates 
the broad areas of development with indicative housing figures and 
anticipated delivery timeframes.  It is acknowledged that the housing figures and anticipated timeframes are indicative and progress on the differing 
development islands will be dependent on the necessary infrastructure being 
delivered, therefore if infrastructure is already in place, there is potential for the 
delivery of development to be accelerated.  The early delivery of any of the 
sites should not compromise the delivery of the overall infrastructure to support 
the completed New Eastern Villages as envisaged under this Plan. The extent 
of the development islands is also illustrated but will be refined through the 
development management process. Effective management of development will be achieved through the application of this policy and through:
 
  Alignment of proposals with other related (but non-planning) strategies   
 identified in the evidence base above;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Any subsequent DPDS
   Guidance in SPDs;
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership;
   Development Framework Plan, design codes and masterplan; 
   Continuing dialogue between the Council, the local community and   
 developers and neighbouring authorities; and
   The development management process.
5.90 Whilst it is anticipated development will progress broadly in a north to south direction supporting delivery of key infrastructure and achieving the critical mass around the district centre and the express bus corridor, it is recognised 
that there will be opportunities for development to progress on a range of sites 
within the New Eastern Villages at differing periods to that anticipated and identified on the inset  map depending on access arrangements and other policy requirements including the provision and timely delivery of necessary 
infrastructure and appropriate mitigation of development impacts.170 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Figure 11: New Eastern Villages Inset Diagram  
(Indicative subject to detailed masterplan work)
 © Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
171 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Policy NC4: Tadpole Farm
a. Land at Tadpole Farm is allocated for a new mixed-use development  
 as defined on the Policies Map. 
b. The development shall provide: 
   a total of 1,695 dwellings at an average density of 35 dwellings   
  per hectare;
  5 hectares of employment land (B1 and/or B2 Class uses);
  a mixed use local centre of no more than 1000m2  
  retail floorspace; 
  a 2 forms of entry primary school (or 2 forms-of-entry);
  contributions towards the delivery of 2 forms-of-entry secondary  
  school places off-site;
  temporary accommodation to manage the demographic peak  
  at primary and contributions as such for secondary schools;
  green infrastructure in accordance with Policy EN1 which   
  connects with the urban area and countryside, particularly the   
  Cricklade Country Way;
  a wildlife corridor associated with the River Ray;
  sport, leisure, and community facilities in accordance with  
  Policy CM2, including off-site contributions towards indoor   
  leisure facilities; and
  a community wide approach to renewable energy.
c. Development at Tadpole Farm shall provide sustainable transport   
 links that integrate with Swindon including:
  an express bus link between Tadpole Farm and Swindon Town   
  Centre and other public transport links;
  contributions towards mitigation on the highway network;
  vehicular access routes from Tadpole Lane and a new route  
  north to connect to Swindon via Ermin Street, Blunsdon  
  (the former A419) and under the new A419(T) at the existing   
  underpass;
  measures to discourage through traffic from Thamesdown Drive   
  to Blunsdon via Tadpole Lane;
  additional pedestrian and cycle connections between the   
  development and North Swindon;
  walking and cycling links to North Swindon;
  a link to the National Cycle Route 45 at the Cricklade Country   
  Way; and
  Development at Tadpole Farm shall protect, integrate and   
  enhance existing assets including habitat connectivity and   
  biodiversity, particularly at the River Ray Corridor.172 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026d. The development shall include mitigation to reduce the impact of   
 development upon:
  the strategic landscape of Blunsdon Hill;
  the rural area to the north of the site; and
  the risk of flooding at new and existing communities and  
  avoid development in the area of flood risk associated with  
  the River Ray.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
173 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Figure 12: Tadpole Farm Inset Diagram
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016174 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.91 Outline planning permission was recently granted for a mixed use development 
comprising 1695 dwellings, 5 hectares of employment land, a primary school 
and local centre at Tadpole Farm in accordance with the draft Policy NC5 in 
the Revised Proposed Submission Document Core Strategy (2011). This Local Plan retains Tadpole Farm as an allocation to guide detailed applications and in the event of a new outline planning application being submitted in  
the future. 
5.92 The draft South West Regional Spatial Strategy identified an area of search 
to the north-west of Swindon, to accommodate 2,000 dwellings as urban 
extension(s) to the town. The Small Scale Urban Extensions Study concluded that Tadpole Farm is the most sustainable location to accommodate 
development in this area.  Tadpole Farm was identified in large part due to  
the absence of any major environmental constraints and that an urban 
extension in this location can be accommodated discretely within the strategic landscape with limited impact upon the character and identity of any 
surrounding settlements.
5.93 The need to ensure a delivery of housing supply on a range of urban extensions to meet economic and demographic needs means Tadpole Farm remains as 
a location for major development. However, to reflect a move towards lower densities, a reduced scale of development is now allocated in this Plan.
5.94 The Small Scale Urban Extensions Study and Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy highlight the importance of the Cricklade Country Way as a key strategic green infrastructure route.  Development proposals must 
support this role and integration with wider green infrastructure objectives, 
including a landscape strategy, which addresses strategic impact to the north of the site and the relationship between Tadpole Farm and Blunsdon Hill.
5.95 Access to Tadpole Farm will be primarily from Oakhurst Way and a new northern access road to the former A419 to Blunsdon. Vehicular access will also 
be from Tadpole Lane.  Measures such as signaling and road design should be 
implemented to discourage trips from Thamesdown Drive to Blunsdon via the new development and Tadpole Lane. The primary route for construction traffic will be from the north. 
5.96 The Swindon Transport Strategy identifies the requirement for a new express bus link and transport route linking north and west Swindon with the Town Centre. 
An express bus route is critical to deliver the smaller scale urban extensions 
in a sustainable manner and should be phased in the early part of the development. A cohesive approach to transport and highways infrastructure will be required involving developer contributions from all sites to deliver a 
transport solution for north Swindon. A bus only access route is also identified 
from north Swindon.
5.97 The purpose of this is to mitigate the impacts of development upon the existing road network at north and west Swindon alongside the localised transport infrastructure. Impact during the construction phase on existing communities will 
need to be considered.
5.98 There is a considerable area of high flood risk to the west of the proposed site associated with the River Ray. Development will not be permitted in this high 
flood risk area, and measures should be introduced to reduce existing flood problems at Tadpole Bridge.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
175 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Key Evidence Base
5.99 Key evidence base documents include: 
   Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Study (2008);
    Swindon Transport Strategy (2009); and
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026:  
 Revised Consultation Document (2011).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.100 Tadpole Farm is a key component of the development strategy for the Borough 
and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base. Indicative phasing of the delivery of Tadpole Farm is shown on Figure 12 to 
clarify when development will be delivered in accordance with the consented 
outline application.  Effective management of development will be achieved through the application of this policy and through:
 
  Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the   
 “Evidence Base” above; 
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership; 
   Development framework plan, design codes and masterplan; 
   Continuing dialogue between the Borough Council, the local community  
 and developers; and
   The development management process.
176 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Policy NC5: Kingsdown (East of the A419)
a. Land at Kingsdown (East of the A419) is allocated for a new  
 mixed-use development, as defined on the Policies Map. 
b. The development shall provide:
    a total of 1,650 dwellings, at an average density of 35 dwellings   
  per hectare, with lower densities in the north and west of the   
  development;
  a mixed use Local Centre of not more than 1000m2 retail  
  floorspace with no more than 20% of that as comparison goods;
  a 2 forms of entry primary school and a children’s centre;
  contributions towards the delivery of 2 forms-of-entry secondary  
  school places off-site;
  temporary accommodation to manage the demographic peak  
  at the primary school and contributions as such for secondary   
  schools;
  green infrastructure in accordance with Policy EN1 which  
  connects with Broad Blunsdon and the wider countryside;
  landscape mitigation to reduce the visual impact of    
  development to the north and east of the site;
  sport, leisure, and community facilities in accordance with the   
  objectives of Policy CM2; 
  high quality public realm; and;
  a community wide approach to renewable energy in accord   
  with Policy DE2.
c. Development at Kingsdown shall provide sustainable transport links   
 that integrate with Swindon including:
  a new all vehicular bridge across the A419 to connect to the   
  Swindon urban area as the primary access route;
  public transport links from the first phase of development 
  mitigation contributions for the highway network;
  vehicular access routes from Cold Harbour Junction and the  
  B4019 east of Broad Blunsdon, designed in such a way to  
  discourage additional trips through Broad Blunsdon and  
  Broadbush and protect the amenity of Kingsdown Lane including 
   appropriate green infrastructure;
  measures to minimise ‘rat-running’ through Broad Blunsdon  
  village and from Cold Harbour Junction; and
  connections for walking and cycling to Swindon and  
  Broad Blunsdon.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
177 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026d. Development at Kingsdown will protect, integrate and enhance   
 existing assets including:
  Bydemill Brook and its tributaries; and
  Stratton Wood
e. Development at Kingsdown shall include mitigation to reduce the   
 impact of development upon:
  existing biodiversity and geodiversity assets in accordance  
  with Policy EN4;
  the risk of flooding at new and existing communities in    
  accordance with Policy EN7;
  the historic environment, including listed buildings and any  
  archaeological features in accordance with Policy EN10; and
  the context and character of Broad Blunsdon at the northern  
  edge of the site, through the design of the development.
f. The character and identity of Broad Blunsdon, including Broadbush,   
 shall be protected by a principle of non-coalescence between the  
 settlements. The masterplan for the development should include  
 areas of green infrastructure and a form of development that  
 contributes to this principle. The land between the Kingsdown  
 development and the village shall remain part of the countryside.  
 However, small scale development within this area, as defined on  
 the Policies Map, will be supported where it retains or enhances   
 the existing character of the countryside and:
  involves the re-use, conversion or extension of existing buildings  
  at a scale appropriate to their location, in accordance with the   
  criteria specified in Policy DE1; or
  is an essential requirement directly related to the economic or   
  social needs of the rural community.
5.101 In order to provide an adequate supply of housing to meet the overall 
requirement and satisfy the 5-year housing land requirement it has been necessary to identify another smaller-scale urban extension to Swindon.
5.102 In the Preferred Options draft of the Core Strategy (2008), land at Kingsdown (East of the A419) was allocated for 500 dwellings to meet the requirement within that Plan to be in accord with the draft RSS. However in the Small Scale 
Urban Extension Study (2008) land at Kingsdown was assessed as being less 
sustainable than Tadpole Farm.  In the subsequent draft of the Core Strategy it was identified as a potential reserve site subject to delivery on other sites with the allocation being assigned to a larger Tadpole Farm allocation. Subsequent 
capacity work has limited Tadpole Farm to less than 1700 dwellings. To meet 
the additional housing requirement, land at Kingsdown has been assessed using the evidence of the small-scale urban extension study for its potential 
contribution to supply of housing.178 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.103 The Small Scale Urban Extension Study concluded that it is accessible to 
employment opportunities in north east Swindon and retail and leisure facilities also in north east Swindon. However such accessibility is subject to direct access over the A419, particularly by walking and cycling. In landscape terms 
development south of Kingsdown Lane is more appropriate than north of it. 
5.104 In order to provide for the essential infrastructure, particularly crossing the A419, 
a larger development is required than the initially identified 500 dwellings. Also, to provide for an on-site primary school of 2 forms of entry a residential 
development of between 1,600 and 2,000 dwellings is required. In consideration 
of the landscape north of Kingsdown Lane lower density housing is proposed in that area reducing the overall capacity. 
5.105 Access to Kingsdown shall be by more than one point. The primary access will be via a new bridge over the A419 linking into the Swindon urban area including walking and cycling. 
5.106 In order to deliver a sustainable development it is vital that the vehicular bridge is delivered early in the development. This may be secured through conditions relating to occupancy of residential units.  Improvements to Cricklade Road shall be considered in the context of the proposed Kingsdown development 
and other developments.
5.107 It is important that any impact on Broad Blunsdon is minimised and mitigated. 
The policy includes measures to reduce ‘rat-running’ and for the development to respect the context and character of the village. The area between 
the proposed development and Broad Blunsdon shall remain part of the 
countryside to maintain the separate identity of the village.
 Key Evidence Base
5.108 Key evidence base documents include:
 
  Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Study (2008);
   Swindon Transport Strategy (2009); and
   Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026: Revised   
 Consultation Document (2011).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.109 Kingsdown is a key component of the development strategy for the Borough 
and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base. 
Indicative phasing of the delivery of Kingsdown is shown on Figure 13 to provide clarity when development will be delivered.  Effective management  
of development will be achieved through the application of this policy  
and through: 
   Alignment of proposals with other related strategies identified in the  
 “Evidence Base” above;
   Implementation of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
   Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership; 
   Development framework plan, design codes and masterplan; 
   Continuing dialogue between the Borough Council, the local community  
 and developers; and
   The development management process. Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
179 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Figure 13: Kingsdown (East of the A419) 
	  © Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016180 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Rural Settlements
5.110 The rural area comprises about three-quarters of the Borough’s area, within 
which are a range of small settlements comprising well-defined communities. 
The rural areas of the Borough have their own specific requirements in terms 
of accessibility, economy and community facilities that in general are under greater pressure than in the Swindon Urban Area. These have to be provided in the context of the character and landscape of the surrounding areas. However 
the growth of Swindon will also impact upon these communities. The decline 
in employment in rural settlements and the increase in migration of commuters means they have increasingly become dormitory settlements.
 New Housing Developments
5.111 Policy SD2 makes provision for at least 450 new dwellings in the rural part 
of Swindon Borough between 2011 and 2026. The Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (2009 and 2013) confirmed that this level can be delivered but will require a comparison of available sites in consultation with the 
local communities.  Neighbourhood Plans and/or further site specific allocations 
work undertaken by the Borough Council will allocate specific development sites in accordance with the Local Plan, and in doing so will review settlement boundaries. Such allocations should be in the context of the existing character 
and size of the settlement. Whilst most development will occur in the primary 
settlements, the spatial strategy needs to be flexible enough to enable necessary development in the secondary settlements and smaller villages without setting rigid criteria about the level of existing facilities that is needed in 
individual settlements to make new housing acceptable. 
5.112 Sustainable small-scale developments that are necessary to maintain the 
function of rural life in villages will be acceptable but must come forward in a planned way with support from local communities. Proposals that introduce new uses to existing buildings can sometimes protect or make an important 
visual contribution to the rural scene as well as a practical contribution to the 
local stock of facilities or accommodation. Similarly, the removal of unsightly buildings can have a useful and important visual impact and might introduce 
additional environmental benefits.
5.113 In order to protect the individual characters of the countryside and small villages, unsustainable developments that are not of appropriate scale, design, 
or function should be prevented. The joint principles of sustainability and the need to keep rural communities vibrant would also be served by improving public transport, for example by encouraging community-based transport. 
 Employment
5.114 The national indications are that in the rural areas the key areas for future 
job growth are home working, teleworking and small businesses. These types 
of employment generate less of a need to identify and release land for economic development, and instead require a strategy which enables small 
businesses by, for example, increasing the provision of live-work space in rural 
communities. The Borough Council will be supportive of planning applications for workspace extensions to homes (subject to criteria related to scale, noise and disturbance). The local rural economy would also be boosted by 
encouraging job growth in leisure, education, and tourism (e.g. rural crafts), 
particularly in the more attractive villages and countryside. Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
181 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Accessibility and Village Services
5.115 Commercial facilities in rural areas, such as shops, post offices, and public 
houses, increasingly struggle to be economically viable. Services can be 
brought into the rural area, a principle that the spatial strategy for rural areas 
supports.  In doing so, it is hoped that the sustainability of rural areas will be improved by reducing the need to travel into Swindon. Whilst the Borough Council has an aspiration to encourage a range of services in small settlements, 
it is not something it can directly control.
5.116 For rural settlements to thrive resident’s local accessibility to services needs 
to be improved. Opportunities to improve fixed route bus services are limited because often such services are not economically viable and funds are only 
available to support a few routes. The future is therefore in demand responsive 
transport and in community-based schemes, which will be encouraged and supported by the Borough Council through successive reviews of the 
Local Transport Plan. There may also be a need for subsidised transport. If 
sustainable transport schemes are to be successful, Rural Transport Partnerships need to be developed through the Local Transport Plan, including local 
communities so that local needs can be identified. Coordination of schemes 
across administrative areas will require a joint approach with adjacent local authorities. Accessible funding mechanisms are needed, with targets 
applicable to rural areas.
 Key Evidence Base
5.117 Key evidence base documents include:
 
  Swindon Core Strategy Rural Issues Paper (2009)
Policy RA1: Highworth
a. Development at Highworth shall be in accordance with Policies SD1  
 and SD2 and should support the following local priorities: 
   maintain the separate identity of Highworth as a hill top market   
  town and respect its landscape setting; 
  rejuvenation of Highworth Town Centre to create a lively,  
  thriving and attractive focus for the town by:
   maintaining and enhancing the character and function of   
   Highworth Town Centre;
   seeking that appropriate development contributes towards   
   the improvement and unification of Highworth Town Centre   
   and points of access to it;
   preventing the loss of existing shops, services and facilities   
   from Highworth Town Centre;
   focusing shops, services and facilities at Highworth Town   
   Centre in accordance with Policy SD2; and
   improving the accessibility of Highworth by means of public  
    transport, walking and cycling, and providing links to  
   Swindon Borough’s existing cycle infrastructure182 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.118 Highworth is a freestanding settlement seven miles from Swindon and retains 
a market town function within its catchment area.  Highworth has a well-defined historic centre with a range of services and is surrounded by attractive countryside.  In addition, Highworth has a broad employment base that 
includes a business park at Blackworth Industrial Estate. 
5.119 The Vision for Highworth (Our Future Is In Our Hands) prepared by the 
Highworth Community Partnership Group in 2008, suggests that the economic 
development strategy for Highworth should seek to achieve “an appropriate 
balance between self-containment and openness to achieve economic viability”. To provide for future local employment opportunities approximately 
5 hectares of land north of the existing Blackworth Industrial Estate is identified 
to provide opportunities to provide an appropriate balance. To ensure that a range of job opportunities are provided for, the amount of B8 use Class is limited to no more than 50% of the allocation.
5.120 The vision also gives support to the development of sustainable  
tourism – particularly cultural tourism that would prevent Highworth becoming  
a ‘tourist trap’.
5.121 New housing development should be at a scale to support the identity of Highworth as a hill-top settlement, and does not increase the level of out-commuting, particularly by private car. However, a limited amount of additional housing is accepted to maintain the viability and vitality of Highworth, 
particularly the Town Centre.  Highworth Town Centre is a small centre that 
suffers from a lack of ‘critical mass’ of shops sufficient to attract shoppers in significant numbers. New housing provision will increase the number of 
households in Highworth, which will help maintain the viability of shops. There is 
a pressing need to improve the pedestrian linkage between the Co-op store and Highworth Town Centre. The street frontage of the High Street should remain primarily for A1 use-class (retail) in line with Policy EC3.   Support a sustainable market town economy for Highworth by:
   supporting the expansion of existing business and  
   encouraging economic development opportunities in   
   accordance with Policy EC1;
   realising tourist potential, in the form of appropriate  
   attractions and accommodation, as a historic market town  
   and gateway to the Cotswolds; and
 improving the visual and physical appearance of the  
   key points of access into the town.
  Prevention of significant adverse environmental impact.
  Provision of a range of social and recreational facilities.
  Protection and enhancement of the role of Pentylands Park,  
  as defined on the Policies Map, as a place to visit for  
  recreational purposes and related activities; and
b. Land north of Blackworth Industrial Estate, as shown on the Policies  
 Map, is allocated for B Use Class employment use, with no more  
 than 50% of it being used for B8-Use Class.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
183 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.122 Pentylands Park is an important and cherished local amenity, with ambitions 
to designate it as a Country Park. It is therefore vital that it is safeguarded from 
development that would compromise its role and function.
5.123 Opportunities should be sought from any future development to improve the key gateways to the Town Centre, particularly the Fox Roundabout.
 Local Priorities
5.124 Local priorities for Highworth have been identified through community planning 
participation events.
 Additional Evidence Base
5.125 Additional information includes:
 
  Shaping Your Community Report (2010); and
   Highworth: The Vision (2008).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.126 Effective management of development at Highworth will be achieved through the application of this policy and through:
 
  Highworth Neighbourhood Plan
   Any subsequent DPDs 
Policy RA2: Wroughton
a. Development at Wroughton shall be in accordance with Policies  
 SD1 and SD2 and should support the following local priorities  
 at Wroughton:
   retain Wroughton’s independent identity from Swindon by   
  maintaining separation between Wichelstowe and the village;
  strengthen links, particularly by public transport, between   
  Wroughton and Swindon including to:
   Swindon’s southern employment areas; 
   the Great Western Hospital; and
   West Swindon.
  strengthen the role of Wroughton Village Centre as a focus for  
  the village by:
   strengthening links between Wroughton High Street and the   
   Ellendune Shopping Centre;
   preventing the loss of existing shops and facilities;
   focusing shops and facilities at Wroughton Village Centre in   
   accordance with Policy EC3; and
   maintaining and enhancing the character of Wroughton  
   High Street.184 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.127 Wroughton is almost adjacent to Swindon and any extension to the north 
would bring about coalescence. The proximity to a wide range of services 
in Swindon has meant that a market town function has not developed, and there is a narrow range of services within the settlement. Wroughton also has a 
limited employment base. Some new employment in the service sector might 
be acceptable, but no land allocations are required. The Vision for Wroughton (The Community Strategic Action Plan for Wroughton 2007-2017), prepared by V4W (Vision for Wroughton Group), and further articulated through the 
Wroughton Parish Council Action Plan (2009), has as an aspiration “to maintain 
its strong village feel, while at the same time ensuring that there is provision for business and economic activity to ensure prosperity and sustainability”. Opportunities were seen at Wichelstowe, encouraging new business start-ups, 
and developing the sectors of agriculture, tourism and retail, creative and 
scientific sectors (based on the Science Museum), and potentially people  
care industries. 
5.128 There are two major environmental constraints to significant development. Firstly, it remains important that the gap between Wroughton and Swindon 
is retained to preserve the separate physical and community identity of 
Wroughton. Secondly, Wroughton adjoins the North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Beauty and any development proposals will need to take this  
into account.
5.129 Wroughton Village Centre functions well and contains most of the main services 
that a village of this size requires.  However the Ellendune Shopping Centre is in 
need of rejuvenation.
 Local Priorities
5.130 Local priorities for Wroughton have been identified through community planning participation events.
 Additional Evidence Base
5.131 Additional information includes:
 
  Shaping Your Community Report (2010);
   Vision for Wroughton – The Community Strategy Action Plan for Wroughton  
 2007-2017 (2007); and
   Wroughton Parish Council Action Plan 2009.  maximise opportunities associated with the Science Museum to  
  benefit Wroughton and the Borough through:
   realising tourism benefits associated with the  
   Science Museum; and
   allowing expansion of museum related activities and  
   enabling development providing the benefits of the  
   development are delivered sustainably and do not conflict  
   with other policies in the Local Plan; 
  the provision of further sports and play facilities.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
185 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Delivery and links with other key policies and strategies
5.132 Effective management of development at Wroughton will be achieved 
through the application of this policy and through: 
   Wroughton Neighbourhood Plan (if commenced)
   Any subsequent DPDs
Policy RA3: South Marston
a. Development at South Marston shall be in accordance with Policies  
 SD1 and SD2 and must contribute towards the creation of an  
 integrated village with a distinct rural and separate identity from  
 Swindon and other settlements. Expansion of the village will be as  
 part of the New Eastern Villages strategic allocation and through  
 allocated brownfield opportunities, as shown on the Policies Map.
b. Development at South Marston shall:
   ensure it respects the character of the existing village by:
   providing housing at an average of 30 dwellings per  
   hectare; and
   providing affordable housing in accordance with Policy HA2,  
   but at a proportion of no more than 20%.
  provide community, recreation facilities and retail provision of  
  an appropriate scale, as part of a village centre;
  provide green infrastructure in accordance with Policy EN1   
  proportionate to the scale of expansion;
  provide an extended recreation ground to include the field to  
  the south-west of the current recreation ground with recreational  
  facilities of an appropriate type and scale;
  protect historical landscape features, archaeological assets and  
  existing green-infrastructure; 
  deliver primary school places within the village to meet the   
  needs of an expanded South Marston; and
  provide a new road connection between Thornhill Road and  
  Old Vicarage Lane, within the limits of the expanded village  
  and designed so that it does not form a bypass to South Marston;
  provide traffic management and sustainable transport measures  
  to minimise the volume of traffic, including traffic passing through  
  the village, and to reduce the impact on the village, in particular  
  at Pound Corner;
  ensure other development/redevelopment opportunities on   
  existing (brownfield) sites in the west and north of the village   
  provide strong links with the village and make the appropriate   
  infrastructure contributions to mitigate their impact; 186 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.133 An expanded South Marston forms one of the New Eastern Villages in Policy 
NC3. South Marston Parish Council conducted a village survey in 2005  
(85% household response rate) which demonstrated the importance to  
South Marston that it retains its independence and identity and that it does not coalesce with Swindon or other developments. To achieve this, an extension 
to the existing village is proposed, which must retain a gap between South 
Marston and the New Eastern Villages development including Rowborough. This approach to South Marston meets identified housing needs to the east of Swindon, whilst protecting the identity and character of the village. There 
are brownfield sites, which provide additional opportunities, which must be 
incorporated as part of the village. 
5.134 This development of South Marston will retain a strong and definitive sense of place and provide the opportunity to deliver new local services and facilities within South Marston as a consequence of its increase in size and therefore 
allow existing residents of the village to benefit from growth. This will enable 
South Marston to thrive and promote greater self-containment within the village. In 2006, South Marston Parish Council initiated the preparation of a Village Strategy by local residents, which identified the principles of potential 
development. Any additional development opportunities must demonstrate 
that they contribute towards the wider plans and objectives for South Marston and fully integrate with the village.
5.135 The Village Strategy outlined opportunities for development of the existing industrial sites to the west of the village; the re-routing of traffic through the 
village away from Pound Corner; and the importance of creating a strong 
centre to the village around the Recreation Ground and adjacent green space.  The proposals for development of the village as a consequence of the New Eastern Villages provide an opportunity to deliver some of these objectives 
in a way that does not prejudice the strategic objectives for the whole area.   provide mitigation measures to protect the village from flood risk;  
  and
  realise opportunities to facilitate main drainage and utilities  
  supply to existing properties that currently lack connections  
  where possible.
c. To ensure non-coalescence of South Marston with Swindon and the   
 New Eastern Villages, the land between the expanded village and  
 the railway to the south shall remain part of the countryside.   
 Development within this area, as defined on the Policies Map, shall  
 only be permitted where it retains or enhances the existing character  
 of the countryside and:
  involves the re-use, conversion or extension of existing buildings  
  at a scale appropriate to their location, in accordance with the  
  criteria specified in Policy DE1; or
  is an essential requirement directly related to the economic  
  or social needs of the rural community.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
187 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.136 The Borough Council is working with South Marston Parish Council, in 
consultation with village residents, to help support an integrated approach to the development of the village and will benefit the current and future community of South Marston.
5.137 Development should seek to improve the provision of utilities, such as 
broadband, for existing residents of the village.
 Additional Evidence Base
5.138 Additional information includes:
 
  South Marston Village Strategy (2007);
   On-going joint work with South Marston Parish Council on the South Marston  
 Village Supplementary Planning Document; and
   Shaping Your Community Report (2011).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.139 Expansion of South Marston is a key component of the development strategy of 
the Borough and is linked to many policies and strategies listed in the evidence base.  Figure 14 indicates the broad location of development.  Effective management of development at South Marston will be achieved through the application of this policy and through:
 
  Integrate with the character of the existing village and its landscape   
 setting, and it is anticipated this will be guided by Supplementary Planning  
  Document(s) and Village Design Codes;
   Any subsequent DPDs; and
   Engagement with the community of South Marston through the  
 Parish Council.
188 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Figure 14: South Marston Inset Map
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Swindon Borough Council 100024296 2016Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
189 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Local and Neighbourhood Policies 
5.140 The Local and Neighbourhood Policy sets out the approach that will be taken 
to planning for local communities and neighbourhoods in the Borough.  The 
introduction of the Localism Act 2011 makes new statutory provisions for local 
communities to play an enhanced role in planning for new development in their local area.  This Part and its policies will help to guide those processes.
 Key Issues
5.141 The involvement of the local community goes to the heart of successfully planning for and implementing sustainable and inclusive growth and change.  
Without the input of the community, development would be less responsive 
to local needs.  Proactive engagement with the local community will be key to ensuring that the impact of new development is a positive one and reflects the locality within which it sits.  This engagement will need to take 
place throughout the planning for and delivery of development and there are 
several stages during which the community’s views and input can be sought.  However, it does not stop at just engaging: it will be important that the views of 
the community are taken into account as planning discussions move forward 
and reasoned justification is given in the consideration of views.  It is important that the Borough Council continues to encourage engagement between the private sector (for example, developers) and the local community when 
planning for new development, but also that the reasons the Borough Council, 
as Local Planning Authority, makes decisions either in supporting or opposing development proposals are transparent and communicated effectively.
5.142 In order to deliver sustainable development at the appropriate scale for the local communities, this Plan sets out a spatial strategy to deliver the right quantum and quality of growth at the right time.  These ‘strategic’ policies 
provide the framework for delivery in the Borough.  In some of the places 
identified for growth, be it large or small scale, it may be appropriate for  
there to be more growth than is indicated in this Plan.  The Neighbourhood 
Planning process allows for this to take place, where the local community  
want that to happen.
5.143 Traditionally, Parish Plans have been the key document through which local communities could express their aims, objectives and priorities.  These plans 
may continue to be the most suitable vehicle for local communities to express their priorities for the delivery of any number of things such as facilities, services and development.  However whilst informative, and sometimes the best and 
most up-to-date evidence of what a community wishes to see happen in their 
area, as non-statutory plans they are not always seen to have any real traction in the planning process.
5.144 The Localism Act 2011 and changes to national planning policy introduced in 2012 through the NPPF provide the opportunity for local communities to 
have more control over planning strategy and the delivery of development 
in their area, where those communities support an increase in the amount of Strategic Objectives
The Local and Neighbourhood Policies will help to meet all Strategic Objectives set out in Part 2 of this Plan, in the local context.190 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026development over that identified in the Local Plan and where their plans 
are in conformity with the Local Plan.  Neighbourhood Plans, which form part of the statutory development plan whilst Neighbourhood 
Development Orders, can give permission to development without 
the need for planning permission to be granted by the Local Planning Authority, both can be drawn up by properly constituted 
Neighbourhood Forums.  They provide two additional mechanisms 
open to local communities to bring forward development (in addition to existing ways of securing development) over which the local community can have a say in their location and specification. 
5.145 Notwithstanding any desire to produce a community plan, a key issue relevant to their preparation, whether statutory or non-statutory, will 
be the amount of resource needed to commit to producing such a 
document given that such plans should be driven by the community rather than by the Borough Council.  
 Addressing the Key Issues
5.146 Planning has a key role to play in helping communities to deliver growth 
and change in the way they want to deliver it, particularly so with the 
introduction of the new planning system.  Whilst it cannot guarantee the delivery of all facilities and services a community may wish for, it can help to protect and enhance existing assets and provide a positive 
framework to help shape and guide development with the involvement 
of the community at its heart.  Key to effective delivery will be this Plan, as well as more detailed planning work which could be done involving 
the community such as masterplanning, Neighbourhood Plans  
(or Neighbourhood Development Orders) or further work on any 
subsequent DPDs. 
5.147 The Borough Council‘s Localities have a key role in facilitating Neighbourhood Forums, and in some cases through the Locality Forum may choose to initiate Neighbourhood Plans.
5.148 In addition, the Borough Council has adopted a Neighbourhood 
Planning Protocol to help local communities choose the most 
appropriate vehicle to affect change in their area and advise on the process and support available to them if they choose to develop a Neighbourhood Plan.Part 5: Delivering Sustainable Growth and  Change
191 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.148 There are 14 parishes, 13 with an elected Parish Council and one with an 
annual parish meeting and Highworth Town Council, within the Borough,  
which have a local democratic role and also provide and manage a number 
of local facilities. The Parish and Town Councils provide a focus for engagement 
within their communities. There are also a large number of Community and Resident Groups.
5.149 It is important to take account of the needs and aspirations of those diverse 
communities that cross administrative boundaries.
5.150 The Borough Council and its partners are also promoting new ways of working. This is about providing the best and most cost effective service possible for our 
communities by changing how we work, where we work and how we  
use technology.Policy LN1: Local and Neighbourhood Planning
a. In order to maximise opportunities for Swindon Borough’s    
 communities to comment on and influence growth and change in   
 the Borough, good communication between the Borough Council,   
 local community, and developers will be maintained through:
   engagement and consultation in the preparation of  
  Development Plans, Masterplans, Supplementary Planning  
  Documents and in determining planning applications;
  encouraging pre-application discussions between developers  
  and the local community; and,
  ensuring that the Borough Council’s decision making process  
  is transparent and with reasons for decisions communicated   
  effectively.
b. The production of non-statutory community plans by Parish Councils  
 and other recognised organisations representative of the local  
 community will be supported where possible to help ensure  
 objectives, priorities and policies are broadly aligned with those  
 of this Plan.
c. The preparation of statutory Neighbourhood Plans and    
 Neighbourhood Development Orders by designated Neighbourhood  
 Forums will be supported in accordance with the Council’s  
 Neighbourhood Planning Protocol and the requirements of Local  
 Planning Authorities set by the Localism Act 2011 and  
 accompanying Regulations.
d. Should Neighbourhood Plans and/or Neighbourhood Development  
 Orders not be commenced to bring forward sufficient allocations  
 of local housing development in conformity with this Plan, or  
 sufficient developer proposals for such housing development not  
 have been approved within the first five years of the plan period,  
 the Borough Council will seek to identify such sites through any  
 subsequent DPDs. 192 Swindon Borough Local Plan 20265.151 Localities, Parish and Town Councils, and Community Groups will be 
encouraged to prepare community-led plans to establish, prioritise and help deliver the improvements needed in their area. Where the 
community or neighbourhood action plans are founded on full local 
consultation and engagement, and where they do not conflict with the strategic policies of the Local Plan, these Plans will be accorded 
weight as a material consideration in the determination of planning 
applications.
5.152 Through the Community Participation events, the need for better communication in relation to planning applications and decisions  
was highlighted.
5.153 In line with the Statement of Community Involvement. developers  
shall be encouraged to undertake public consultation on  
development proposals.
5.154 Neighbourhood governance arrangements shall be encouraged to 
provide a focus for community action.
 Key Evidence Base
5.155 Key evidence base documents include: 
 
  Shaping Your Community Report (2011);
   Swindon Borough Statement of Community Involvement (2007);
   Swindon Borough Statement of Community Involvement  
 in Planning (2013); and
   Swindon Sustainable Neighbourhoods Study (2009).
 Delivery and Links with Other Key Policies and Strategies
5.156 Effective management of development will be achieved through the applications of the policy and through:
 
  Neighbourhood Plans; and
   Any subsequent DPDsAppendices193
Appendix 1Appendix 1: Saved Policies of the Swindon Borough Local Plan  
2011 superseded by the Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
The Town & Country Planning (Local Development) (England) Regulations 2004 (and amends) states that where a  
Development Plan Document contains a policy that is intended to supersede another policy, it must state the fact and  
identify the superseded policy.
Saved Local Plan 2011 Policies Superseded 
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
DS1 Urban Concentration of DevelopmentSD2: Sustainable  Development StrategyPolicy framework superseded
DS1AThe Regeneration of Swindon’s  
Central AreaSD1: Sustainable  Development PrinciplesSC1: Swindon’s Central AreaPolicy framework superseded
DS2 Strategic Development AreasNC1: Wichelstowe
SD2: The Sustainable Development 
StrategyDesignation and policy framework 
superseded
DS3 Commonhead NC2: CommonheadPolicy framework 
superseded
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026194
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
DS4 Master Plan/Framework PlansNC1: WichelstoweNC2: Commonhead NC3:Eastern Villages 
NC4: Tadpole Farm
NC5: Kingsdown Policy framework superseded
DS5 Hierarchy of Rural SettlementsSD2: The Sustainable  Development Strategy
RA1: Highworth
RA2: Wroughton RA3: South Marston Designation and 
policy framework 
superseded
DS6 Standards of Design and AmenityDE1:High Quality Design 
DE2: Sustainable Construction Superseded
DS7 Urban DesignDE1: High Quality Design
SD1: Sustainable development Principles Superseded
DS8Infrastructure Needs Resulting from Development
IN1:Infrastructure Provision Superseded
DS9 Density of DevelopmentHA1: Mix, Types and Density
DE1: high quality design Superseded
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026195
Appendix 1Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
ENV1Development affecting Conservation AreasEN1: Green Infrastructure Network EN2; Community Forest 
EN3: Open Space  
EN5: LandscapeEN10: Heritage AssetsPolicy framework superseded
ENV2Development affecting  
Listed BuildingsEN10:Herritage Assets
EC4: Conversion of Buildings to 
Employment in the CountrysideDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
ENV3Preservation of Buildings of Significant Local InterestEN5: Landscape Character and 
Historical Landscape  
EN10:Herritage AssetsSuperseded
ENV4Protection of Historic Parks  
and GardensEN3: Open Space  EN5: Landscape Character and 
Historical Landscape 
EN10: Heritage AssetsSuperseded
ENV5Development Affecting the Borough’s Most Significant Archaeological Remains
EN5: Landscape Character and 
Historical Landscape 
EN10: Heritage Assets  
EN11: CanalsSuperseded
ENV6Archaeological Remains of  
Lesser ImportanceEN5: Landscape Character and Historic Landscape
EN10: Heritage Assets Superseded
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026196 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
ENV7 Public ArtCM4: Maintaining and Enhancing Community FacilitiesSuperseded
ENV8 Access for AllDE1: High Quality DesignSC1: Swindon’s Central area Superseded
ENV9 Development in the CountrysideLN1: Neighbourhood Planning 
RA1: Highworth
RA2: WroughtonRA3: South MarstonSuperseded
ENV10 Landscape Character ProtectionLN1: Neighbourhood Planning  
EN1: Green Infrastructure Network   
EN5: Landscape Character and Historical LandscapeSuperseded
ENV11North Wessex Downs Area of 
Outstanding Natural beauty
EN1: Green Infrastructure Network
EN5: Landscape Character and 
Historical LandscapeSuperseded
ENV12 Landscape Setting to HighworthSC1: Swindon`s Existing Urban 
Communities
RA1: HighworthSuperseded
ENV17 Biodiversity – Local SitesEN1: Green Infrastructure Network 
EN4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity Superseded197
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
ENV18 Habitat and Species Protection EN4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity Policy framework 
superseded
ENV19 Community Forest EN2: Community Forest Designation and policy framework 
superseded
ENV20 Existing Strategic Green Corridors EN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
ENV21 Potential Strategic Green Corridors EN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
ENV22 Ground and Surface Water ProtectionEN6: Flood Risk EN1: Green Infrastructure Network 
IN2: Water Supply and Waste WaterSuperseded
ENV24 Riparian and Other Buffer Zones EN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
E1A Sequential Approach to Office 
DevelopmentEC1: Economic Growth through Existing Business and Inward Investment EC2: Employment Land and  
Premises classesSuperseded
E2 Large Inward Investment ProposalsEC1: Economic Growth through Existing 
Business and Inward InvestmentSuperseded198 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
E3 Employment Land SupplyEC1; Economic Growth through  
Existing Business and Inward InvestmentEC2: Employment Land and  
Premises classesDesignation and policy framework 
superseded
E4 Key Employment AreasEC2: Employment Land and  Premises classesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
E6 Keypoint EC1: Economic Growth through Existing 
Business and Inward Investment 
EC2: Employment Land and PremisesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
E7Employment - Land at Southern Development Area and Land at CommonheadNC1: Wichelstowe 
NC2: CommonheadDesignation and 
policy framework superseded
E8 Triangle Site EC2: Employment Land and PremisesDesignation and policy framework superseded
E9Land to the east of the A419 and  
south of the A420NC3: Eastern Villages Designation and policy framework 
superseded
E10 Pipers Way & Groundwell EC2: Employment Land and PremisesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
E11 Employment at rural settlementsEC4: Conversions of Buildings to 
Employment Use in the CountrysideSuperseded199
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
E12Conversion of Buildings to Employment use in the CountrysideEC4:Conversions of Buildings to Employment Use in the CountrysideSuperseded
E13 Farm Diversification EC5: Farm Diversification Superseded
H1 Housing Land ProvisionHA2: Affordable Housing 
SD2:The Sustainable Development 
StrategySuperseded 
H3Strategic Housing Allocation and Land at CommonheadHA2: Affordable HousingSD2:The Sustainable Development Strategy 
NC2: CommonheadDesignation and policy framework 
superseded
H4Residential Development – Phasing and MonitoringHA1: Mix, Types and Density  
SD2:The Sustainable Development 
StrategyNC2: CommonheadPolicy framework superseded
H5Residential Development in Swindon 
and the Primary Rural SettlementsSC1: Swindon’s Central Area 
SC2: Swindon’s Existing Urban Communities 
RA1: Highworth
RA2: WroughtonRA3: South MarstonPolicy framework 
superseded200 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
H6Residential Development in the 
Secondary Rural SettlementsHA5: Rural Exception SitesSD2: Sustainable Development StrategyPolicy framework superseded
H7 Agricultural Workers DwellingsHA7: Conversion of Buildings to 
Residential Use in the CountrysideHA6: Agricultural Workers DwellingsPolicy framework superseded
H8Conversions to Residential Use in the 
CountrysideHA7: Conversion of Buildings to Residential Use in the CountrysidePolicy framework superseded
H9 Rural Housing Exceptions HA5: Rural Exception SitesPolicy framework 
superseded
H10The Provision of Affordable Housing in Larger Development SitesHA2: Affordable Housing HA3: Wheelchair Accessible HousingSuperseded
H11Provision for Disabled People in New Housing DevelopmentsHA3: Wheelchair Accessible Housing Superseded
H12 Subdivision of DwellingsHA4: Subdivision of Housing/Housing  in Multiple Occupation Superseded
H13Conversion of Upper Floors to Residential AccommodationDE1: High Quality Design Superseded
H14Conversion or Redevelopment of Office Space to Residential AccommodationDE1: High Quality Design Superseded201
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
H15 Residential Extensions DE1: High Quality Design Superseded
H16 Sites for GypsiesHA8: Gypsies, Travellers, and Travelling 
Showpeople Pitches and SitesPolicy framework superseded
S1 New Retail FloorspaceSC1: Swindon`s Central Areas 
EC3: The Role of the Centres and  Non Main Town Centre UsesPolicy framework 
superseded
S4 Cavendish SquareSC2: Swindon`s Existing  
Urban CommunitiesPolicy framework superseded
S5 Gorse Hill Core AreaSC2: Swindon`s Existing  
Urban Communities
SC1: Swindon`s Central AreasPolicy framework superseded
S6 Gorse Hill Fringe AreaSC2: Swindon`s Existing  
Urban Communities
SC1: Swindon`s Central AreasPolicy framework superseded
S7 West SwindonSC2: Swindon`s Existing  Urban CommunitiesPolicy framework superseded
S8 Northern Orbital CentreEC3: The Role of the Centres and Non Main Town Centre Uses SC2: Swindon’s 
Existing Urban CommunitiesPolicy framework 
superseded202 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
S9 Southern Development Area RetailNC1: Wichelstowe
SC1: Swindon`s Central AreasPolicy framework superseded
S10 HighworthRA1: Highworth 
RA2: Wroughton SC1: Swindon`s Central AreasPolicy framework 
superseded
S11 WroughtonRA1: Highworth 
RA2: Wroughton SC1: Swindon`s Central AreasPolicy framework 
superseded
S12 Major Local CentresSC1: Swindon’s Central Area
EC3: The Role of the Centres and  
Non Main Town Centre UsesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
S13 Minor Local CentresSC1: Swindon’s Central AreaEC3: The Role of the Centres and  
Non Main Town Centre UsesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
S14 Single Small ShopsSC1: Swindon’s Central Area
EC3: The Role of the Centres and  
Non Main Town Centre UsesSuperseded
S15 Temporary Retail DevelopmentSC1: Swindon’s Central Area EC3:  
The Role of the Centres and  
Non Main Town Centre UsesSuperseded
S16 Hot Food Vending VehiclesEC3: The Role of the Centres and  
Non Main Town Centre UsesSuperseded203
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
R1New or Improved Recreation,  
Sport and Leisure FacilitiesCM2: Active & Healthy Lifestyles 
CM4: Maintaining and Enhancing 
Community facilitiesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
R2 Visitor AttractionsCM2: Active and Healthy LifestylesEC3: The Role of the Centres and Non 
Main Town Centre UsesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
R4 Protection of Recreational Open Space EN3: Open Space Superseded
R5Provision of Open Space in Strategic 
Development Areas and at CommonheadNC1:Wichelstowe
NC2 Commonhead
NC3:Eastern VillagesNC4: Tadpole Farm 
EN1: Green Infrastructure NetworkSuperseded
R6Provision of Open Space Outside  
the Strategic Development AreasEN1: Green Infrastructure Network  Superseded
R9Outdoor Recreation and Holiday 
AccommodationCM2: Active and Healthy Lifestyle.
SD2: The Sustainable Development StrategySuperseded204 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
R10 CanalsSC1: Swindon`s Central Area NC1: WichelstoweNC3: Eastern Villages 
EN11: CanalSuperseded
R12Hotels and Other Serviced  
AccommodationEC3: The Role of the Centres and  Non Main Town Centre UsesDesignation and 
policy framework 
superseded
CF1 Local Health ServicesCM2: Active & Healthy Lifestyles 
CM4: Maintaining and Enhancing 
Community FacilitiesSuperseded
CF2Premises for Community,  
Ethnic and Religious NeedsCM3 Integrating Facilities and  
Delivering ServicesCM4: Maintaining and Enhancing 
Community Facilities  Superseded
CF3 Premises for Criminal Justice AgenciesSD2: The Sustainable  
Development Strategy  Policy Framework Superseded
CF5 Cavendish SquareCM4: Maintaining and Enhancing 
Community Facilities  
SC1: Swindon`s Central AreaSuperseded
CF6 Loss of Established Community FacilitiesCM2: Active & Healthy Lifestyles 
CM4: Maintaining and Enhancing 
Community FacilitiesSuperseded205
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
CF8 Power Lines and Overhead Cables DE1: High Quality Design Superseded
CF9 High Voltage Power Lines DE1: High Quality Design Superseded
CF10 TelecommunicationsDE1: High Quality Design
IN3: ICT and TelecommunicationsSuperseded
CF11 Renewable Energy DevelopmentDE1: High Quality Design
IN4: Low Carbon and  
Renewable Energy Superseded
CF12 Wind Turbine DevelopmentDE1: High Quality DesignIN4: Low Carbon and  
Renewable Energy Superseded
CF13Water Supply and Sewerage InfrastructureIN2: Water Supply and Waste Water Superseded
T1 Transport Requirements of DevelopmentDE1: High Quality DesignTR1: Sustainable Transport Networks 
TR2: Transport and Development Superseded
T2 Provision of Bus TravelTR1: Sustainable Transport Networks 
TR2: Transport and DevelopmentSuperseded206 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan 
Policy 2011  
(superseded)Local Plan Policy 2011 (superseded) Local Plan Policy 2026 Comment
T3Protection of Proposed Bus Lanes  or Other Priority MeasuresDE1: High Quality DesignTR1: Sustainable Transport NetworksSuperseded
T4 Park and Ride TR1: Sustainable Transport Networks Superseded
T5 Access by Foot and CycleDE1: High Quality DesignTR1: Sustainable Transport NetworksSuperseded
T6Protection of Existing and  
Proposed Cycle NetworkEN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
T7 National Trails EN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
T8 Protection of Rights of Way EN1: Green Infrastructure Network Superseded
T12 Other Road SchemesTR1: Sustainable Transport Networks
NC1: WichelstoweSuperseded207
Appendix 1
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Central Area Action Plan (2009) Policies superseded by the Local Plan 2026
Central 
Area 
Action 
Plan 2009  
(superseded)LCentral Area Action Plan Policy 2009 
(superseded)Local Plan 2026 Policy  Comment
CAAP4 Canal SC1: Swindon’s Central AreaSuperseded by 
Policy SC1: Swindon’s 
Central Area
CAAP17 North Star SC1: Swindon’s Central AreaSuperseded by Policy SC1: Swindon’s 
Central Area208 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Appendix 2: Evidence Base Documents
A Climate Change Action Plan for Swindon Borough 2006-2010  
(Review and Update) (2008)
Swindon Borough Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010-2026:  
Revised Consultation Document (SBC, 2011) 
Active Swindon Strategy 2009-2015 (SBC & NHS, 2009)Affordable Housing Viability Study (2012)
An Economic Strategy for Swindon 2012-26: Consultation Document (SBC, 2012)
An Urban Fringe Action Plan for Southern Swindon (2006)Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.
Biodiversity Strategy for England 
Children and Young People’s Plan for Swindon 2008-2011 (2008)Conservation Area Appraisals
Cultural and Leisure Strategy 2003-2013 (SBC, 2003)
Delivering Excellence for Swindon 2008-2013 (SBC & PCT, 2008)Designing Gypsy and Traveller sites Good Practice Guide ‘(DCLG, 2008)District Energy Pre-Feasibility Study (SBC & Bizcat, 2011)Draft EDA Supplementary Planning Document (2009) and comments received
Swindon Town Centre Masterplan (2012)
East of Swindon Evidence Base Update (2011)East of Swindon Evidence Base Update Addendum (SBC, 2012)
Eastern Villages Southern Connector Road Feasibility Study (2014)
Eastern Villages Transport Study (2011) Eastern Villages Transport Study Update (2012)Economic Testing of Swindon Core Strategy (2012)Emerging Surface Water Management Plan 
Environment Agency Flood Risk Mapping (2011)
Farming Statistics: Diversification and Renewable Energy Production  
on Farms in England 2010, (National Statistics & DEFRA, 2012)
Flood Risk: Sequential Testing of Potential Strategic Development  
Sites in Swindon Borough (2012)
Good Practice Guide ‘Designing Gypsy and Traveller sites’ (2008)Government Forest Policy Statement
Great Western Community Forest Plan (1994, 2002-2027)
Guidelines for Landscape and visual Impact Assessment (3rd Edition)Highworth: The Vision (2008)
Independent Panel on Forestry
Index of Multiple Deprivation 2010 (DCLG, 2011)Keepers of time - a Statement of Policy for England’s Ancient and Native Woodland209
Appendix 2
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Kennet and Vale of White Horse Catchment Abstraction Licensing Strategy 
(December, 2012)
Landscape Character – A Landscape-scale framework for conservation  
in Wiltshire and Swindon (July 2013)
Manual for Streets, (Department for Transport, 2007)
Manual for Streets 2, (Department for Transport, 2010)Mobile Operators Association’s (MOA) Ten Commitments (2006)
Mouldon Hill Country Park Masterplan 
National Character Area Profile 109: Midvale RidgeNational Character Area Profile 116: Berkshire and Marlborough Downs
National Heritage List for England;
National Planning Policy Framework (DCLG, 2012)Neighbourhood PlansNew Eastern Villages Draft SPD (2013)
New Eastern Villages Mitigation Works West of A419 and Apportionment  
of Impacts (2014)
New Life for New Swindon: Regeneration Framework  
(The New Swindon Company, 2004)
North Wessex Downs AONB - A Study of Landscape Sensitivities and  
Constraints to Wind Turbine Development (2006)
North Wessex Downs AONB Position Statement on Renewables Energy (2012)
North Wessex Downs AONB: A Study of Landscape Sensitivities and Constraints  
to Wind Turbine Development (2006)
North Wiltshire District Council Living Landmarks Project Swindon & Cricklade Railway 
Feasibility Report (Feb, 2007)
One Swindon Delivery Plan (2011)
On-going joint work with South Marston Parish Council on the South Marston Village 
Supplementary Planning Document
Our Five Year Plan for 2010-2015, Thames Water (2010)
Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
Planning Practice Guidance [Online]Policing Plan for Wiltshire 2012/13 (Wiltshire Police Authority, 2012)Regional Planning Guidance for the South West (RPD 10)  
(Government Office for the South West, 2001) 
Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest;Restoration of the Wilts and Berks Canal Feasibility Study (1998)Retail and Leisure Study Update (2007)RNIB Shopfronts and Wayfaring Guidance
Securing the Future: Delivering UK Sustainable Development Strategy (DEFRA, 2005)
Shaping Your Community Report (SBC, 2011)Showpeople’s Guilds’ Model Standard Package for Sites (2007)210 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Sites and Monuments Record / Historic Environment Record;
South Marston Village Strategy (2007)
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment: Level 1 (Halcrow Group Ltd, 2008)
Strategy for Major Sports Facilities Provision 2009-2026 (SBC, 2009)Surface Water Management Plan (emerging)
Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report (Inc. Strategic Environmental Assessment)  
(SBC, 2006)
Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan (Wiltshire Wildlife Trust, 2005)Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan Update (2010)
Swindon Borough Community Infrastructure Viability Report (GVA, 2012)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Habitats Regulations Assessment Report  
(SBC, 2009)Swindon Borough Core Strategy Habitats Regulations Assessment  
Screening Report (2008)Swindon Borough Core Strategy Issues & Options Paper (SBC, 2007)Swindon Borough Core Strategy Preferred Options Paper (SBC, 2008)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Proposed Submission Document (SBC, 2009)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Revised Proposed Submission Document  
(SBC, 2011)Swindon Borough Core Strategy Revised Proposed Submission: Diversity Impact 
Assessment (SBC, 2011)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Revised Proposed Submission: Habitats Regulations 
Assessment Update Note (SBC, 2011)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Revised Proposed Submission: Health Impact  
Assessment (SBC, 2011)
Swindon Borough Core Strategy Rural Issues Paper (SBC, 2009)Swindon Borough Core Strategy Sustainable Development Policies  
(Fulcrum Consulting, 2009)Swindon Borough Council Corporate Strategy 2012Swindon Borough Council Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2014)Swindon Borough Council Library Strategy 2011: Providing Access for All (2011)
Swindon Borough Council Office Floorspace Threshold Evidence Base (SBC, 2012)
Swindon Borough Council Open Space Audit and Assessment Review (SBC, 2011) Swindon Borough Council Playing Pitch Strategy (2007)Swindon Borough Council Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment (SBC & Halcrow, 2011)
Swindon Borough Council Retail and Leisure Study Update (SBC & Donaldsons, 2007)
Swindon Borough Council Retail Floorspace Threshold Evidence Base (SBC, 2012)Swindon Borough Council Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009)Swindon Borough Council Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2013)Swindon Borough Council Wheelchair Accessible Housing in New Housing  
Developments (SBC, 2012)211
Appendix 2
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Swindon Borough Economic Development Vision and Framework (2006)
Annual Housing Monitoring Reports 
Swindon Borough Housing Requirement Update Report (SBC, 2012)
Swindon Borough Landscape Character Areas Supplementary Planning  
Guidance (2004) Swindon Borough Local Plan 2011 (SBC, 2006) 
Swindon Borough Local Plan Pre-Submission: Diversity Impact Assessment (SBC, 2012)
Swindon Borough Local Plan Pre-Submission: Habitats Regulations Assessment 
Update Note (SBC, 2012)
Swindon Borough Local Plan Pre-Submission: Health Impact Assessment (SBC, 2012)
Swindon Borough Local Transport Plan 3 (2011 - 2026)
Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Report (SBC, 2004)Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Review (2011)
Swindon Borough Open Space Audit and Assessment Review (2014)
Swindon Borough School Organisation Plan 2010-2013 (SBC, 2010)Swindon Borough Statement of Community Involvement (2007)Swindon Borough Statement of Community Involvement in Planning (2013)Swindon Borough Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2008)
Swindon Sustainable Neighbourhoods Study (SBC, 2009)
Swindon Central Area Action Plan (2009)Swindon Central Canal Route Study (2007)
Swindon Design Guide (SBC, 2006)
Swindon Development Appraisal Study (1998)Swindon District Energy Pre-Feasibility Study (2011)Swindon Eastern Development Area Framework (SBC & LDA Design, 2009)Swindon Eastern Development Area WBCT Preferred Canal Route  
(Wilts & Berks Canal Trust, 2012)Swindon Employment Land Review (Nathaniel Lichfield and Partners, 2007) Swindon Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (2013),
Swindon Housing Market Area Strategy 2009-2014 (2009)
Swindon Housing Market Assessment (SBC & DTZ, 2006)Swindon Housing Needs Assessment (SBC, 2006)
Swindon Housing Requirement Update Report (2012)
Swindon Joint Strategic Needs Assessment: 2012 Review (SBC & PCT, 2012)Swindon Joint Study 2026 (SBC, 2005)Swindon Local Transport Plan 3 2011 – 2026 (SBC, 2011)Swindon Municipal Waste Management Strategy (2007)
Swindon Principle Urban Area Study (2003)
Swindon Retail Capacity Update (SBC & DTZ, 2009)Swindon School Place Planning Study Update (SBC, 2011)212 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Swindon School Place Planning Study: Future Demand to 2026  
(Cambridge Education, 2009)
Swindon Self Assessment of Progress against the Children and Young People’s  
Plan for Swindon 2008-2011 (April 2010 – March 2011) (SBC, 2011)
Swindon Shop-Fronts Development Control Guidance Note (2006)
Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Study (SBC, 2008)Swindon Southern Development Area Masterplan Document (2003)
Swindon Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 1 (2008)
Swindon Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2012 (SBC, 2012) Swindon Sustainable Community Strategy: A Shared Vision for  
Swindon 2008-2030 (2008)
Swindon Sustainable Energy Framework (2011)
Swindon Transport Strategy (2009)Swindon Water Cycle Strategy: Phase 1 Technical Report  
(Halcrow Group Ltd, 2007)Swindon Water Cycle Study: Phase 2 (CH2MHILL, 2014)Swindon Workspace Strategy (2009)
Swindon’s Urban Landscape Scale Conservation Framework  
(the Landscape Scale revision of the Swindon Biodiversity Action Plan);
Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework (2012)Thames Corridor Abstraction Management Strategy (2004)
Thames Water Resources Five Year Plan 2010-15.
Thames Water Resources Management Plan 2010-35The Big Arts Plan 2009-2011 (SBC, 2009)
The Community Strategic Action Plan for Wroughton 2007-2017”,  
prepared by V4W (Vision for Wroughton Group, 2007)
The Flood and Water Management Act (2010)The Flood Risk Regulations (2009)The Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2013-2016)
The Historic Environment Topic Paper (2012)
The Kennet and Pang Catchment Abstraction Management Strategy (2004)The Natural Choice: Securing the Value of Nature (2011)
The North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management  
Plan 2009-2014 (2009)
The Regional Spatial Strategy for the South West 2006-2026 (2008)The Rights of Way Improvement Plan for Swindon 2007-2011 (SBC, 2007)
The South West Regional Woodland and Forestry Framework (2005)
The Swindon Small Scale Urban Extensions Evidence Review Paper  
(Wiltshire Council & SBC, 2012)The Swindon Sustainable Community Strategy: A Shared Vision for  
Swindon 2008–2030 (2008)213
Appendix 2
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026The Taylor Review of Rural Economy and Affordable Housing: Living Working 
Countryside (DCLG, 2008)
The UK Renewable Energy Strategy (2009)
Travelling Showpeople’s Sites: A Planning Focus, Model Standard Package (2007)
Upper Thames Catchment Management Plan: Consultation Draft (2012)Vision for Wroughton – The Community Strategy Action Plan for  
Wroughton 2007-2017 (2007)
Water Resource Management Plan 2010-2035, Thames Water (2012)
West of Swindon Study Update (Wiltshire Council & SBC, 2009) Wichelstowe Environmental Statement Supplement Volume 1(V1.1),  
Volume 2 (2013)
Wichelstowe Master Plan Report (October 2013)
Wichelstowe Off-site Landscape and Nature Conservation Proposals  
(September 2013)
Wiltshire and Swindon Aggregate Minerals Site Allocations Local Plan (2013) 
Wiltshire and Swindon Minerals Core Strategy 2006-2026 (2009)Wiltshire and Swindon Minerals Development Control Policies Development  
Plan Document (2009)
Wiltshire and Swindon Strategic Plan for Accident Reduction (2008)
Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Core Strategy 2006-2026 (2009)Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Development Control Policies Development  
Plan Document (2009)
Wiltshire and Swindon Waste Site Allocations Local Plan (2013) Wiltshire County and Swindon Borough Rural Facilities Survey  
(Wiltshire Council and SBC, 2008)
Wiltshire Fire and Rescue Service’s Community Risk Strategy for Swindon Borough 
2006-2026 (Swindon and Wiltshire Fire Authority, 2011)
Wroughton Parish Council Action Plan 2009214 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Appendix 3: Open Space Standards
The standards for open space support Policy EN3 of the Swindon Borough Local 
Plan.  They are also detailed in the Open Space Audit and Assessment (Update 2014) 
which assesses the quantity, quality and accessibility of all public open space  
in the Borough.
QuantityFor the purposes of assessing the overall quantity of open space provision the 
standard of 3.2 hectares per 1000 population will be used as set out below:
Category of 
Open SpaceDefinition Requirement
Children and Teenager’s 
Play AreasAll equipped children’s play 
areas, skateboard parks, 
outdoor basketball goals 
and similar facilities.0.3 Hectares (0.75 
Acres/1000 population)
Outdoor Sports FacilitiesIncludes all outdoor sports facilities whether naturally or artificially surfaced e.g. playing pitches, bowling greens and tennis courts.1.6 Hectares (4 Acres/1000 population) of which 1.2 Hectares (3 acres/1000 population) is playing pitches
General Recreational AreasAll areas of public open space which have a significant recreational function but do not fall in the above categories e.g. parks and gardens, amenity areas, accessible wildlife areas.1 Hectare (2.47 Acres/1000 population) of which 0.5 Ha should be suitable for children’s informal play
Allotments An area containing allotment plots which the occupier for the purpose of producing fruit or vegetables for consumption by individuals and family wholly or mainly cultivates. Allotments are defined more precisely by the Allotments Act 1922.0.3 Hectares (0.75 acres/1000 population)215
Appendix 3
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Types of Open Space Provision
The Borough Council consider that a far reaching network of connected and  
multi-functional green spaces will make a key contribution to the quality of life for 
both existing and future communities in Swindon Borough, as highlighted  
and defined below.
Children and Teenager’s Play Areas
Local Equipped Area for Play (LEAP): A LEAP is an area of open space specifically 
designated and laid out with features including equipment for children who are 
beginning to go out and play independently close to where they live, usually within  
5 minutes walking time.
Neighbourhood Equipped Area for Play (NEAP): A NEAP is an area of open space 
specifically designated, laid out and equipped mainly for older children but with play opportunities for younger children as well.
Swindon Local Landscaped Area for Play (LLAP): A LLAP is an area of open 
space designed for play by children and young people. It provides flexibility to consult with local communities to reflect community needs and aspirations in design, incorporating design for natural play, biodiversity and access for all, whilst 
considering maintenance requirements as an integral part of the design.
Outdoor Sport Facilities
Outdoor sports facilities for adults and children with natural or artificial surfaces. 
Typically this includes playing pitches, bowling greens, athletics tracks and  
tennis courts.
Playing pitches are further defined as areas formally laid out and maintained 
for organised sports (generally football, rugby, cricket or hockey). This includes 
clearance zones around the playing area.
Local Open Space (LOS)
These spaces are located within housing areas to serve the informal recreational 
needs of the immediate community and the play requirements of children.  Local 
open spaces will have equipped play areas for children aged 2-6 (LEAP) and 6-14 
(NEAP) and may contain multi-use games areas.  They may also provide seating, 
paths, site information and associated landscape.
Major Open Spaces (MOS)
These spaces are designated principally for passive recreation serving recreational 
needs and providing connectivity to surrounding areas.  May vary in size, shape and 
degree of formality and may be used to preserve and enhance retained landscape features such as woodlands, lakes or watercourses.  MOS may contain more formal provisions, pitches or play areas as secondary uses.216 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Quality
Type of Open Space 
ProvisionQuality Standards
Children’s and Teenager’s Play Areas NPFA Six Acre Standard - Locally Equipped Area for Play and Neighbourhood Equipped Area for PlaySwindon Local Landscaped Area for Play  
(LLAP) - Fields in Trust (FiT) 2008
Outdoor Sports Facilities Local standards based on Sport England guidance
General Recreational AreasLocal standard 
Allotments Local standard
Accessibility
Type of Open Space Accessibility
Local Equipped Area for Play (LEAP)
Swindon Local Landscaped Area for Play 
(LLAP)
Neighbourhood Equipped Area for Play 
(NEAP)250 metres (approx. 5 
Minutes walking time)
250 metres (approx. 5 
Minutes walking time)500 metres (approx. 15 
Minutes walking time)
Outdoor Sports Facilities600 metres for junior pitches
(15 Minutes walking time)20 Minute drive time for adult sports facilities. 
Local Open Spaces 500 metres
Major Open Spaces2  to 20 Hectare sitesGreater than 20 Hectare sites2 km5 km
Allotments 600 metres
Natural Green Space Accessibility 
2 ha site 300 metres 
20 ha site 2 km 
100 ha site 5 km
500 ha site 10 km217
Appendix 4
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Appendix 4:  
Green Infrastructure Typologies28 
The green infrastructure typologies support Policies EN1, EN2, EN3, EN4, EN5, EN10, 
EN11, SC1 and TR2 of the Swindon Borough Local Plan Submission.
Green 
infrastructure sitesExample Information sourceSuggested consultees
Biodiversity sites – sites of national and local importance together with their associated species.  Coate Water,SevenfieldsSwindon Local Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP)Natural England notifications (available on line)Wiltshire and Swindon Biological Records CentreSBCParish and Town CouncilsNatural EnglandEnvironment AgencyWiltshire Wildlife TrustForestry Commission
Country parks 
and town parksTown 
Gardens,
Queens Park.Swindon Central 
Area Action Plan 
(published 2009)
Swindon Open 
Space Audit and 
Assessment.SBC
Parish and  
Town Councils
Semi-natural 
greenspaces (including woodlands and water bodies)Shaw Forest Park,Rivermead,Swindon Open Space Audit  and AssessmentSBCParish and Town CouncilsWiltshire Wildlife TrustEnvironment Agency
CemeteriesRadnor Street LNRSBCParish and Town Councils
Historic Environment Record Groundwell Ridge,Barbury CastleWiltshire Sites and Monuments Records (SMR/HER)SBCParish and Town Councils
Trees and hedgerows (Where affected by development
29)SBCParish and Town Councils
Green roofs Toothill SBC
28This list includes the main green infrastructure typologies, some of which overlap and interrelate. 
However, the list is not exhaustive.
29This includes trees and hedgerows, (whether subject to Statutory Protection or not), that are on or 
adjacent to potential development sites and that could be influenced by development proposals.218 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Primary 
SchoolParish and Town Councils
(Open spaces)
Outdoor sports 
facilitiesBorough-wide (Could include school playing fields)Swindon Open Space Audit and AssessmentSBCParish and Town Councils
General 
recreational areasSwindon Open Space Audit and 
AssessmentSBC
Parish and Town 
Councils
AllotmentsBorough-wideSwindon Open Space Audit and 
AssessmentSBC
Parish and Town 
Councils
Children’s  
play areasSwindon Open Space Audit and AssessmentSBCParish and Town Councils
Green Infrastructure Linear FeaturesExample Information sourceSuggested consultees
Rights of way and other designated cycle/pedestrian routes including long distance trails.Sustrans Route 45,Thames Path,RidgewayRights of Way definitive maps. National Trail Management Plans.National Cycle network. (Sustrans)SBCParish and Town Councils
Canal networkNorth Wilts Canal, 
Wilts and 
Berks 
CanalSwindon Central 
Area Action Plan 
(published 2009)SBC
Parish and  
Town Councils, 
Wilts and Berks 
Canal Trust
Water courses and associated floodplains River Ray,River ColeSBCParish and Town Councils
Environment 
Agency
Linear green routesRichard Jeffries Parkway,River Ray Parkway.SBCParish and Town Councils219
Appendix 4
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Green Infrastructure 
NetworksInformation sourceSuggested consultees
Strategic, sub-regional, and local GI networks.Swindon Green Infrastructure StrategySBC
Green spineSwindon Central Area Action Plan (2009)SBCParish and Town Councils
Green Infrastructure SettingInformation sourceSuggested consultees
North Wessex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural BeautySwindon Borough Local Plan 2026North Wessex Downs AONB Management PlanSBC Natural England
Landscape characterGreen Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document SBCParish and Town Councils, Natural England
Great Western Community ForestForest PlanSBCParish and 
Town Councils, 
Community 
Forest 
Cotswold Water ParkCotswold Water Park Strategy Review and Implementation  (Masterplan)Cotswold Water Biodiversity Action Plan 2007-2016Cotswold Water Park Trust Wiltshire Council
National Trails: Thames and Ridgeway National Trails Management PlansNational Trails220 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Appendix 5: Housing Trajectory  
The Trajectory includes an allowance for 5% brought forward from the end of the plan period to the first 5-years in line with the 
National Planning Policy Framework
It should be noted, Moredon Bridge and Ridgeway Farm are within Wiltshire Council’s administrative area.
221
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Appendix 6: Monitoring Indicators
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
SD1: Sustainable Development PrinciplesALLCovered by other indicators within the frameworkNot Required
SD2: The Sustainable Development StrategyALLNumber of dwellings completed by location and strategic allocations.
Housing Trajectory showing: 
i) Annual dwelling completions
ii) Projected dwellings over the 
phased periods
iii) Annual new additional dwellings requirement
iv) Annual average no. of additional dwellings required to meet housing targets
Amount of housing land available that contributes to the 5- year housing land supply
Amount of land (ha) developed  
for employment by location.Employment levels and measures  
of GDPProvide 22,000 dwellings over the plan period, on average achieve the following:
1,150 dwellings p.a. 2011-20161,625 dwellings p.a. 2016-2026
Provide the following dwellings over the plan 
period:
  Central Area 1,000 dwellings
  Remainder Urban 3,500 dwellings
  NDA 589 dwellings
  Wichelstowe 4,064 dwellings
  Commonhead 890 dwellings
  Tadpole Farm 1,695 dwellings
  New Eastern Villages 7,500 dwellings
  South Marston 640 dwellings
  Kingsdown 1,650 dwellings
  Highworth 200 (at least)  dwellings
  Wroughton 150 (at least) dwellings
  Other Villages: 100 (at least) dwellings222 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
Amount of land developed within the Countryside in line with the policy.
Total amount of floorspace for 
‘Town Centres Uses’ by locationProvide 5-year housing land supply of 
deliverable sites.
Provide 119.5 ha employment land over the 
plan period
No development in the countryside unless in 
accordance with the plan
Majority of Town Centres Uses within the 
Town Centre unless supported by other policies within the Plan. 
SD3: Managing DevelopmentALLPercentage of major applications determined in 13 weeks
Percentage of minor applications 
determined in 8 weeks
Number of major appeal decisions 
allowed as a percentage of total planning decisions on major planning applications
Production of a Master Plan and/or 
Design Codes
The percentage of applications 
that are accompanied with a Diversity Impact Assessment / Health Impact AssessmentAt least 60% of major applications determined within 13 weeks  (national target)
At least 65% of minor applications 
determined in 8 weeks (national target)
No more than 20% of major decisions 
overturned at appeal (national target) 
Positive progress towards formulation of 
Master Plans and/or Design Codes. 
All significant development should be 
accompanied by a Diversity Impact Assessment / Health Impact Assessment
Formulation of SPDs in accordance with  
the Local Development Scheme.223
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
Production of Eastern Villages  
and South Marston SPDs
DE1: High Quality DesignSO1SO2
SO3Percentage of residential development in accordance  
with the design principles criteriaAll applicable residential developments to 
meet the design principles criteria
DE2: Sustainable ConstructionSO1
SO2SO3Percentage of completed development achieving current adopted standards for sustainable construction.
Percentage of developments 
within strategic allocations and within major developments within the District Heating Priority Areas demonstrating compliance with  
the policy.All residential developments to meet the following targets, until superseded by national prescribed standards:
  Code for Sustainable Homes Level 3 – 2013
  Code for Sustainable Homes Level 4 –  
    2013-2016
  Code for Sustainable Homes Level 5 – 2016
  BREEAM Excellent – 2013
All major developments within the District Heating Priority Areas and developments  
within the strategic allocations to be in accordance with the policy.
EC1: Economic Growth through Existing Business  
and Inward InvestmentSO3SO5Employment levels by sector
Delivery of university and/or 
enhanced higher educationIncrease in employment levels within  the sectors identified
Increase in higher education provision224 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
facilities
Business Start Ups and Closures (VAT 
Registrations and de-registrations)Increase in business start-ups and decrease in closures.
EC2: Employment Land  and Premises (B Use Classes)SO3Quantum change in different employment land
Number of permitted proposals 
over 1,000m
2 office space outside 
of the Central Area.No net loss of employment land unless in accordance with the policy.
No proposals over 1,000m2 office outside  
of Central Area not in compliance with  
the policy.
EC3: The Role of Centres and 
Non Main Town Centres UsesSO3  SO8Number of retail proposals permitted outside of defined 
hierarchy of centres
Percentage of Class A1 retail 
frontage in primary and secondary 
frontage in the Central Area
Percentage of Class A1 retail 
frontage within District and Primary 
Rural Centres
Number of applications granted 
for retail developments over 600m
2 
accompanied with a Retail Impact AssessmentAll Proposals permitted outside of the Town Centre or defined centres are in accordance with the policy.
Town Centre:75% A1 Primary Frontage60% A1 Secondary FrontageDistrict and Primary Rural Centres:70% A1 street frontagesAll permitted retail development over 600m
2 
should be accompanied by a comprehensive 
Retail Impact Assessment 225
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
EC4: Conversion of Buildings to Employment Use in the CountrysideSO3Number of permitted schemes for employment in the countrysideAll permissions granted for conversion of buildings to employment use in the countryside are in accordance with  the policy.
EC5: Farm Diversification  SO3Number of permitted schemes  
for rural diversificationAll permissions granted for rural diversification schemes are in  accordance with the policy.
HA1: Mix, Types and Density SO4The annual number of housing completions by: 
  Ward 
  Type e.g. flat, terrace, semi,  
    detached, and number  
    of bedrooms
  DensityTo reflect the housing needs as identified  
within the Swindon Strategic Housing  
Market Assessment 
HA2: Affordable Housing SO4Percentage of granted planning 
permissions for sites of 15 or more 
or sites larger than 0.5 ha with 30% providing affordable housingAll planning permissions for sites of 15 or more dwellings or sites larger than 0.5 ha with 30% or more  affordable housing  unless in accordance with the policy
HA3: Wheelchair  
Accessible HousingSO4Provision of wheelchair accessible housing provided on sites of 50  or more dwellings2% of dwellings for proposals over  50 dwellings226 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
HA4: Subdivision of Housing / Housing in Multiple OccupationSO4 Number of HMOs permittedAll HMOs permitted in accordance  with the policy
HA5: Rural Exception Sites SO4Number of permitted schemes  
for rural housingAll permissions granted for rural exceptions are in accordance with the policy
HA6: Agricultural  
Workers DwellingsSO4Number of permitted schemes  
for agricultural workersAll permissions granted for agricultural workers’ dwellings are in accordance  with the policy
HA7: Conversion of  
Buildings to Residential  Use in the CountrysideSO4Number of permitted schemes for conversions of buildings to residential use in the countrysideAll permissions granted for conversions of buildings to residential use in the countryside are in accordance with  the policy
HA8: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
Pitches and Sites  SO4Net additional pitches  
(gypsy and traveller)
Number of permitted pitches/
schemesProvision of 17 gypsy and traveller 
residential pitched and one travelling 
showpeople site.
All permissions granted for pitches or 
sites for gypsies, travellers and travelling showpeople are in accordance with  
the policy
TR1 Sustainable  
Transport NetworksSO7Mode share of journey to work
Per capita CO
2 emissions inAnnual increase in sustainable transport use Reduction in CO
2 emission from transport227
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
Local Authority area from road transport
Delivery of Rapid Transit NetworkDelivery of Rapid Transit Route as outlined  
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
TR2 Transport and 
Development SO7Percentage of new residential development within 30 minutes of public transport time of facilities At least 90% of new residential development to be within 30 minutes  
public transport time of facilities
IN1: Infrastructure Provision SO2Progress of the Infrastructure Items as prioritised within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan
Amount of S106 / CIL monies 
received and spentPrioritised Infrastructure Items to be delivered within identified timeframes
S106 and CIL will be monitored annually
IN2: Water Supply and 
WastewaterSO2Number of planning permissions granted contrary to technical adviceAll permissions to be granted in accordance with technical advice
IN3: ICT & Telecommunications SO2Number of planning permissions 
granted contrary to  
technical adviceAll permissions to be granted in 
accordance with technical advice
IN4: Low Carbon and Renewable EnergySO2Renewable energy capacity installed (by type) (measured in kW)To provide 200 megawatts of electricity  by 2020228
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
CM1: Education SO5Provision of education facilities including:
  primary schools
  secondary schools
  expansion of colleges, university 
    or enhanced tertiary facilities
  SEN facility
nursery facilities within new  primary schools
CM2: Active and  
Healthy Lifestyles SO6SO8  SO9Percentage of adult population who participate in sport and active recreation, at moderate intensity, for at least 30 minutes on at least  
12 days out of 4 weeks.Increase in participation
CM3: Integrating Facilities 
and Delivering Services SO6Number of granted planning 
permissions and agreements for services on same sites/co-locationsIncrease in agreements to use schools  
and other public buildings
CM4: Maintaining  and Enhancing  
Community FacilitiesSO6Quantity of new and loss  
of community facilities No loss of community facilities unless  
in accordance with the policy
EN1: Green  Infrastructure Network  SO9Amount of new green infrastructure corridors/connectionsIncrease in green infrastructure corridors.
No loss of strategic green corridor unless in 
accordance with the policy
No loss of woodland unless in accordance 
with the policy and the Plan.229
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
EN2: Community Forest SO9Amount of new woodland 
Percentage change in Community 
Forest planted areaNet increase in tree cover
EN3: Open Space SO9Quantity of open space provision in strategic development areas and the rest of the Borough.
Quantity of public open space lostAll residential development of 25 dwellings 
or more providing open space onsite
No loss of open space unless in 
accordance with the policy
EN4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity SO9Percentage change in area of designated biodiversity sites (ha)
Percentage of SSSIs in  
‘favourable or ‘unfavourable 
recovering’ conditionArea of  
net biodiversity gainNet gain of biodiversity
EN5: Landscape Character and Historical LandscapeSO9Percentage of development approved in areas where there 
is a need to take account of 
landscape character contrary to 
landscape team advice.All permissions to be granted in accordance with technical advice 
EN6: Flood Risk SO9Applications approved contrary to the advice of the environment agency on flood defence or water 
quality groundsAll permissions to be granted in 
accordance with technical advice 
EN7: Pollution SO9 Level of air pollutionAll permissions to be granted in accordance with technical advice230 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
EN8: Unstable Land  SO9Number of planning permissions granted contrary to adviceAll permissions to be granted in accordance with technical advice.
EN9: Contaminated Land SO9Number of planning permissions granted contrary to adviceAll permissions to be granted in 
accordance with technical advice.
EN10: Historic Environment 
and Heritage AssetsSO10Substantial loss of sites of archaeological importance including Scheduled Monuments
Proportion of conservation areas 
with an up to date appraisal
A reduction in the number of 
heritage assets in the Borough  
at risk;
The completion of a local list of 
locally important heritage assets.Area of net biodiversity gainNo loss of sites of archaeological importance
All conservation areas with an up to date 
appraisal
A reduction in the number of heritage 
assets in the Borough at risk
The completion of a local list of locally 
important heritage assets.
All permissions to be granted in 
accordance with technical advice 
EN11: Canals SO9Amount of development permitted on land safeguarded for the canalPrevent inappropriate development  
on the safeguarded route.231
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
SC1: Swindon`s Central Area   ALL Indicators outlined in CAAPThe delivery of the following over the Plan period:
  1,000 dwellings
  90,000m2 new office development
  Increase in leisure floorspace within the  
    North Star area (as identified on Figure 7)
  53,000m2 net comparison retail  
    floorspace in primary shopping area
The delivery of key infrastructure items  
in accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan
SC2: Swindon`s Existing Urban CommunitiesALLThis policy is covered by other indicators within this frameworkIncrease in ranking on previous rankings (2010 baseline)
NC1: Wichelstowe ALLQuantum of houses and 
employment land delivered at 
Wichelstowe since the start of  
the plan periodThe delivery of the following over the  
Plan period:
  4,064 dwellings
  40 dph
  12.5 hectares employment land
The delivery of key infrastructure items  
in accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
No development permitted within the 
indicative non-coalescence area unless  in accordance with the policy232 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
NC2: Commonhead ALLQuantum of houses and employment land delivered at Commonhead since the start of  
the plan periodThe delivery of the following over the Plan period:
  890 dwellings
  15 hectares employment land
The delivery of key infrastructure items in accordance with the Infrastructure  Delivery Plan
No development in the area preserving 
the setting of Coate Water unless in accordance with the policy
NC3: Proposed Eastern Villages including Rowborough and South Marston Village ExpansionALLQuantum of houses and employment land delivered at Eastern Villages since the start  of the plan periodThe delivery of the following over  
the Plan period:
  6,000 dwellings south of A420
  1,500 dwellings at Rowborough
  500 dwellings at South Marston
  40 hectares employment land
  12,000m2 retail floorspace
The delivery of key infrastructure items  in accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
No development in non-coalescence  
areas unless in accordance with the policy233
Appendix 6
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
NC4: Tadpole Farm   ALLIQuantum of houses and employment land delivered at Tadpole Farm since the start of  
the plan periodThe delivery of the following over the  
Plan period:
  1,695 dwellings
  5 hectares of employment land
The delivery of key infrastructure items  in accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
NC5: Kingsdown ALLQuantum of houses and employment land delivered at Kingsdown since the start of the plan periodThe delivery of about 1,650 dwellings over the Plan period.
The delivery of key infrastructure items in 
accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan.
No development in non-coalescence area 
unless in accordance with the policy
RA1: Highworth ALLQuantum of houses and 
employment land delivered at Highworth since the start of the  
plan periodFull occupancy
No decrease of the percentage of  
Town Centre Uses (baseline 2013)Delivery of 5 hectares of employment  
land including no more that 50% B8 use
RA2: Wroughton ALLQuantum of houses and 
employment land delivered at Wroughton since the start of the plan periodFull Occupancy
No decrease of the percentage of Town 
Centre Uses (baseline 2013)234 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026
Local Plan PolicyStrategic 
ObjectivesIndicators Target
RA3: South Marston ALLQuantum of houses and employment land delivered at South Marston since the start of  
the plan period.
Amount of development permitted 
within the non-coalescence areasDelivery of affordable housing in line with the policy
Average density of 30 dwellings per hectareThe delivery of key infrastructure items in 
accordance with the Infrastructure  Delivery Plan.
No development in non-coalescence area 
unless in accordance with the policy
LN1: Neighbourhood PlanningALLAdoption of neighbourhood plans and community plans as outlined  
in the policyThe quantity of dwellings identified in accordance with the targets in policy SD2235
Appendix 7
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Affordable Housing: Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided 
to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined 
with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should include 
provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.
    Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private registered   
  providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008),  
   for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent  
  regime. It may also be owned by other persons and provided under equivalent  
  rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the  
  Homes and Communities Agency.
    Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered providers  
  of social housing to households who are eligible for social rented housing.
    Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a rent of no more than 80%  
  of the local market rent (including service charges, where applicable).
    Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social  
  rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable Housing  
  definition above. These can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity  
  loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable  
  rented housing.
The National Planning Policy Framework states that homes that do not meet the above 
definition of affordable housing, such as “low cost market” housing, may not be considered as affordable housing for planning purposes.
Annual Monitoring Report: the annual assessment of the implementation of the Local 
Development Scheme and the extent to which policies in Local Development Documents are being successfully implemented.
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB): is a landscape whose distinctive character 
and natural beauty are so outstanding that it is in the nation’s interest to safeguard them. Created by the legislation of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act of 1949.
B Class Uses: The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) 
specifies various classes of use for buildings and land. Within each class changes of use  
for another purpose within the same class do not require planning permission.  
The B use classes comprise:
 
   B1 - Business includes offices, research and development premises and  
  light industry. Light industry can be carried out in a residential area without  
  adverse environmental effects from noise, vibration, smell, fumes, smoke, soot,  
  ash, dust or grit. 
    B2 - General Industry includes any industrial use not covered by B1.
    B8 - Storage and Distribution covers warehousing for distribution. It does not  
  cover retail warehousing.Appendix 7: Glossary of Terms 236 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026BREEAM Standard: BREEAM measures the overall environmental impact of a development 
project on a scale of pass, good, very good, and excellent.   It serves as both an assessment 
tool and an accreditation scheme. Building standards for offices, industrial developments and supermarkets are rated independently by trained assessors. For more detail refer to  
the draft Swindon Sustainable Building Design and Construction Draft Supplementary Planning Document.
Brownfield Development: The redevelopment of land that possesses at least one of the 
following five characteristics: previously developed land that is now empty; vacant buildings; derelict land and buildings; other previously developed land or buildings, currently in use, allocated for development in the adopted plan or having planning permission for housing; 
other previously developed land or buildings where it is known there is potential  
for redevelopment.
Swindon Central Area Action Plan: Provides a planning framework that will guide the 
future development of Central Swindon. It contains overarching strategic objectives for 
development in terms of high quality design, public realm, sustainability and transport and 
movement and also includes site-specific policies. All planning applications submitted to 
the Council within Central Swindon will be assessed against the policy framework contained 
within the Action Plan.
Community Cohesion: The concept of community cohesion was investigated by the Cantle 
Report in 2001, and is linked to other concepts such as inclusion and exclusion, social capital 
and differentiation, community and neighbourhood. An action guide published by the Local Government Association in 2004 identifies a cohesive community as one where:
 
   There is a common vision and a sense of belonging for all communities; 
    The diversity of people’s different backgrounds and circumstances is  
  appreciated and positively valued; 
    Those from different backgrounds have similar life opportunities; and 
    Strong and positive relationships are being developed between people  
  from different backgrounds and circumstances in the workplace, in schools,  
  and within neighbourhoods. 
How spatial planning can assist in achieving community cohesion is one of the challenges 
for the Local Plan, and other Development Plan Documents, to resolve. 
Community Facilities: Provide for the health and wellbeing, social, educational, spiritual, 
recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the community.
Community Strategy: Local authorities are required under the Local Government Act 2000 
to prepare a Strategy with the aim of improving the social, environmental and economic 
well being of their areas. 
County Wildlife Sites: are non-statutory designations used to identify high quality wildlife 
habitats in a county context. Together with statutory sites such as Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSIs), County Wildlife Sites form an important part of the wildlife resource in the wider countryside.
Development Plan Documents: those documents that form the Development Plan for the 
area, contained within its Local Development Framework, and are subject to independent examination (including a Local Plan, Site Specific Allocations, Action Area Plans and 
Development Control Policies). 237
Appendix 7
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026District Heating Network: a system for distributing heat, which is generated in a local 
centralised location for residential and commercial heating requirements.
Diversity Impact Assessment (DIA): A thorough and systematic analysis of an existing or 
proposed policy. Its aim is to obtain a profile of how the policy affects different equalities 
groups - usually these are defined by areas of legislation: age, disability, gender, race, religion & belief and sexual orientation.
Front-loading: the principle of carrying out extensive public and stakeholder consultations 
from the beginning of the process of producing a Development Plan Document. This 
benefits from enabling people’s visions to be incorporated into the document’s vision, and 
elicits early views about the possible issues and strategies for the future.  Most differences can be identified and addressed from the beginning, thereby helping to reduce the number of 
objections later in the process (‘back-loading’). 
Green Infrastructure: A network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural,  
which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits  
for local communities. 
Green Roof: Green roofs are vegetated layers that sit on top of the conventional roof 
surfaces of a building. Intensive green roofs are composed of relatively deep substrates  
and can therefore support a wide range of plant types: trees and shrubs as well as perennials, grasses and annuals.  Extensive green roofs are composed of lightweight layers 
of free-draining material that support low growing, tough drought-resistant vegetation. 
Gross Value Added (GVA): this measures the contribution to the economy of each 
individual producer, industry or sector.
Gypsy and Travellers: Planning Circular 01/2006 (Planning for Gypsy and Caravan Sites) 
defines: “Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excluding 
members of an organised group of travelling show people or circus people travelling 
together as such”
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA): European Directive 92/43/EEC (the Habitats 
Directive) requires that any plan or project, not directly connected with or necessary to  
the management of a designated habitats site but likely to have a significant effect thereon, should be subject to an assessment of its implications for the site. This applies  
to DPDs and SPDs.
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO): A house which is occupied by three of more 
unrelated persons, who do not form a single household. This definition is supported by Sections 254, 257 and 258 of the Housing Act 2004.
Independent Examination: The Local Planning Authority must submit all Development Plan 
Documents for Independent Examination that is held in public by an Inspector from the Planning Inspectorate. Consequent on s112 of the Localism Act 2011 the Inspector must make recommendations to the Council, but his report is not binding.
Inclusive Design: The use of design features to increase accessibility to buildings by all, 
regardless of age or disability.  For example design features and navigational aids can help people with sensory impairment to easily move around with confidence, and housing can 
be made more accessible by including design features that enable independent living. 238 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Lifetime Homes: A home that incorporates a range of criteria designed to enhance 
accessibility and allow easy adaptation, and is appropriate for, and accessible to, everyone, 
not just those with limited mobility. 
Local Development Document: The collective term for Development Plan Documents, 
Supplementary Planning Documents and the Statement of Community Involvement. 
Local Development Framework: The name for the portfolio of Development Plan 
Documents, Supplementary Planning Documents, a Statement of Community Involvement, the Local Development Scheme and Annual Monitoring Reports, which collectively  
will replace the Local Plan and provide the framework for delivering the spatial strategy  
for the Borough. 
Local Development Scheme:   
The programme for preparing Local Development Documents. 
Localism Act: A statute passed in 2011 which aims to devolve power from central 
government to local government and communities.
Local Nature Reserves (LNR): Are for both people and wildlife. They are places with 
wildlife or geological features that are of special interest locally. They offer people special opportunities to study or learn about nature or simply to enjoy it.
Local Strategic Partnership: The partnership of stakeholders (the Swindon Strategic 
Partnership) bringing together locally the public, private, voluntary and community sectors given responsibility for producing the Community Strategy within Swindon. 
Major Development: For dwellings, a major development is one where the number of 
dwellings to be constructed is 10 or more. A site area of 0.5 hectares or more should be used as the definition of a major development when the number of dwellings to be built is not given in the application. In all other cases, a major development is one where the site area is 
1 hectare or more, or where the floorspace to be constructed is 1000 square metres or more.
MWe: This is an abbreviation for Megawatt (electric) and is used as the unit of electrical 
power produced by a generator. In a thermal reactor this is about one-third of the  
thermal power available. 
National Planning Policy Framework: A national planning policy document released in 
March 2012 which replaced previous national planning guidance contained in  
PPG’s and PPS’s 
Natura 2000 Sites: In May 1992 European Union governments adopted legislation designed 
to protect the most seriously threatened habitats and species across Europe. This legislation 
is called the Habitats Directive and complements the Birds Directive adopted in 1979. At 
the heart of both these Directives is the creation of a network of sites called Natura 2000. 
The Birds Directive requires the establishment of Special Protection Areas (SPAs) for birds. The Habitats Directive similarly requires Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) to be designated for other species, and for habitats. Together, SPAs and SACs make up the Natura 2000 series.
A Neighbourhood Development Plan: Is a new planning tool to help empower communities 
to shape and manage development in their local areas. Communities will be able to develop planning policies that will become part of the planning framework for their area and grant planning permission for certain types of new development.239
Appendix 7
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Neighbourhood Planning: Neighbourhood planning is allowing the people who know about 
and care for an area plan for it. It is led by the residential and business community, not the 
council, and is about building neighbourhoods – not stopping growth. Neighbourhood planning is optional but if adopted by the Council, neighbourhood plans and orders will have weight becoming part of the plan making framework for the area.
A Neighbourhood Development Order: Enables the community to grant planning  
permission for the development it wishes to see.
The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004: is the primary legislation for the 
development plan process.
Planning Inspectorate:  A body whose work includes national infrastructure planning under 
the Planning Act 2008 process as amended by the Localism Act 2011; processing planning and enforcement appeals; and holding examinations into local plans and community infrastructure levy charging schedules.
Primary Frontage: The part of the Town Centre that contains a high proportion of retail uses, 
including major national retailers. 
Policies Map: a map, illustrating the spatial extent of all the policies in Development  
Plan Documents. 
Express Bus Network: The Express Bus Network is intended to provide a reliable, high 
frequency, high quality public transport system for Swindon. 
Reg.25, Reg.26: Regulations in the Town and Country Planning (Local Development) 
(England) Regulations 2004, that prescribed how local authorities should undertake consultation on Local Development Documents at the Issues and Options and  
Preferred Options Stages.
Reg.27, Reg. 28: Regulations in The Town and Country Planning (Local Development) 
(England) (Amendment) Regulations 2008 that prescribed how local authorities should undertake consultation on Local Development Documents at the Pre-Submission stage.
Reg.30, Reg.31: Regulations in The Town and Country Planning (Local Development) 
(England) (Amendment) Regulations 2008 that prescribed how local authorities should submit Local Development Documents to the Secretary of State.
Reg.19, Reg. 20: Regulations in The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning)(England) 
Regulations 2012 that prescribes how local authorities should undertake consultation on Local Plans at the Pre-Submission stage in accordance with Regulation 35.
Reg.22: Regulation in The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) 
Regulations 2012 that prescribes how local authorities should submit Local Plans to the 
Secretary of State.
Rural Exceptions Policy: Allows residential development adjoining the settlement boundary 
of a village (village envelope) or within villages with no settlement boundaries to be permitted as an exception to normal planning policy. It can provide a significant number of 
affordable homes for local people in rural areas.
Saved Policies: The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, and Planning Policy 
Statement 12: Local Spatial Planning (now withdrawn) allowed for a transition period between the old development plan system and the new Local Development Framework approach, to ensure there was no policy deficit. Adopted structure and local plans and unitary development plans retain development plan status and automatically 240 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026become ‘saved’ policies for a period of three years from commencement of the Act 
(September 2004), or until replaced by RSS or LDF documents.  For plans adopted since the commencement of the Act, the three-year period commences from the date they 
become adopted.  During the three-year period local planning authorities should bring 
forward local development documents to replace saved polices in accordance with their Local Development Scheme (LDS). The Wiltshire & Swindon Structure Plan 2016 was adopted 
in April 2006 and the Swindon Borough Local Plan was adopted in July 2006, which are the 
dates from which the initial three-year period started in Swindon Borough. 
Secondary Frontage: The part of the Town Centre that provides opportunities for cafes, 
professional services and independent retailers to flourish.
Site Allocations Development Plan Document: A document that identifies or “allocates” 
areas of land for specific types of development. This can include housing, employment, community facilities etc. The document also includes the definition of development boundaries or settlement limits for those places where some further growth may take place.
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI): Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) give legal 
protection to the best sites for wildlife and geology in England. Natural England has responsibility for identifying and protecting the SSSIs in England under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended).
Soundness: The submitted Local Plan will be subject to a Public Examination, which considers 
whether the Strategy is ‘sound’ - in other words founded on a robust and  
credible evidence base and the most appropriate strategy when considered against the reasonable alternatives. For something to be sound is must also be deliverable, flexible and 
able to be monitored. 
Spatial Vision: A statement that sets out the big picture of how an area, in this case Swindon 
Borough, will be developed over an extended period of time i.e. 20 years.
Statement of Community Involvement: Sets out the standards that the Council will achieve 
in involving local communities in the preparation of Local Development Documents and 
development control decisions. 
Statement of Consultation: A statement that is put together to describe the involvement of 
the community in the preparation of the development brief.
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA): The consideration of policies and proposals to 
assess their impact on the environment. The European ‘SEA Directive’ (2001/42/EC) requires a formal environmental assessment of Development Plans. This is to be undertaken as part of 
a ‘Sustainability Appraisal’. 
Strategic Green Corridors: are linear features of mostly open character, including riverside 
paths, footpaths, cycleways and bridleways, which act as wildlife corridors and attractive, safe off-road links between residential areas, open spaces, urban centres, leisure facilities 
and employment areas. 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA): The primary role of the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment is to identify sites with potential for housing; so that a Local Planning Authority can assess whether it can identify a five year housing land supply, as required by national policy. The identification of potential housing sites also informs the local plan process, the assessment includes consideration of environmental constraints, 
significant national planning policies and viability. 241
Appendix 7
Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Strategic Housing Market Assessment: A Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) is a 
study of the housing market in a particular area and is used to inform local development 
plans and housing strategies. 
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs): these provide supplementary information in 
respect of the policies in Development Plan Documents. 
Sustainability Appraisal: a tool for appraising policies to ensure that they reflect sustainable 
development objectives (i.e. social, environmental and economic factors). To comply with Government policy, the Borough Council will produce a Sustainability Appraisal that incorporates a Strategic Environmental Assessment.
Sustainability Appraisal Scoping Report: The Scoping Report sets out the proposed scope of 
the ‘Sustainability Appraisal’ for each ‘Development Plan Document’. 
Sustainable Communities: These are seen as the residential and workplace surroundings 
in which people live and thrive and where there is a balance and integration of the social, economic and environmental components that define a community area. These communities are likely to be safe and inclusive; well planned, built and run; and offering equality and opportunity for all. Sustainable communities are diverse and distinctive, 
reflecting their own local circumstances. 
Sustainable Development: UK’s Sustainable Development Strategy – Securing the  
Future (2005) defines the goal of sustainable development as, “to enable all people 
throughout the world to satisfy their basic needs and enjoy a better quality of life, without compromising the quality of life of future generations”. The UK has accepted five key 
principles of sustainable development to ensure that we live within environmental limits and 
achieve a just society, and we do so by means of sustainable economy, good governance, and sound science. 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods Study: A study of urban settlements that are adapted to the 
local environmental characteristics and make an efficient use of resources, minimise their emissions and show an increase in quality of life.
Supported Housing:  Usually consists of flats or shared housing where people with specific 
needs can live independently within the community, with support from the relevant services.
Swindon Strategic Partnership (SSP): A non-statutory, non-executive body bringing together 
members of the public, private, and voluntary sectors. The SSP is responsible for producing the Sustainable Community Strategy.
Swindon Transport Strategy: The Swindon Transport Strategy has been prepared by 
consultants WSP for Swindon Borough Council and the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA). It is intended to provide a comprehensive understanding of the transport interventions required to facilitate and support sustainable growth in Swindon over the next 20 years. The Transport Strategy has been used to inform the Local Plan and will be used 
to inform the preparation of future Council policies and other planning documents, the 
Swindon Local Transport Plan and the delivery of transport schemes. 
Travel to Work Areas: For those involved in labour market analysis and planning, it is useful to 
be able to use data for zones that are labour market areas. To meet this need, the zones are defined so that the bulk of their resident population also work within the same area. Defining labour market areas requires the analysis of commuting patterns, and the Office of National 
Statistics (ONS) has worked with Newcastle University to apply a complex allocation process 
to define a set of Travel to Work Areas (TTWAs). 242 Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Travellers: CLG document Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (March 2012) gives the definition 
as “Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who 
on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excluding members of an 
organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such”.
Travelling Showpeople: CLG document Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (March 2012) gives 
the definition as “Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes such persons who on the 
grounds of their family’s or dependants’ more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined above”.Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Notes:
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________Swindon Borough Local Plan 2026 Notes:
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________This information is available on the internet at www.swindon.gov.uk. 
It can be produced in a range of languages and formats  
(such as large print, Braille or other accessible formats)  
by contacting the Customer Services Department.
t: 01793 445500  f: 01793 463982
e: customerservices@swindon.gov.uk
D1351/FOI 3975/16