Our Local Plan 
Our Local Plan: 2033 
(Regulation 22 submission) 
January 2019 Foreword 
Foreword 
Welcome to the final draft of our Local  Plan. 
I would like to thank the many residents who have made 
comments in response to the three Regulation 18 consultations 
and the Regulation 19 consultation we have held during the Local 
Plan process. Thousands of you have had your say, I can assure 
you we have listened and your input has helped shape our 
strategy and form the plan. 
What are  the challenges facing the district? 
Nationally we  are facing a housing crisis. There are just not 
enough affordable homes for people to live in. As a council we 
have been tasked by the government to create a plan to deliver 
at least 9,400 new homes  in the Tandridge district., or even 
12,900 according to a newly released government metric. 
Having carried  out extensive evidence work and considered the 
rural nature of the district and the fact at the start of this process 
we had 94% Green Belt land, In reality, we think the number of 
homes we can deliver will be nearer 6,100  6,056 or 303 homes per year. This will be challenged but 
we have robust evidence to demonstrate this is what our district can accommodate. A new government 
metric target which  comes into effect at the end of January 2019 will propose we need to provide 
12,900 new homes or 645 homes per year. 
We have  developed a strategy which we believe will not only provide a significant number of affordable 
homes for current residents, our children and our grandchildren, but which will also address some of 
the other challenges we are facing. 
We have  an ageing population which has an impact on healthcare providers, a creaking infrastructure 
and many of our residents regularly commute into London and surrounding areas for work. Our young 
people can’t afford to buy homes in the area and most local jobs don’t pay enough to give them the 
hope of ever doing so and they are moving away. 
Growing families  struggle to find suitable and affordable homes to move to. Our healthcare providers 
and schools struggle to recruit key workers. Meanwhile the volume of cars is having a negative impact 
on our roads. All of this has an adverse impact on the economy. 
For the district to thrive and become a place where people want to live, work and visit, we need to 
tackle these issues and reverse these trends and this is why this Draft Local Plan  is about far more 
than building houses. 
What will  the Local Plan deliver? 
This is very much an infrastructure led plan, underpinned by a sound economic strategy. This Plan 
will deliver new roads, improved healthcare facilities and schools to support existing and future 
generations. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 1 Foreword 
It will deliver new employment areas and create thousands of local higher skilled jobs. It will also 
deliver homes local families can afford, as well as a greater variety of smaller homes and apartments 
to help young people get on the property ladder and others to downsize if they choose. 
We also want to build more council homes. The development of this plan is all about giving us control 
over what types of homes are built, so we can make sure we get the right type of housing, rather than 
yet more 4-bedroom homes which currently make up a disproportionate amount of our housing stock. 
We want to make these affordable and in some instances only available for local people. 
One of our biggest challenges is the very high percentage of Green Belt land in the area. At the start 
of this process we had 94%. We have  worked hard to find a way to protect this as best we can, while 
finding places for people to live. Green Belt is not just fields – it includes roads, industrial sites and 
areas where many of you live. 
We have  identified brownfield sites (land which has previously been developed), for development 
within the urban areas. But we can’t rely only on this type of development to meet the overall housing 
need targets, there just isn’t enough of it left. We have to find the right balance. 
Developing a  Garden Community 
In our plan we are proposing the development of a Garden Community of around 4,000 homes built 
over the longer term. This will guarantee significant infrastructure as this number of homes cannot 
be developed without it. For example the community will include new primary schools, a secondary 
school, a health hub, rail and road improvements, play pitches, flood mitigation and employment 
sites. 
Our Local  Plan identifies the Garden Community is located in South Godstone and this is a decision 
backed up by extensive evidence. Once the Local Plan is adopted, the Council will work very closely 
with the local community to draw up an Area Action Plan which will include the detailed plans. 
A Garden  Community can take at least 6 to 10 years to plan and formulate policy for. A lot of work 
needs to take place before any building can begin and to ensure the design of our Garden Community 
is one we are proud of. 
Looking to  the future 
For the majority of our residents the Local Plan will deliver benefits and it will be good news. For 
those who will be most affected, we are committed to working with you to do everything we can to 
minimise the impact. 
Putting such  a plan together is a huge and complicated task and some of the decisions we have had 
to make have not been easy. It has taken more than three years to get to this stage. Following this  
consultation the Draft Local Plan will The Local  Plan will now be submitted to the government for an 
independent inspector to examine, before it can be adopted by the Council. 
We believe  our Local Plan provides a framework for the district to grow in a positive way, so everyone 
will have the opportunity to live in an affordable, vibrant area, with a strong economy. 
2 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Foreword 
Councillor Martin Fisher 
Leader of Tandridge District Council 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 3 Contents 
Introduction 
2 Introduction 10 
3 Regulation  19 Consultation 12 
4 Next Steps 15 
Context 
5 Policy Context 16 
National Context  16 
Local Context  19 
6 Duty to Cooperate 24 
The Local Plan 
7 District Portrait 26 
8 Issues  and Opportunities 30 
9 V ision: Tandridge District 2033 33 
10 Spatial  Objectives 34 
Spatial Strategy 
11 Spatial Strategy 36 
12 Key Diagram 43 
13 The Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 44 
14 Green  Belt 46 
15 Infrastructure  and Financial Contributions 49 
16 Development  Viability 52 
Settlements of the District 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Contents 
17 Settlement Policies 54 
People 
18 Providing Homes for All 69 
Housing Strategy  69 
Retention and  Supply 71 
Affordable Homes  73 
Rural Housing  Exception Sites 75 
Specialist Housing  78 
Providing for  Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople 80 
19 Health  and Wellbeing 86 
Place 
20 Place-Making 89 
21 Best Use of Land and Densities 92 
22 Housing  96 
Housing Allocations  96 
23 Employment  147 
Employment Land  Allocations 156 
24 Education  180 
25 Retail  184 
26 Green  and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 198 
Landscape Character  201 
203 
Biodiversity and  Ecology Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
208 
Trees and  Soft Landscaping 216 
27 Play and Open Space 219 
28 T ourism 226 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Contents 
29 Historic Environment, Heritage and Conservation 230 
30 Environmental  Sustainability 233 
Renewable Energy  Infrastructure 233 
Resilience to  Environmental Change 234 
Air Quality  and Pollution 236 
Flood Management  and Mitigation 239 
Sustainable Drainage  Systems 240 
Water Consumption  243 
Waste 244 
31 Sustainable  Transport and Travel 246 
32 Airport  Parking 249 
Airport Parking  249 
South Godstone Garden Community 
33 Our Garden Community 250 
A V ision for South Godstone 255 
The Principles  and Objectives of the Garden Community 256 
34 Strategic  Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 260 
Monitoring Framework 
35 Monitoring Framework 265 
Monitoring Indicators  267 
Appendix 
Appendix 1: Indicative  Housing Trajectory 278 
Appendix 2:  Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 279 
Glossary 286 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Contents 
List of Policies 
TLP01: Spatial Strategy 39 
TLP02: Presumption  in favour of Sustainable Development 44 
TLP03: Green  Belt 47 
TLP04: Infrastructure  Delivery and Financial Contributions 50 
TLP05: Development  Viability 53 
TLP06: Urban  Settlements 55 
TLP07: Semi-Rural  Service Settlements 59 
TLP08: Rural  Settlements 62 
TLP09: Limited  and Unserviced settlements 67 
TLP10: Responsive  Housing Strategy 70 
TLP11: Retention  and Supply 71 
TLP12: Af fordable Housing Requirement 74 
TLP13: Rural  Housing Exception Sites 77 
TLP14: Specialist  Need Housing and Extra Care 79 
TLP15: Gypsy , Traveller and Showpeople Provision 81 
TLP16: T raveller Pitch/Site/Plot Design 84 
TLP17: Health  and Wellbeing 87 
TLP18: Place-Making  and Design 89 
TLP19: Housing  Densities and the Best Use of Land 94 
HSG01: Land  at Plough Road and Redehall Road, Smallfield 98 
HSG02: Chapel  Road, Smallfield 101 
HSG03: Land  North of Plough Road, Smallfield 103 
HSG04: W oodlands Garage, Chapel Road, Smallfield 106 
HSG05: Sandiford  House, 40 Stanstead Road, Caterham 108 
HSG06: Land  off Salmons Lane West, Caterham 110 
HSG07: Coulsdon  Lodge, Coulsdon Road, Caterham 113 
HSG08: 156-180  Whyteleafe Road, Caterham 115 
HSG09: Land  at Fern Towers, Harestone Hill 117 
HSG10: William  Way Builders Merchant, 38-42 High Street, Godstone 118 
HSG11: Land  to the West of Godstone 120 
HSG12: Land  at The Old Cottage, Station Road, Lingfield 123 
HSG13: Land  West of Red Lane, Hurst Green 126 
HSG14: W arren Lane Depot, Hurst Green 129 
HSG15: Land  West of Limpsfield Road, Warlingham 131 
HSG16: Land  at Green Hill Lane and Alexandra Avenue, Warlingham 134 
HSG17: Land  at Farleigh Road, Warlingham 136 
HSG18: Former  Shelton Sports Ground, Warlingham 139 
HSG19: Edgeworth  Close, Whyteleafe 142 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Contents 
HSG20: North Tandridge: One Public Estate (NTOPE), Caterham 145 
TLP26: Development  Within and Outside Town and Local  Centres Sequential testing and 
TLP34: Area  of Greater Landscape Value and Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Candidate TLP20: Supporting  a Prosperous Economy 148 
TLP21: Employment  Hierarchy 151 
TLP22: Rural  Economy 154 
SES01: Godstone  Road Business Centre, Whyteleafe 157 
SES02: Hobbs  Industrial Estate, Felbridge 159 
SES03: Lambs  Business Park, South Godstone 161 
SES04: W esterham Road Industrial Estate, Tatsfield 163 
IES01: Snowhill  Business Centre, Copthorne 165 
IES02: Brewer  Street, Bletchingley 167 
IES03: Cophall  Farm, Copthorne 169 
IES04: Systems  House, Blindley Heath 171 
IES05: Redhill  Aerodrome Industrial Area, South Nutfield 173 
IES06: Paddock  Barn Farm, Godstone Road, Caterham 175 
IES07: Priory  Farm, South Nutfield 177 
TLP23: Protection,  Provision and Enhancement of Schools 182 
TLP24: Retail  Hierarchy 184 
TLP25: Retail  Frontages 187 
retail impact  190 
TLP27: Retail  Provision 191 
TLP28: Caterham  Town and Local Centre 193 
TLP29: Oxted  Town Centre 195 
TLP30: Green  and Blue Infrastructure 198 
TLP31: Access  to Countryside Public Rights of Way 199 
TLP32: Landscape  Character 202 
TLP33: Surrey  Hills and High Weald Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 206 
Areas 207 
TLP35: Biodiversity , Ecology and Habitats 210 
TLP36: Ashdown  Forest Special Protection Area 214 
TLP37: T rees and Soft Landscaping 217 
TLP38: Play  and Open Space 220 
TLP39: Providing  Playing Pitches and Built Leisure Facilities 222 
TLP40: Burial  Space 225 
TLP41: T ourism 226 
TLP42: Hotels  and Tourist Accommodation 228 
TLP43: Historic  Environment 231 
TLP44: Renewable  Energy Infrastructure 234 
TLP45: Energy  Efficient and Low Carbon Development 235 
TLP46: Pollution  and Air Quality 238 
TLP47: Sustainable  Urban Drainage and Reducing Flood Risk 241 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Contents 
TLP48: Water Consumption and Waste Water 243 
TLP49: W aste 245 
TLP50: Sustainable  Transport and Travel 246 
TLP51: Airport  Related Parking 249 
Policy SGC01:  South Godstone Garden Community 260 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Introduction2 
2 Introduction 
2.1 Our District  is a great place to live, work and visit. To ensure the Ddistrict remains  a desirable 
and thriving place, it is essential that we set the right policies and strategies to encourage prosperity 
and to remain up to date in responding to the changing needs of the community and demography. 
2.2 Our Local  Plan is the key document which helps the Council develop the District in the right 
way over the plan period to 2033, so that we have the right facilities and infrastructure in place to 
support communities, grow the local economy and provide homes which are affordable including for 
those looking for their forever home and those just starting out on the housing ladder. Fundamentally, 
the emerging Local Plan has been prepared for the wider benefit of all residents by making 
significant improvements to infrastructure. 
2.3 Tandridge District  Council (“the Council”) has prepared a Local Plan which sets out a 
development strategy for the Ddistrict up  to 2033 in accordance with national policy and guidance. 
This includes the National Planning Policy Framework (2012) and accompanying Planning Practice 
Guidance (PPG). In addition, the Pplan is consistent with the statutory requirements of the Town and 
Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations (2012). 
2.4 Our Local  Plan sets out: 
the Council’s vision and objectives for the District’s development over the plan period; 
policies to ensure development delivers sustainable homes, that is built to a high-quality of 
design and maintains an attractive built and natural environment; 
the future distribution for housing growth and requirements for affordable housing; 
policies to build a strong, competitive economy and set out the future distribution for new 
employment land space and thus new jobs; 
policies to support and enhance the vibrancy and vitality of our town and village centres; 
policies to support a sustainable transport and road infrastructure network; 
a broad location and overarching strategic policy for the South Godstone Garden Community 
which will be further detailed through an Area Action Plan (AAP); 
the infrastructure requirements necessary to support the delivery of allocated sites which stem 
from the accompanying Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which will also inform a review of the 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL). 
2.5 Our Local  Plan provides the opportunity for the District to build on its existing strengths while 
addressing identified challenges by guiding the delivery of homes, providing for employment and 
setting policies which enhance and protect the natural and historic environment. The policies and 
proposals of the Plan will directly serve our communities and those in need. They will also attract 
investment from the private sector and provide opportunities for public investment from both central 
10 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 2 Introduction 
government and other bodies such as the Local Enterprise Partnership. Such investment will help to 
deliver new and expanded health services, schools, improved road and rail networks and flood 
mitigation, as well as enhancements to existing physical and green/blue infrastructure. 
2.6 The policies  and content of our Local Plan will guide decisions on planning applications to build 
or change the use of buildings and land whilst providing the strategic policies that guide any 
Neighbourhood Plans produced in the District. All policies within Our Local Plan and all other 
development plan documents should be considered and read as a whole. 
2.7 The Council  currently has an adopted development plan which includes the documents set out 
below. The adoption of the Our Local Plan will necessitate the replacement of a number of existing 
adopted policies to reflect the up to date position and to accord with Regulation 8 of the Town and 
Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations (2012): 
The Core Strategy (Adopted 2008): sets out the strategic policies to steer and manage the 
approach to development. This will be fully replaced by the Local Plan 2033; and 
Local Plan Part 2 – Detailed Policies (Adopted 2014): Suite of Development Management policies 
to assist in the assessment of planning applications. This will be partially replaced by the Local 
Plan 2033. 
2.8 These alterations  are formally set out in 'Appendix 2:  Policies to be replaced or altered by 
Our Local  Plan: 2033'. The full or partial deletion of policies in both the current Core Strategy (20108) 
and
 the Detailed Policies (2014) document, will only take effect at the point of adopting Our Local 
Plan. 
2.9 Our Local  Plan is accompanied by four key supporting documents: 
Sustainability Appraisal as required by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. This 
includes a Strategic Environmental Assessment of the plan as required by European Directive, 
and English Regulations. The purpose of the Sustainability Appraisal is to ensure the Local Plan 
is the most appropriate plan having regard to likely sustainability and environmental outcomes; 
Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) of the potential impact of the plan on sites which are 
ecological habitats designated for their international and European importance, as required by 
European Directive and English Regulations; 
Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA) appraising the effect of Our Local Plan on people with 
protected characteristics, and those experiencing social or economic disadvantage, as required 
by the Equalities Act 2010; and 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) setting out the infrastructure required to support development 
within the district over the plan period, and proposals on how such infrastructure will be delivered. 
It identifies potential funding sources and delivery partners. Upon adoption of the Local Plan, 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan will become a live document that is updated and revised as both 
development and infrastructure are delivered. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 11 Regulation 19 Consultation 3 
3 Regulation 19 Consultation 
Have your say on Our Local Plan 2033: Consultation 
Purpose of the Consultation: We are To seeking your views on 
the soundness and legal compliance of Our Local Plan: 2033 This consultation 
closeds at 5pm on 10 
September 2018 
3.1 In preparing this Local Plan, the Council has carried out three formal public consultations: the 
Issues and Approaches (2015), Sites Consultation (2016) and Garden Villages Consultation (2017). 
Each of these consultations accorded with Regulation 18 of the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations (2012). 
3.2 Before Our  Local Plan can become formal policy it must undergo independent examination by 
the Planning Inspectorate, who is appointed on behalf of the Secretary of State. This Local Plan 
Consultation presents the final iteration of the plan which the Council proposes to submit and is the 
final stage of public consultation which must be undertaken in advance of submission, anticipated in 
late 2018. 
3.3 Theis consultation on  Our Local Plan: 2033 is being was carried  out to accord with Regulations 
19 and 20 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations (2012) for 6 
weeks, between 30 July 2018 and 10 September 2018. 
3.4 The feedback  received from each stage of consultation has been considered and published 
through the relevant Statements of Consultation available on the Council's website. 
What are  we consulting on? 
3.5 The main  purpose of the Regulation 19 consultation is to ask for comment on the legal 
compliance and soundness of Our Local Plan. 
3.6 Comments relating  to legal compliance should be made in the context of the statutory documents 
set out at section 5 and predominantly relates to procedural matters. In the case of comments relating 
to soundness, these should be made in accordance with paragraph 182 of the National Planning 
Policy Framework which identifies the test of soundness of a plan including whether it has been 
positively prepared, whether it is justified, effective and consistent with policy. A Guidance  Note, has 
been prepared and is available on the Council's website to explain the Regulation 19 consultation 
process further, and set out in more detail what soundness and legal compliance relate to. All those 
wishing to respond to the consultation and submit comments are advised to read the guidance note 
first. 
3.7 The Planning  Inspectorate will focus on matters of legal compliance and soundness during 
Examination in Public. 
12 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 3 Regulation 19 Consultation 
How can I submit my  comments? 
Online 
Comments need to be made in writing, by filling in the online questionnaire using the Council’s 
online consultation  portal (http://consult.tandridge.gov.uk/portal/planning_policy /). Y ou will need 
to log in or register to submit your comments this way. 
If you have previously submitted comments to the Local Plan process, you will already have a 
username and password for the online system and these should be used to access your online 
account to submit your comments. If you are unsure of your log in details, you can find these 
out via the 'forgotten password' and 'forgotten username' function on  the portal. 
Email 
If you are unable to comment via the consultation portal, you can e-mail your comment to us at 
localplan@tandridge.gov.uk 
By Post 
You can hand in written comments at the Main Council Offices in Oxted, or post them to: Local 
Plan Consultation 2018, Strategy Team, Tandridge District Council, 8 Station Road East, Oxted 
RH8 0BT. 
3.8 Comments must  be received by the close of consultation or they will not be taken into account. 
Please check  the Council’s website (www.tandridge.gov.uk/localplan) for full details of the consultation 
and how  to take part. 
Where can  I view the  consultation material? 
View it online 
Our Local Plan: 2033 can be viewed on the Council's consultation portal  
(http://consult.tandridge.gov.uk/portal/planning_policy/). 
The consultation document and associated evidence can also be viewed on the 
Council’s website (www.tandridge.gov.uk/localplan). 
View it as a hard copy 
Hard copies of the documents can be viewed at the Council offices in Oxted: 
Tandridge District  Council 
8 Station Road East 
Oxted 
Surrey 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 13 Regulation 19 Consultation 3 
RH8 0BT 
Copies of the main documents for consultation are also available during the consultation period 
in each of the libraries in the District, as well as in Edenbridge Library in Sevenoaks District and 
Horley Library and Redhill Library in Reigate and Banstead Borough. 
Obtain a  hard copy 
Copies of Our Local Plan: 2033 and other related documents can be obtained by e-mailing the 
Council at  localplan@tandridge.gov.uk , or calling  01883 722000. Please note there may be a 
fee and  the cost of documents can be viewed on the Council's 
website (www.tandridge.gov.uk/localplan) 
All documents are available for you to print from home, directly from the Council's website. 
Alternative formats  
If you would like this document or other consultation material in a different format, such as large 
print or a different language, please phone 01883 722000 or e-mail localplan@tandridge.gov.uk . 
Can I have my  say if I live outside  the district? 
If you live outside Tandridge District you can still comment on this consultation and all comments 
should be directed to Tandridge District Council. 
Where can  I view information relating to Our Local Plan: 2033? 
View it online 
Our Local Plan: 2033 and associated evidence can be viewed on the 
Council’s website (www.tandridge.gov.uk/localplan). 
View it as a hard copy 
Hard copies of documents can be viewed at the Council offices in Oxted: 
Tandridge District  Council 
8 Station Road East 
Oxted 
Surrey RH8 0BT 
Alternative formats
  
If you would like this document or other material in a different format, such as large print or a 
different language, please phone 01883 722000 or e-mail localplan@tandridge.gov.uk . 
14 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 4 Next Steps 
4 Next Steps 
4.1 Once the  consultation has concluded, cComments relating to soundness and  legal 
compliance have been  considered in preparing this final iteration of Our Local Plan: 2033, to be 
submitted for examination. will be considered. In addition, mA number  of minor amendments to the 
document may have been made in response to the consultation and all responses received will be 
submitted directly to the Planning Inspectorate for their consideration along with those raised through 
previous consultation phases, in accordance with Regulation 22 Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations (2012). It will be through the process of the Independent Examination 
in Public, that any other matters will be assessed and at the discretion of the appointed Planning 
Inspector. 
4.2 The table  below sets out the current timetable for the next stages in the process and in 
accordance with the Council's current adopted Local Development Scheme (2018). Following 
submission of the Plan, alterations to the timetable may be needed as we will will be dependent  upon 
the Planning Inspectorate and the length of time taken to carry out the examination process. The 
Council would need to agree adopt Our Local Plan, before it can become part of the wider development 
plan. 
Timescale Stage 
Summer 2018 Our Local Plan: Publication Consultation 
Winter 2018/19 Submission to Planning Inspector 
Spring/Summer 2019 Examination in Public 
Winter 2019 Adoption 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 15 Policy Context 5 
5 Policy Context 
5.1 The starting  point for preparing a plan is national legislation and national planning policy with 
which we must be compliant. To accord with such requirements Our Plan has, through the undertaking 
and consideration of evidence, been prepared to reflect the local requirements, characteristics and 
constraints of our area as well as other other strategies and  matters which are relevant to our district. 
National Context  
Statutory Requirements  
5.2 This Plan  accords with the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the Localism Act 
2011 and the Town and Country (Local Planning) Regulations 2012. It reflects the aims and objectives 
of government planning policy as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), Planning 
Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). 
The Planning  & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 and Town and Country (Local Planning) 
Regulations 2012 (as amended) 
5.3 Planning legislation  sets out the formal and legal process against which a Local Plan should 
be prepared. Compliance with legislation is demonstrated throughout our plan-making process and 
in the steps we have taken to arrive at the final plan. 
5.4 Where it has been beneficial to do so, input from legal Counsel and other professional bodies 
including the Planning Officers Society, has been sought at points throughout the plan-making process, 
to review the Councils approach and demonstrate that the process is compliant and legally sound. 
The National  Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
5.5 The NPPF  was published in March 2012, and sets out the Government’s planning policies for 
achieving sustainable development, plan making and taking decisions on planning applications. Local 
Plans are seen as key to delivering sustainable development and must therefore be prepared in 
accordance with the principles and policies set out in the NPPF and the framework as a whole. 
5.6 In accordance  with the NPPF, Local Plans should be evidence led and positively prepared in 
seeking to achieve each of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable 
development. In particular, they should include strategic policies to deliver: 
The homes and jobs needed in the area; 
The provision of retail, leisure and other commercial development; 
The provision of infrastructure for transport, telecommunications, waste management, water 
supply, waste water, flood risk and the provision of energy (including heat); 
The provision of health, community and cultural infrastructure and other local facilities; and 
Climate change mitigation and adaption, conservation and enhancement of the natural and 
historic environment, including landscape. 
16 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 5 Policy Context 
5.7 The NPPF requires that Local Plans should cover a timescale of 15 years or longer. It also 
stipulates that plans should identify allocations for development. It should also identify those areas 
where development may be restricted for good reason and prevent a local planning authority from 
meeting their identified local needs in full. These include environmentally-protected areas and Green 
Belt. 
5.8 Local Plans  also should be prepared using a proportionate evidence base, and should address 
issues that cross administrative boundaries via the Duty to Cooperate, discussed at Section 6. 
5.9 The NPPF  demonstrates a commitment to achieving sustainable development throughout the 
document, but most forcibly in the opening chapter (paragraphs 6-16). The document goes on to 
provide policy on a range of specific themes including economic growth, town centres, housing, Green 
Belt and flooding. The requirements of these policies and how they will be implemented locally is set 
out within Our Local Plan and the policies of our wider development plan. 
5.10 In March  2018, the Government published a revised version of the NPPF for consultation. It 
is anticipated the final iteration of the document will be adopted by central government in the Summer 
2018. However, in accordance with the draft transition arrangements set out in that document(1), Our 
Local Plan has been prepared in accordance with and will be considered against the policies of the 
existing NPPF (2012). 
Planning Practice  Guidance (PPG) 
5.11 To provide  more information and support policies set out in the NPPF, the national Planning 
Practice Guidance (PPG) was published in March 2014 and has undergone partial updates on a 
variety of matters since that time. The PPG sets out further details, including technical guidance, that 
should be considered when preparing plans and making decisions on planning applications. 
5.12 Together the  NPPF and PPG set out overarching policy and guidance on a wide range of 
planning topics, to which we have had regard. 
Planning Policy  for Traveller Sites (2012/2015) (PPTS) 
5.13 Alongside the  NPPF the Government published a separate Planning Policy for Traveller Sites 
(PPTS) in March 2012, which was amended in August 2015. As with the NPPF, the PPTS sets out 
the requirements for local planning authorities when preparing Local Plans and taking decisions on 
planning applications, but specifically in relation to Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople. 
5.14 Our Local  Plan includes policies which allow for the local needs of the travelling community 
to be met where they satisfy a criterion which accounts for the constraints of our District and in a 
sustainable way. 
Sustainability Appraisal  (SA) 
5.15 The Environmental  Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations (2004) require 
Sustainability Appraisals, and Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA), where relevant, for a 
wide range of plans and programmes, including Local Plans. The purpose of the SA is to establish 
how a plan will contribute to the Government's priority of sustainable development. 
1 Draft National  Planning Policy Framework (March, 2018) Annex 1, paragraph 209 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Policy Context 5 
5.16 The SA is an iterative process which must take place throughout the preparation of a plan 
and be published at each formal consultation stage to ensure interested parties can observe how the 
SA itself has been used to guide the Plan. The SA is used to promote sustainable development by 
assessing the extent to which an emerging plan can help balance relevant environmental, economic 
and social objectives. It can set out where the impact of wording in a policy or site is overtly detrimental 
indicating that it should be amended, or ruled out from consideration. 
5.17 The SA which has been carried out continuously throughout the plan-making process and 
published at each stage of consultation has been an essential part of how the Plan has evolved and 
in the determination of the preferred spatial strategy and the proposals set out in this document. At 
each step, the adopted Sustainability Objectives, used by other East Surrey authorities, have provided 
an assessment framework. This ensures the social, economic and environmental benefits and impacts 
are understood and that all reasonable alternative sites, locations, spatial approaches and policies 
have been appraised. 
5.18 Where necessary  the Plan has been modified and shaped in response to the results to ensure 
that harmful impacts are avoided or mitigated. A further Sustainability Appraisal  has been prepared 
throughout the plan- making process and for the Regulation 19 iteration of the Local Plan and is 
published accordingly . alongside this  document. 
Habitats Regulation  Assessment (HRA) 
5.19 The purpose  of the Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) of land use plans is to ensure 
that consideration is given to sites protected by European Directives as part of the development of 
planning policy. HRA is a requirement of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010 
(as amended; ‘the Habitats Regulations’). The assessment focuses on the likely significant effects 
of the plan on the nature conservation interests of European-protected areas in and around the 
District, and seeks to establish whether or not there will be any adverse effects on the ecological 
integrity of these European sites as a result of proposals in the Plan. 
5.20 Whilst there  are no protected sites within Tandridge District, there are two protected sites 
within neighbouring districts which the Council have had to consider as part of the HRA process. 
These are the Ashdown Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Area 
(SPA); and the Mole Gap to Reigate Escarpment Special Area of Conservation (SAC). 
5.21 The HRA process has  been carried out continuously through the plan-making process and in 
support of Our Local Plan: 2033. The HRA is a staged process, essentially iterative, and the Local 
Plan has been revisited as necessary in response to more detailed information, and identifies 
recommendations that no significant adverse effects remain. The report  accompanies the Local Plan 
Regulation 19 consultation process. 
18 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 5 Policy Context 
Local Context 
Corporate Plans and Strategies 
Tandridge District  Council Vision and Corporate Objectives 
5.22 The majority  of the plan-making process has been prepared against the corporate mission 
statement -To make Tandridge a vibrant place to live, work and visit and the corporate objectives 
that accompanied that vision. 
5.23 In March  2018, the Council updated its mission statement to reflect the Council's increased 
focus on economic prosperity, 'place shaping' and supporting our more vulnerable residents and 
adopted a more forward-looking vision which captures the scale of the Council’s ambitions. With 
regards to updating the Council's objectives, these are reviewed annually and agreed through the 
formal committee process. 
5.24 Whilst the  Council does not have a formal Corporate Plan, the Key Objectives and associated 
Vision, are essential in setting the direction of the Council's service operations and the projects it will 
prioritise. Our Local Plan remains in accordance with the corporate aims and will assist in achieving 
these objectives, which are: 
Corporate Vision & Key Objectives 2018/19: 
Aspirational for our people, our place and ourselves 
Objectives 
I. Providing high quality, customer-focused services 
II. Making a difference in our community by supporting those who need it most 
III. Creating a thriving economy while protecting the local environment 
IV. Working in partnership with the community and other public services to create opportunities 
for all 
V. Improving the quality of our residents’ lives including by enabling access to decent and 
affordable homes 
VI. Being a proactive, flexible learning environment 
5.25 The Council's Vision and Objectives have been developed in liaison with all Tandridge District 
Council Staff and elected Members. On reflection of the engagement, a number of specific corporate 
projects are prioritised, including: 
Implementing a  strategy to invest in land and property. Among other things this will allow the 
Council to create more affordable housing; 
Developing The Local Plan; 
Implementing regeneration schemes in Caterham and Oxted to enhance the vitality and viability 
of our town centres; and 
Facilitating flood prevention measures in Caterham by engaging with multi-agency partners. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 19 Policy Context 5 
Tandridge District Council Economic Proposition (2017) 
5.26 Tandridge combines  a superb quality of life with a great business location. As part of the East 
Surrey M25/M23 economic growth corridor, the District has clear locational advantages. These include 
access to Gatwick Airport in under 30 minutes, Heathrow in under an hour as well as direct access 
to the M25 and wider strategic road. With 11 stations in the Ddistrict, our  residents and workers have 
access to wider travel including fast trains to London in just over half an hour and connections to a 
range of other locations including Redhill, East Grinstead and the South Coast. 
5.27 Despite these  advantages, there are a number of barriers preventing our area from maximising 
its potential as a place to do business and its ability to perform better. Such barriers include road 
congestion, rail disruption, availability of commercial space and a lack of high-value employment 
opportunities. The Council is keen to place more focus on tackling these challenges through the right 
investment, support and infrastructure and have adopted corporate objectives which support a thriving 
economy. With this in mind the Council adopted a local economic strategy and delivery plan in 
December 2017, known as the Economic Proposition. 
5.28 The Economic  Proposition provides a framework for strengthening and growing the local 
economy to ensure the area can stay competitive and ensure our future prosperity. The Proposition 
underpins other local strategies, plans and policies covering such areas as spatial designations and 
allocations, commercial development and regeneration, interaction with skills providers, underpinning 
bids for funding to support business growth and job opportunities. The Economic Proposition has 
been relevant to the content of the policies of Our Local Plan, all of which seek to protect and enhance 
the economic offering of the District. 
5.29 The aims  of the Economic Proposition are to: 
I. Improve and  increase employment space 
II. Invest in strategic infrastructure 
III. Regenerate town  centres 
IV. Encourage high-value,  high-skilled employment 
V. Provide support  for our businesses to grow and prosper. 
5.30 These aims  will be delivered through an initial Delivery Plan to be agreed annually and 
monitored by Committee and also through the monitoring of the Local Plan. 
Other Plans  and Strategies 
Gatwick 360  - The Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan (SEP) (2014) (2018 - 2030) 
5.31 In England,  Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) are voluntary partnerships 
between local authorities and businesses set up in 2011 by the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills to help determine local economic priorities and lead economic growth and job creation 
within the local area. Tandridge District is covered by the Coast to Capital LEP and the Council work 
closely with them to establish economic opportunities and seek to overcome challenges related to 
the local district as well as the wider regional economy. 
20 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 5 Policy Context 
5.32 The Strategic Economic Plan (SEP) highlights mechanisms which can improve economic 
performance for businesses across the LEP region including things such as broadband and other 
infrastructure improvements. The LEP currently focuses on five key sectors of genuine strength and 
economic opportunity to ensure the area is recognised as a dynamic and thriving community of 
businesses. These are: Creative Digital & IT, Finance and  Business Services, Advanced Manufacturing 
and Engineering, Environmental Technologies, and Healthcare and Life Sciences. The majority of 
the findings of the SEP are applied through the Council's Economic Proposition, where relevant. 
5.33 The first Coast to Capital SEP was published in March 2014. Since then, there have been 
significant changes to both the Coast to Capital Captial LEP region  and the country as a whole, 
including the decision to leave the European Union and the publication of Government's Industrial 
Strategy Green  Paper (2017) . A new SEP is being prepared and is anticipated later in the Summer 
of 2018. 
5.34 The LEP , in late summer 2018 updated its SEP and published 'Gatwick 360˚', which replaces 
the 2014 plan and sets out a new vision. The document asserts that the area has become over reliant 
on the London labour market, overstretched rail and infrastructure, some of the highest house prices 
in England, as well as continued loss of employment space. The document places significant emphasis 
on the role played by Gatwick Airport in helping to benefit the LEP economy as a place at the 
geographical and economic heart of the Coast to Capital area, which fuels business, attracts employers, 
generates jobs and drives commerce from Croydon through Surrey to Brighton and across West 
Sussex and to the coastal towns. 
5.35 For T andridge, the SEP highlights Oxted as an area which has an economic role within the 
LEP's wider plan. It also highlights sectors where it forecasts growth and opportunity; for Tandridge 
district this includes insurance and financial services, visitor economy and support services, air 
transport related industries, computer and consumer electronic manufacturing. The Council will 
continue to work with the LEP and reflect the SEP in the future iterations of the Council's Economic 
Proposition and delivery plan, as appropriate. 
Infrastructure Studies  
Surrey County  
5.36 Sustainable growth needs  to be supported by infrastructure. Roads, schools, community and 
leisure facilities, healthcare and green space are essential for well-functioning, well-connected places 
and healthy communities and vital if we are to retain existing businesses and attract new ones. 
5.37 The Surrey  Infrastructure Study (SIS) indicates that delivering the necessary infrastructure to 
support growth planned in Surrey to 2031 will cost at least £5.51 billion, with only £3.04 billion of 
potential funding identified. 
5.38 The SIS was prepared on behalf of the County Council and the 11 Borough and District 
Councils in Surrey. Each of the Boroughs and Districts has an existing or emerging Local Plan that 
sets out the planned development across its area and the infrastructure needed to support it in the 
short to medium term. The updated SIS brings these plans together to provide a 'snap-shot' reflecting 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 21 Policy Context 5 
the position as at June 2017 (2). It presents an overview of growth and infrastructure at the strategic 
level across Surrey and highlights the scale of investment required to: government, infrastructure 
providers, developers, local communities and businesses. 
5.39 A wide range of stakeholders were engaged to inform the study including County and District 
council service providers, transport operators, utility companies, higher education providers, Clinical 
Commissioning Groups, the Environment Agency, Surrey Nature Partnership and the Coast to Capital 
and Enterprise M3 Local Economic Partnerships. 
Gatwick Diamond  
5.40 The Gatwick  Diamond is a geographical area which has one of the strongest local economies 
in the UK being just 30 minutes from central London, with London Gatwick Airport at its heart. An 
extensive transport network of air, road and rail connects the Gatwick Diamond to London and the 
UK, mainland Europe and the rest of the world. Tandridge District lies on the eastern edge of 'the 
Diamond' and actively engages with the initiative. 
5.41 The mission  of the initiative is to concentrate: '...on critical strategic issues, the business-led 
Gatwick Diamond Initiative will collaborate with local authority and private sector partners to lobby, 
influence, inspire and promote the Gatwick Diamond locally, nationally and internationally as the best 
connected, fastest growing and most dynamic business location (3).' Our position in the Gatwick 
Diamond presents us with real opportunity to support our economic and business operations and will 
be valuable in supporting the prosperity of the area. 
5.42 The Gatwick  Diamond Post 2030 Infrastructure Study (2017) builds upon and should be read 
in conjunction with the supporting infrastructure studies for West Sussex and Surrey, which assess 
the current infrastructure capacity and potential impacts of 2015-2030 growth forecasts. It is a high 
level study that has been prepared on behalf of West Sussex and East Surrey local authorities to 
provide a strategic overview of potential future development between 2030 and 2050, with and without 
a second runway at Gatwick Airport, and the infrastructure needed to support that growth. 
5.43 The study  provides an assessment of potential infrastructure needs beyond 2030 and many 
borough and district Local Plan periods, based on assumptions about future growth which will depend 
on decisions to be made in the future. This includes infrastructure needed to directly mitigate the 
effects of the airport’s operations and those infrastructure requirements that could result from wider 
growth indirectly linked to expansion, such as health and education facilities. 
Gatwick Diamond  and Surrey Local Strategic Statements (LSS) 
5.44 A Local Strategic Statement (LSS) sets out a number of priorities that are common to the 
authorities within a specific area. Tandridge District has been a part of and adopted two LSS, as part 
of the Gatwick Diamond and as a Surrey Authority. Working groups and close liaison with a number 
of authorities has been key to arriving at these agreed statements amongst multiple parties. 
2 The point  of preparation for the Surrey Infrastructure Strategy (SIS) prevented it from being able to account for the development 
now proposed through Our Local Plan: 2033. This will be accounted for in subsequent updates to the SIS and the Council's locally 
specific Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which accompanies the Plan. 
3 The Gatwick  Diamond Initiative Business Plan 2018-2021 
22 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 5 Policy Context 
5.45 These LSS's seek to provide a spatial vision for the associated parties and reflect common 
strategic issues that authorities want to address - including shared objectives on housing need, 
environmental enhancement, economic growth and infrastructure provision. 
5.46 Strategic Planning  and Local Plans are not just a local matter. Many issues, such as 
infrastructure and economic development, affect cross-boundary areas and a matter for more than 
just one authority. LSS help to ensure that these shared issues are captured, achieved and regularly 
updated. 
Waste and  Minerals Plan 
5.47 Surrey County  Council (SCC) is the statutory waste and minerals authority and the adopted 
Waste Local Plan (2008) and Minerals Core Strategy (2011) is currently used to determine planning 
applications in relation to waste and minerals matters. Each of these plans is a statutory Development 
Plan and should be read alongside the Local Plan. 
5.48 SCC is currently in the process of updating its Waste Plan and the Council will continue to 
engage in this process. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Duty to Cooperate 6 
6 Duty to Cooperate 
6.1 In preparing  Our Local Plan the Council is bound by Section 110 of the Localism Act 2011 and 
Section 33A of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. The legislation requires all local 
planning authorities, county councils and prescribed bodies to engage actively and constructively on 
an ongoing basis on strategic cross boundary matters, including the preparation of local plans and 
other plan documents. This is known as the Duty to Cooperate. 
6.2 The Council  adopted a Duty to Cooperate Scoping Statement in December 2014. The scoping 
statement was always intended to be a live document and updated to reflect the actions taken to 
demonstrate how the council has complied with the Duty to Cooperate throughout the Local Plan 
preparation. In preparing Our Local Plan, Duty to Cooperate Update Statements have been prepared 
at each formal stage of consultation and published accordingly. 
6.3 The Duty  to Cooperate Scoping Statement and all updates should be read together to observe 
how we have engaged with relevant parties on strategic matters. In particular how we have engaged 
on unmet housing needs, infrastructure, flooding and landscape matters and in determining the 
location for the Garden Community. 
Statements of  Common Ground and Formal Agreements 
6.4 In preparing  Our Local Plan, it has been beneficial to the process to enter into a formal agreement 
with a number of parties to establish a consistent position on strategic issues. These agreements 
take the form of both Statements of Common Ground and Memorandums of Understanding. 
6.5 The table  below highlights where agreements have been reached, those that are being prepared 
and the parties involved: 
Subject Status Type of Agreement Authority/Party 
Ashdown Forest: Air 
Quality Agreed Statement of Common Ground/ 
Inter Authority Agreement Multiple 
Ashdown Forest: 
Recreational Pressure Underway Statement of Common Ground Multiple 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Bromley 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Clinical 
Commissioning Group (NHS) 
Strategic Matters Underway 
Agreed Statement of Common Ground Crawley 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Croydon 
Strategic Matters Agreed Statement of Common Ground Guildford 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Highways England 
24 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Strategic Matters Underway 
Agreed Statement of Common Ground Sevenoaks 
Infrastructure Matters Agreed Statement of Common Ground Surrey County 
Council 
(Infrastructure) 
Strategic Waste 
Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Surrey County 
Council (Waste) 
Strategic Matters Underway 
Agreed Statement of Common Ground Wealden 6 Duty to Cooperate 
Subject Status Type of Agreement Authority/Party 
Mid-Sussex Memorandum of Agreed Strategic Matters 
Understanding 
Strategic Matters Agreed Statement of Common Ground Mid-Sussex 
Strategic Matters Underway 
Agreed Statement of Common Ground Mid-Sussex and West 
Sussex 
Strategic Matters Agreed Statement of Common Ground Mole Valley 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Network Rail 
Strategic Matters Underway Statement of Common Ground Reigate and 
Banstead 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 District Portrait 7 
7 District Portrait 
Geographical Context 
7.1 Tandridge District  is the furthest eastern Local Authority in Surrey. It borders seven other 
authorities: Reigate and Banstead, Crawley, Mid Sussex, Sevenoaks, Wealden and the London 
Boroughs of Croydon and Bromley. It also neighbours the county borders of West Sussex, East 
Sussex, Kent and the Greater London areas. 
Bordering Authorities 
7.2 Tandridge hosts significant transportation infrastructure, including London’s Orbital M25 running 
east to west and the M23 running north to south along the western boundary. The A25 runs parallel 
but slightly south of the M25 and the A22 runs north to south through the centre of the District. The 
District is well-served by rail with 11 railway stations providing services into London, East Grinstead, 
Uckfield, Redhill and Tonbridge. 
7.3 Gatwick Airport  is located just a few miles to the south-west of the District border,. and a A 
number
 of more recreational and private aviation facilities are located within, or just beyond the 
boundary just beyond  the boundaries including Redhill  Aerodrome and Biggin Hill Airport. Kenley 
AirfieldAerodrome is also just north of the district boundary and is used primarily for light aircraft  and 
gliders. 
26 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 7 District Portrait 
District Overview 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 27 District Portrait 7 
7.4 There are no high-order hospitals (i.e. that include Accident and Emergency departments) 
located within the District and residents need to travel to neighbouring facilities at East Surrey Hospital, 
Crawley, Sevenoaks , Bromley and Epsom to receive urgent and/or complex medical care. However, 
there is a well used minor injuries unit within the Caterham Dene Community Hospital at Caterham. 
7.5 There are  two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) in the District: Surrey Hills in the 
north and High Weald in the south-east. The District has a long-standing history of having the the 
highest percentage  of Green Belt of any authority in England. It also has numerous landscapes valued 
for their biodiversity. These include Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Local Nature Reserves, and 
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas. 
Population 
7.6 Tandridge is  home to approximately 87,600 (4) residents, most living in our more built-up areas 
of Oxted (including Hurst Green and Limpsfield) and the wider Caterham area (including Caterham 
Valley, Caterham on the Hill, Whyteleafe and Warlingham). The rest of the population reside in a 
network of smaller towns and villages, much of their setting derived from the countryside that surrounds 
them. 
7.7 Tandridge has  a higher than average number of residents aged 65 and over (20.4%, compared 
to 17.8% nationally(5) ). This trend is set to continue over the next 20 years, with this age group 
forecast to grow by over 50%(6). Our working age residents are highly skilled with more than 46% 
qualified at NVQ Level 4+, although most of those skills are used in jobs outside of the District given 
the predominance of low-skilled employment opportunities in the District(7). Levels of out-commuting 
are high (71.6%), with a flow of around 3,500 commuters to Reigate and Banstead Borough. There 
is also an important relationship with Greater London, with around 12,500 residents commuting to 
work in the City and London Boroughs(8). 
7.8 According to  the 2011 Census, over 60% of the total households in Tandridge are occupied by 
one or two people only - nearly 27% are single person occupied dwellings. Home ownership far 
outstrips the national average, where nearly 75% of all homes in the District are either owned outright
(9)or with a mortgage . Despite this, 11% of the total housing stock is public sector housing and over 
1,300 households are on the Council's housing waiting list(10). 
Quality of  Life 
7.9 On the whole, our residents live a high quality of life with access to green open spaces. They 
value the countryside and proximity to London. Car ownership is higher than the English average. 
48% of households have access to two or more vehicles whilst 11.8% have no car (11). Car ownership 
could of course link to individual choice and wealth, as well as necessity due to the predominant rural 
nature of the District. 
4 Surreyi Datasets -ONS Population  Projections 2016 - 2041 - Published May  2018 
5 Surreyi Datasets – ONS Population  estimates by broad age and gender 
6 T andridge Economic Proposition 2017 - Economic Profile 
7 Tandridge Economic Proposition (2017) 
8 Settlement Hierarchy 2015 - This figure is based on all London Boroughs. 
9 Surreyi, ONS Census 2011 - Household characteristics - tenure and dwellings 
10 Surreyi, DCLG 2017 - Number of households on local authority waiting lists 
11 Surreyi, ONS Census 2011 - Household characteristics - amenities, cars and deprivation 
28 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 7 District Portrait 
7.10 The health of our residents is generally good or very good, but more than 65% of adults are 
classified as overweight or obese, as well as 25% of 10-11 year old children(12). Our unemployment 
levels are relatively low with 1.0% of the working age population claiming unemployment benefits 
(compared to 2.2% nationally), But this is the joint-highest figure in Surrey. Levels across wards vary 
from 0.3% in Dormansland and Felcourt to 2.3% in Whyteleafe (13). 
12 Tandridge Wellbeing Space Strategy 2015 
13 Surreyi, ONS Claimant Count, April 2018 https://www.surreyi.gov.uk/dataset/unemployment-claimant-count-ward 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 29 Issues and Opportunities 8 
8 Issues and Opportunities 
8.1 Our District  is a great place to live, work and visit. To ensure it remains so means addressing 
the issues our residents, businesses and place face while simultaneously building on the opportunities 
the future presents. Below, is a summary of the issues and opportunities Our Local Plan has had to 
consider in arriving at the policies, allocations and overall approach to planning matters for the plan 
period to 2033. 
Homes and  the Economy 
Average house prices in Tandridge are 14 times higher than average earnings(14). That means 
it is increasingly difficult for local people to get on the housing ladder. 
There are limited options for downsizing to smaller homes, with over 30% of the District's housing 
stock being 4/5 bedroom detached homes on large plots (far higher than the national average 
of 19%). 
The UK Competitiveness Index ranks Tandridge 61st of 379 local authorities, the lowest of the 
11 districts and boroughs in Surrey. Competitiveness relates to the economic performance of a 
local authority area in terms of how attractive it is to businesses and firms. It also measures the 
economic welfare of individuals and how much business success increases the economic value 
and wealth for its residents. 
Our resident population is highly skilled, but over 70% commute to work outside of our District, 
meaning we have notably low self-containment, where residents work within the Ddistrict in 
which they live. 
Our rural businesses struggle with poor broadband connections and isolation, and there is little 
opportunity to relocate to more appropriate and/or larger, premises within the District due to poor 
quality employment space. The loss of employment space, due to permitted development rights, 
has also dwindled supply - specifically within the Office (B1) use class. Caterham has been 
particularly affected by this and the Council will be carefully monitoring the losses and gains of 
employment pace as part of the Authorities Monitoring Report which will be carried out annaully 
annually. 
Retail and  Leisure 
Surrounding town centres such as Croydon, Crawley, Bromley and Redhill, offer much competition 
and offer a wider retail choice and different leisure experiences including a multiplex cinema 
and bowling alleys. Our town and local centres also face threats from online shopping and future 
behaviour changes which are likely to impact their vitality and viability. 
Our residents have access to high quality sports and recreation facilities and open spaces, with 
three quarters of residents accessing open spaces weekly -some 56% of those doing so for the 
health and well-being benefits. Some facilities and spaces are, however, in a poor state of repair 
and in need of improvement. Further, due to the rural nature of the Ddistrict, there  are some 
unsympathetic leisure uses such as paint-balling and quad-biking. 
14 ONS - Housing Affordability in England and Wales- 2017 
30 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 8 Issues and Opportunities 
Wellbeing and Safety 
Despite 62% of adults meeting the recommended 150 minutes weekly exercise, over 65% of 
adults in Tandridge are overweight or obese, as well as over 25% of children aged 10-11 years 
old (15). Combined with an ageing population, our health services and open spaces will be subject 
to increased demand from residents. 
According to national crime statistics, Surrey is one of the safest counties in England. The relative 
crime rate in Tandridge is low, however there are recorded incidents of violent crime in our 
built-up areas. 
The effects of climate change will increase the likelihood and severity of flood events in Tandridge 
and the wider area. Caterham and Smallfield have experienced severe flooding in recent 
years. Due to the rural nature of the Ddistrict, some  communities are particularly at risk of isolation 
in extreme events., and both  Caterham and Smallfield have experienced this already. 
Air quality is an issue, particularly arising from traffic and congestion on the strategic and local 
road network, amplified by a large reliance on  private vehicular transportation. 
The Environment  and Heritage 
Many brooks, streams and rivers that flow through our District have an identified flood risk and 
incidents of flooding have been witnessed across the District, particularly in Caterham and 
Smallfield. 
Tandridge is home to a varied landscape consisting of two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(the Surrey Hills and the High Weald), over 250 Sites of Nature Conservation Interest Importance 
(SNCI)
 and potential SNCI (pSNCI) and multiple Sites of Specific Scientific Interest (SSSI). It is 
also in proximity to two areas of influence of European Protected Habitats (the Ashdown Forest 
and the Mole Gap to Reigate Escarpment). 
The District is blessed with a rich heritage in our built and natural environment. There are over 
600 buildings and assets of historic interest including more than 20 Grade I listed buildings, two 
parks and gardens of historic interest, 19 conservation areas and over 250 areas of Ancient 
Woodland. 
The Green  Belt 
The majority of the District is designated as Green Belt, the highest of any authority in the country. 
Green Belt is a national policy designation that restricts development and seeks to avoid 
inappropriate sprawl by keeping land open. Green Belt policy has worked successfully in this 
District, but does present a policy challenge to meeting our identified development needs in full. 
Infrastructure 
The District is well-located served by  and in proximity to nationally  significant infrastructure, parts 
of the M25 and M23 are within the District and Gatwick Airport is located just outside to the south 
west. such as the M25, M23 and Gatwick Airport. But much of our more local transport network 
(A22, A25, railway stations and rural roads) have capacity issues The A22,  A25, railway stations 
15 Surreyi Online  Database: https://www.surreyi.gov.uk/ 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 31 Issues and Opportunities 8 
and rural roads all form part of the local transport network. The majority of these have capacity 
issues and are subject to congestion and service disruption. 
There are existing capacity deficits in our schools and GP surgeries - the latter is, and will 
continue to be, exacerbated by our ageing population. 
In some parts of our District, there is incomplete connection to the mains sewerage and broadband 
services are limited. 
Tourism and Culture 
Our District  has a number of well used and valued cultural assets which are enjoyed by residents 
and visitors including Oxted Everyman Cinema, The Barn Theatre, Soper Hall, Miller Theatre 
and numerous community halls that are venues for local events. 
There is a variety of successful tourism assets within the District that act as a draw to visitors to 
our area and support our economy. These include Lingfield Race Course, Godstone and Priory 
Farms and also The British Wildlife Centre. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Issues and Objectives Topic Paper (2015) 
Local Plan: Issues and Approaches (Regulation 18) (2015) 
Tandridge District Preferred Strategy Topic Paper (2017) 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Spatial Approaches Topic Paper: All iterations 
Sustainability Appraisal: All iterations 
Tandridge District Wellbeing Space Strategy (2015) 
32 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 9 Vision: Tandridge District 2033 
9 Vision: Tandridge District 2033 
9.1 The V ision for Tandridge District Local Plan: 2033 sets out how we believe the District will be 
at the end of the Plan period, if all the policies of Our Local Plan are delivered successfully. It has 
been developed to reflect the plans and strategies set out in Section 5 and in response to public 
consultation. 
9.2 Our V ision is an ambitious one that seeks to meet development needs that can respond to 
demographic change, but with the least impact to our existing communities. 
9.3 The V ision requires the proposals of the Local Plan to retain and improve upon what is most 
valued, take steps to remedy long-standing issues with flooding and infrastructure provision, while 
ensuring we remain prosperous and supportive of healthy and happy communities. 
Tandridge District: 2033 
The people of Tandridge will have access to homes, jobs, education, leisure and health facilities 
to meet their needs whatever their age, household requirements or culture. 
Our District will overwhelmingly be a place with green and open spaces to support the health 
and well-being of the community. It will be a place where people live close to, and have access, 
to services and facilities in successful towns, local and neighbourhood centres. Where travel is 
necessary, our residents will have access to improved road networks and sustainable public 
transport. High quality design will play a key role in reducing and remediating flood risk. It will 
also ensure the District remains pleasant, safe and secure, making the most of historic assets 
and regenerating areas for the benefit of all. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 33 Spatial Objectives 10 
10 Spatial Objectives 
10.1 To ensure  this Vision can be achieved, the following Spatial Objectives have been identified. 
Like the Vision, they have been developed in response to consultation comments and other feedback 
received over the course of developing Our Local Plan. 
10.2 To enable  the Council to monitor how effectively the Spatial Objectives, and therefore the 
Vision, is being achieved, specific targets have been set for each Objective. This is detailed in Section 
35: Monitoring Framework.  
10.3 Each policy  within Our Local Plan relates to at least one Spatial Objective. This is referenced 
accordingly throughout the document to demonstrate how each policy acts in support of delivering 
the Vision and Spatial Objectives of Our Local Plan. 
Theme Spatial Objective Objective 
Reference 
Economy To strengthen and diversify the economy by providing sufficient, 
sustainably located employment land to meet local needs and to 
provide opportunities for residents to work locally. Existing 
SO1 businesses will be supported by enabling intensification and, where 
appropriate, the expansion of current employment sites will be 
encouraged. Rural businesses and the rural economy, including 
farming and agriculture will continue to be seen as an asset to the 
Ddistrict, where appropriate. and their often unique requirements, 
and need to be close to customers, will be respected. 
Economy Support the development of tourism by recognising local tourism 
assets and supporting those that enhance the local economy without 
significant harm to the quality of life of local residents. SO2 
Economy Support opportunities which engender a skilled workforce, 
particularly at the intermediate and higher skilled levels which will 
also contribute to a reduction in the amount of out-commuting for 
employment. SO3 
Housing Provide a supply of homes, both affordable and market, which 
respond to the needs of our community and supports a mixed 
community. New homes will diversify the existing housing stock in SO4 the Ddistrict, in terms of size and type (e.g. allowing for a range of 
family housing, entry level homes and opportunities to downsize) 
and in response to identified needs. 
HousingRecognise and respond to the accommodation needs of the traveller 
community. SO5 
Town Centres 
& Retail Support our town centres to be vibrant and viable through 
encouraging wider diverse retail and leisure opportunities as well 
as regeneration. SO6 
34 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 10 Spatial Objectives 
Theme Spatial Objective Objective 
Reference 
Encourage healthier and stronger communities across the Ddistrict, 
by
 ensuring sufficient access to quality parks, open spaces, sports SO7 and community  facilities and to protect the spaces and facilities 
that serve the needs of residents. 
Ensure place-making  by promoting development that is accessible, SO8 safe and  that encourages wellbeing. 
Continue to  support high quality design that respects and positively 
SO9 adds to the existing character of settlements and consider higher 
densities where appropriate. 
Mitigating and  adapting to the impacts of climate change where 
SO10 possible and promoting development which is environmentally 
resilient. Health & 
Wellbeing 
Design 
Design 
Design 
Best Use of 
Land To ensure that previously developed land is fully utilised, with a 
focus on previously developed land and optimised densities, where 
appropriate and as far as is practicably possible. SO11 
Green Belt Maintain a Green Belt within Tandridge that serves the policy 
purposes set out in the National Planning Policy Framework and 
ensure the Green Belt endures beyond the plan period. SO12 
Landscape & 
Natural 
Environment Maintain, enhance and respect the District's green infrastructure 
including landscape character, open spaces, habitats and 
biodiversity networks. SO13 
Historic 
Environment Preserve, enhance and protect our historic environment and 
heritage assets. SO14 
Flooding Ensure that development avoids and mitigates flood risk in the 
District, incorporating Sustainable (urban) Drainage Systems 
(SDS/SuDS) and contribute to wider flood risk management 
objectives, where possible. SO15 
Infrastructure Improve existing transport networks whilst supporting and 
encouraging the use of sustainable and integrated modes of 
transport. SO16 
Infrastructure Work with partners and service providers to ensure the delivery of 
improved infrastructure, services and facilities to meet the needs 
of the Ddistrict across the plan period and to ensure that the 
provision of new or enhanced infrastructure matches need as it 
arises. SO17 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 35 Spatial Strategy 11 
11 Spatial Strategy 
11.1 A Sspatial Sstrategy is  at the heart of a Local Plan and the approach that underpins the entire 
future planning framework for a district or borough. A Sspatial Sstrategy sets  out: the level of 
development a Local Authority will provide, the locations which will be the focus for development, the 
areas that will be avoided, protected and enhanced, the approach to environmental betterment and 
any other steps that will be utilised to ensure all this happens. The policies of Our Local Plan are all 
part of the Spatial Strategy and contribute to its achievement. 
11.2 The approach  to development to be taken by the Council was initially set out in the Tandridge 
District Preferred Strategy Topic Paper (2017) which was adopted by the Planning Policy Committee 
in March 2017. Our Local Plan has been prepared to accord with this and will deliver infrastructure, 
jobs, homes and a new Garden Community at South Godstone. The Sspatial Sstrategy set  out at 
TLP01 is one which has continued to be informed by rigorous evidence gathering and accords with 
government requirements, national policy and legislation. 
11.3 Our Spatial  Strategy has also been informed by both public consultation and the Sustainability 
Appraisal. This has resulted in a strategic approach to development that is cognisant of the social, 
economic and environmental needs and constraints within the area and responds to the clear 
community concern about the impact of development on infrastructure and the environment. 
The Need  for Housing and Employment 
11.4 Government policy , through the National Planning Policy Framework is seeking a step-change 
in the rate of house-building across the country, in order to contribute to meeting housing shortages. 
This message is reaffirmed through the Government White Paper 'Fixing our  broken housing market' 
(2017).
 
11.5 That said,  national policy also makes it clear that the ability of a Local Authority to meet 
identified housing needs will be impacted by the level and type of constraints that exist in the local 
area. Our constraints include two Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, land overwhelmingly designated 
as Green Belt, as well as, areas of flood risk, extensive Ancient Woodland and other natural 
designations such as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). The District is also in close proximity 
to the EU designated sites of Ashdown Forest and Mole Gap to Reigate Escarpment and is adjacent 
to Gatwick Airport. 
11.6 In 2015, the Council carried out an assessment of our local housing need in accordance with 
the methodologies of the Planning Practice Guidance and to reflect the requirements of the National 
Planning Policy Framework in terms of the variables an objective assessment of housing need (OAN) 
should consider. The findings of this assessment determined that Tandridge District Council had an 
OAN of 9,400 units for the plan period between 2013 and 2033, or 470 homes per year. National 
policy, coupled with its guidance, however, make it clear that the OAN is a 'starting point' for a local 
authority in their plan-making. It is only through the application of evidence and the consideration of 
constraints that a delivery target can been reached and which may be justifiably different from the 
OAN. This is the case for Tandridge and our Spatial Strategy reflects this. 
11.7 The Council's  Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) fully explores all the steps the Council 
has taken in determining the housing delivery figure Our Local Plan will deliver and considers the 
sources from which our supply will come from. Sources include homes already permitted and those 
36 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 11 Spatial Strategy 
which are anticipated to arise through windfall development. Our housing supply will also stem from 
new housing land allocations and mechanisms such as ensuring best use of land and supporting 
appropriate densities. 
11.8 It is not just homes, however, that are needed in the District, but also employment. Our Local 
Plan aims to achieve a broad and sustainable balance between homes and employment provisions 
to ensure that Tandridge is a good place for businesses to thrive, and to increase opportunities for 
residents to work locally. 
11.9 The Balancing  Jobs and Homes Topic Paper (2016) found that in order to secure an ideal 
balance between housing delivery and economic growth, the Council should aspire to deliver 1.982 
jobs for every home delivered. In essence the Plan and the Spatial Strategy strives to avoid the area 
becoming an increasingly dormitory place for people commuting to London and other centres, and 
seeks to limit the congestion that this brings to our road and rail network. While this seems ambitious, 
it is achievable, not just through the expansion and diversification of employment in the District i.e. 
encouraging high-skilled and higher-paid jobs, but also through providing 'hot desking' office space. 
The latter would enable those who normally work in London to work remotely in a professional 
environment but able to avoid the daily commute. 
11.10 Our new  Garden Community will also play a key role in providing employment opportunities 
both as part of the new facilities, services and employment areas which form part of that development, 
but also in the construction phase. Further consideration of this will be determined through the 
master-planning process of the Garden Community and the preparation of an Area Action Plan. 
11.11 The Economic  Needs Assessment (2017), an update to the Economic Needs Assessment 
2015, looked at the employment needs of the District to 2033 in more detail, as well as the sectors 
that are anticipated to grow in the future. It determined that in order to meet baseline need for 
employment growth, 15.3ha of land for B-class employment use would need to be identified, the 
majority of which (8.6ha) should be for Office use (B1). 
11.12 The Government's  Permitted Development Rights legislation, implemented in 2013, allows 
office space to be converted to residential use without planning permission, has been acutely felt by 
the District, particularly in Caterham. A year-on-year loss of office space via the mechanism of 
permitted development amounts to around 7% (4,000m2) (16) of the District's total office space. As 
such it is not unsurprising that office space is where our employment need lies most and the Council 
will need to ensure this trend does not continue as far as is practicably possible. As office use is a 
much less 'land-hungry' employment use and can be accommodated on one footprint, but over multiple 
storeys, over shops and even homes, the Council do not necessarily need to find an additional 15.3ha. 
In fact, all of this growth can be met through the expansion, regeneration and intensification of existing 
employment sites. However, town and local centres will remain the focus for office development as 
far as is practicably possible and we will still need to remain cognisant of change and loss and be 
flexible in our approach to supporting employment space. 
16 Tandridge Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 37 Spatial Strategy 11 
11.13 In preparing Our Local Plan we have been mindful of the Council's Economic Proposition 
(2017), which sets out the corporate priorities for economic growth and the delivery mechanisms 
which will be employed to support business and jobs growth. Our Spatial Strategy responds to the 
need for employment space and sets the framework for a local economy upon which success can 
be built and the economic aspirations for the District can be achieved. 
11.14 More detail  regarding the approach and policies regarding employment and prosperity is set 
out in Section 23. 
Neighbourhood Plans  
11.15 Neighbourhood Planning  allows people to come together through a local parish or village 
council and say where they think new houses, businesses and shops should go, and what their areas 
should look like. Neighbourhood Plans can be very simple, or go into considerable detail. The 
preparation of a Neighbourhood Plan allows a local area to take ownership of planning in their area 
with the input of statutory bodies and the community, through consultation. 
11.16 There are  certain legal requirements that parish and village councils need to consider when 
developing a Neighbourhood Development Plan or Order as set out in the Neighbourhood Planning 
Regulations 2012 (as amended). Neighbourhood Development Plans must meet basic conditions to 
pass examination before referendum, then adoption. 
11.17 Neighbourhood Development  Plans should support the strategic development needs set out 
in Our Local Plan and plan positively to support local development in the area they cover and meet 
the needs of the District. They cannot be used to block development and are much more about 
shaping sustainable places. 
11.18 A Neighbourhood  Plan will enable communities to develop planning policies that reflect their 
own local issues. Once in place, the policies in a Neighbourhood Plan will be used to help the Local 
Planning Authority determine a planning application. It will mean that local views must be taken into 
account when planning decisions are made. A Neighbourhood Plan also enables communities to set 
out the projects they would like to see happen over the coming years. By having a plan in place the 
community will be in a better position to secure funding and bring forward projects that will make a 
difference to local people. 
11.19 Already in  the District we have seen 12 parishes take up the task of preparing a Neighbourhood 
Plan and designated as a Neighbourhood Plan area, with a cluster of Caterham Parishes working 
together to prepare one joint plan. To date, one Neighbourhood Plan has been adopted for Woldingham 
and this now forms part of the development plan and is used in the assessment of planning applications 
for that settlement. 
11.20 We recognise  the value of Neighbourhood Plans and the control they can give our communities 
on planning matters for their local area. While the guidance and legislation for preparing Neighbourhood 
Plans is set down nationally, Our Local Plan provides further detailed settlement policies to assist 
their preparation and support those undertaking the task. 
38 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 11 Spatial Strategy 
Infrastructure 
11.21 While homes  and employment are a key part of any Local Plan, infrastructure makes the 
delivery of these elements possible and successful. The Spatial Strategy for Our Local Plan has been 
determined with infrastructure at its core. 
11.22 Tandridge District  has a number of issues with infrastructure, from over-capacity schools 
and health services, to struggling road networks. The development proposals set out in Our Local 
Plan have been determined with this in mind. 
11.23 While to some it may appear counter-productive to build more homes when these issues 
exist, it is development that will help fund improvements. Doing nothing is not an option that would 
serve our communities and even if no homes were built, populations would still rise and pressures 
on services would still continue. Properly-planned development allows the Council to ensure 
infrastructure needs can be responded to. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which is published 
alongside the Plan sets out in detail where infrastructure will be required, estimated costs and potential 
sources of funding. 
South Godstone  Garden Community 
11.24 Of most significance to the achievement of infrastructure improvements for the District is the 
strategic development of the Garden Community. Development of this nature and scale balances 
both a need to protect our wider landscape and the Green Belt, while ensuring a critical mass of 
development can be achieved. This development will facilitate significant infrastructure improvements 
that are of benefit not just to the residents of the South Godstone Garden Community, but residents 
across the District. These will include school and health provision, road upgrades and other community 
facilities. More information regarding the Garden Community is set out in Sections 33-34. 
11.25 It is recognised that development of this nature would result in delivery towards the back 
end of the plan-period and beyond. This approach will allow the time needed to get the development 
right and planned properly and larger scale infrastructure put in place ahead of development, as is 
needed. 
11.26 Further information  regarding the broad location for development as set out in the Spatial 
Strategy are depicted on both the Policies Map and the key diagram. 
TLP01: Spatial Strategy 
Strengthening the Network of Sustainable Settlements 
Our Local  Plan will provide 6,056 homes within the Plan period to 2033. These new homes will 
be of varying types, sizes and tenure and include much needed affordable homes that are 
attainable to all areas sections of  our community and those of varying incomes. In the short to 
medium term development is directed towards the most sustainable settlements which are our 
most built-up urban (Urban -T ier 1) and semi-rural service settlements (Tier 2) (See TLP06 and 
TLP07). 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 39 Spatial Strategy 11 
For the longer term and beyond the Plan period, new homes will be delivered through the 
development of the South Godstone Garden Community, as depicted on the Policies Map. Our 
Local Plan identifies a broad location to indicate where the principle of development is established 
but which will require an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. The details of the Garden 
Community, the layout and design of the development as well as the alteration to the Green 
Belt which will be underpinned by an Area Action Plan. 
We will support our areas in preparing positive Neighbourhood Plans so that our communities 
can take a leading role in shaping their settlements and helping us meet identified development 
needs to keep the District a place where people want to live, work and visit. The support for Rural 
Exception Sites will be extended to all our settlements where justified and remain responsive to 
local need. 
Previously-developed land  within settlements will be prioritised and all development designed 
at appropriate densities in accordance with TLP19 and other relevant policies of the development 
plan. 
Units Source 
2,334 Existing Supply (permissions and completions) 
768New Urban Settlement Sites (Tier 1) (Excluding Town Centre 
Initiatives) 
533 New Semi-Rural Service Settlement Sites (Tier 2) 
1,400* South Godstone Garden Community 
435 Windfall 
250 Town Centre Initiatives 
336 Other supply (e.g. empty homes allowance) 
6,056 Total Delivery target 
*A further 2,600 homes will be delivered beyond the plan period (See Policy SGC01: South 
Godstone Garden Community). 
Employment and Prosperity 
The Council  will support the delivery of at least 15.3ha of B-class employment space and 
associated sui-generis uses with focus given to Office uses (B1) within the most sustainable 
locations, such as town centres and those areas served by sustainable transport. 
Employment provision  will be focused towards existing employment sites through intensification 
and expansion, where appropriate. Office development (B1) in particular, will be focused towards 
town centres, as far as is practicably possible. Higher-value and higher-skilled sectors will be 
40 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 11 Spatial Strategy 
encouraged to the District to ensure a diverse commercial offer. An element of employment 
provision will also be met through the delivery of the Garden Community and further detail will 
be set out in the Area Action Plan. 
Our town, local and neighbourhood centres where our shops and other community facilities are 
located, will be protected for the role they play in sustaining our communities. 
Responding to Change 
The Council will closely monitor the delivery and implementation of Our Local Plan through the 
Authority's Monitoring Report. Further, where significant changes to the local circumstances 
change i.e. a notable shift in national policy, or an expansion of Gatwick Airport, an early review 
of the plan will be triggered. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Balancing Jobs and Homes Topic Paper (2016) 
Spatial Approaches Topic Papers (2015, 2016 and 2017) 
Tandridge District Preferred Strategy Topic Paper (2017) 
Sustainability Appraisal (2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
All Spatial Objectives are relevant to the achievement of the Spatial Strategy. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gain and/or loss of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces within 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07 
Percentage of residents whose job and skill set is identified within occupation skill group 
1-6 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 41 Spatial Strategy 11 
Percentage of employment and unemployment within the District 
The net number of permitted and completed homes 
Net number of new market dwellings in each of our settlements and parishes 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions in each of 
our settlements and parishes 
The net number of applications permitted for rural exception homes in each of our settlements 
and parishes 
The number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites 
Types of new homes 
The number of new homes completed by size (number of bedrooms) 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Permissions granted for new housing on brownfield/previously-developed land 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Net number of new dwellings in flood zones. 
42 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 12 Key Diagram 
12 Key Diagram 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 43 The Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 13 
13 The Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 
13.1 Underpinning the  strategy of Our Local Plan, the policies set out and the allocations determined, 
is the Government's emphasis on the importance of sustainable development. The National Planning 
Policy Framework (NPPF) states at paragraph 17, that planning should ‘proactively drive and support 
sustainable economic development to deliver the homes, business and industrial units, infrastructure 
and thriving local places that the country needs’. 
13.2 Further, at  the heart of national planning policy is a presumption in favour of sustainable 
development, with many of the opening paragraphs dedicated to discussing what this means. 
Sustainable development should be seen as a golden thread running through both plan-making and 
decision-taking while also requiring local authorities to positively seek opportunities to meet the 
development needs of their areas. 
13.3 In particular , Local Plans should meet objectively assessed needs for both housing and 
employment development, with sufficient flexibility to adapt to rapid change unless specific policies 
within the NPPF indicate that development should be restricted. This can include Green Belt, Areas 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty and others. Evidence already discussed at Section 11: Spatial Strategy 
discusses this more and much of the evidence which underpins and informs this Plan clearly set out 
how it has responded to the crucial factor of balancing sustainable considerations. 
13.4 Policy TLP02  is included to demonstrate the Council’s commitment to the Government agenda 
and sets out the presumption in favour of sustainable development. 
TLP02: Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 
When considering development proposals the Planning Authority will take a positive approach 
that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National 
Planning Policy Framework. 
It will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that proposals 
can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, 
social and environmental conditions in the area. 
Planning applications that accord with the policies in the Local Development Plan, including 
those in Neighbourhood Plans, will be approved, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
Where there are no policies relevant to the proposed development, or policies are out of date at 
the time of making the decision, the Council will grant permission unless material considerations 
indicate otherwise, taking into account whether: 
I. Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh 
the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the NPPF taken as a whole, or 
II. Specific policies in the NPPF indicate that development should be restricted such as sites 
designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest, land designated as Green Belt, designated 
heritage assets, and locations at risk of flooding. 
44 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 13 The Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Sustainability Appraisal (2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 iterations) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
All Spatial Objectives are relevant to the achievement of the sustainable development. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
As all development should be sustainable there is no requirement to monitor this policy. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 45 Green Belt 14 
14 Green Belt 
14.1 The Green  Belt in Tandridge is part of the Metropolitan Green Belt surrounding London. 
While Green Belt is just one of the constraints the Council has considered in preparing Our Local 
Plan, consultation has shown the land which holds the policy designation is ranked as one of the 
highest areas for concern for our communities, exceeded only by that of infrastructure. 
14.2 A key driver for the Council in preparing its Local Plan is to ensure it can retain control over 
development for the long term and ensure that any development that does take place is in the right 
locations and accompanied by proportionate and appropriate infrastructure. As a district, we have 
been successful in containing development to the non-Green Belt settlements and through infilling 
in a number of those settlements which remain 'washed over' by the Green Belt. As time has moved 
on, however, the ability to meet development in those same areas means that continuing that 
approach is no longer reasonable, nor appropriate and the existing infrastructure has become less 
effective as the demand for it has increased. 
14.3 The lack  of non-Green Belt supply and the Government's housing agenda and drive for 
sustainable development, means the Council has no choice but to consider land in the Green Belt 
to both identify any land that meets the exceptional circumstances for release and demonstrate 
where the boundary can be defended for the long-term. Historically we have been very successful 
at defending the Green Belt against inappropriate development and the policies and proposals of 
Our Local Plan will enable this to continue. 
14.4 The extensive  assessment of the Green Belt in the District, throughout the plan-making 
process, has resulted in limited alterations to our Green Belt boundaries, but allow us to help provide 
for the needs of our communities and provide wider community benefit. Concurrently, the evidence 
also sets out that the overwhelming majority of our Green Belt continues to serve the purposes set 
out in the NPPF. On commencing the preparation of our Local Plan, land designated as Green Belt 
represented 94% of the land within our area. Our Local Plan still recognises that more than 93% of 
the land in our District can remain defended by national and local Green Belt policies. 
14.5 In order to fulfil the Council's Spatial Strategy and beyond the proposals set out in this 
document, there will be a further need to make an alteration to the current Green Belt boundary, 
but only for the purposes of the South Godstone Garden Community. This alteration will only take 
place through the preparation and examination of the Area Action Plan. It will only take place when 
informed by the evidence which underpins that document and the master-planning exercise that 
will ensure the most appropriate boundaries are defined and which can endure beyond the plan 
period. 
14.6 Given the  complexity of creating a new community at the scale anticipated (See Policy 
SGC01) the details and specific matters of the development are not something that can be, nor 
should they be, quickly determined. Such plans will need to subject to rigorous scrutiny, infrastructure 
modelling and option testing to ensure the scheme is well thought out and that it provides places, 
not just spaces. This will be a matter for the Area Action Plan. 
46 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 14 Green Belt 
General Development in the Green Belt 
14.7 As is consistent with the national approach, the construction of new buildings is inappropriate 
in the Green Belt (as defined on the Policies Map); exceptions to this are set out at paragraph 89 of 
the NPPF. Certain other forms of development are also not inappropriate provided they preserve the 
openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict with the purposes of including land in the Green Belt; 
these are set out at paragraph 90 of the NPPF. 
14.8 As with previous Green Belt policy, inappropriate development which is, by definition, harmful 
to the Green Belt will not be approved unless the applicant is able to demonstrate the existence of 
very special circumstances. Such ‘very special circumstances’ will not exist unless the potential harm 
to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other 
considerations. 
TLP03: Green Belt 
The extent of the Green Belt within the District is shown on the Policies Map. 
Further changes to the Green Belt boundary will only take place for the South Godstone Garden 
Community , within the Area of Search, identified in Chapter 33 of Our Local Plan: 2033 and 
through the preparation of an Area Action Plan. 
Within the Green Belt, planning permission for any inappropriate development which is, by 
definition, harmful to the Green Belt, will normally be refused. Proposals involving inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt will only be permitted where very special circumstances exist, to 
the extent that other considerations clearly outweigh any potential harm to the Green Belt by 
reason of inappropriateness and any other harm. 
Neighbourhood Plans will be prepared in recognition of the Green Belt policies of the National 
Planning Policy Framework. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 1) (2015) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 2): Areas for Further Investigation (2016) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO11 - Best Use of Land; 
SO12 - Green Belt. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 47 Green Belt 14 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net number of permissions granted for new housing on Green Belt land 
Net number of gains and/or losses on SSSI, SNCI, LNR, pSNCI, BOA sites 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces within 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07. 
48 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 15 Infrastructure and Financial Contributions 
15 Infrastructure and Financial Contributions 
15.1 The Spatial  Strategy and policies outlined in Our Local Plan set out how the District will develop 
up to 2033 to ensure the overall vision and objectives are achieved. A key component of success is 
to ensure the necessary physical, social and green infrastructure is provided to support both new 
and existing communities. 
15.2 Throughout the  preparation of Our Local Plan, infrastructure concerns were at the forefront 
of the comments received from residents and other interested parties and the overall Spatial Strategy 
was determined with this in mind. In recent years, development in the District has predominantly 
come forward on small-scale and piecemeal sites which are rarely able to generate the critical mass 
of development needed to fund or provide additional infrastructure. The policies and land allocations 
set out in Our Local Plan have been cognisant of this in understanding what benefits would be gained 
from the development of particular sites. 
15.3 Infrastructure gains  will be achieved through a variety of measures including on-site provision 
-funded and delivered by applicants, developer contributions, including Section 106 and Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL). Where both s106 and CIL are sought on sites; Tandridge District Council's 
Planning Obligations and CIL guidance note provides advice on how both of these will be used 
together. Other funding streams such as Government Funding, where it is available will also be 
sought, where applicable. 
15.4 The Council  adopted a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Charging Schedule in December 
2014 which was prepared in response to the previous Core Strategy and the policies contained within 
it. The Council will update the CIL charging schedule to support the proposals and delivery of Our 
Local Plan, setting out the strategic priorities the Council will consider. The timetable is set out in the 
Council's most up to date Local Development Scheme. 
15.5 Our Local  Plan is accompanied and underpinned by the accompanying Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. This sets out the main infrastructure requirements needed to facilitate the delivery of Our Local 
Plan, its policies and the land allocations. The IDP should be considered as a 'living' document and 
following the adoption of the Local Plan will be continually monitored to ensure that if funding streams 
or costs change over time, the information set out in the schedule, can be updated. 
15.6 Robust planning  conditions and obligations will be essential to ensure that development 
contributes in a positive way to existing communities and environments, achieves sustainable 
development and provides for necessary improvements to key facilities. The Council will also 
proactively seek out opportunities for additional funding and work with providers to ensure and facilitate 
delivery to a standard it feels is appropriate. 
15.7 In preparing  the Local Plan, the District Council has worked with Surrey County Highways 
Authority and Highways England, rail related bodies, bus operaters operators and  adjoining authorities 
where appropriate, to develop the most appropriate package of transport measures to support 
development growth and ensure sustainability and climate change benefits are delivered in practice. 
15.8 In addition,  the Council has worked with the following infrastructure providers to consider all 
elements of infrastructure that will be required to offset the impact of development: 
Utilities companies to consider water provision and waste water treatment; 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 49 Infrastructure and Financial Contributions 15 
The Clinical Commission Group on GP practices and healthcare provision; 
Surrey County Council on education and schools; 
Other infrastructure providers such as rail and bus operators. 
15.9 Whilst some  infrastructure requirements will be directly related to specific site delivery, others 
will be a result of the cumulative impacts of development proposals set out in Our Local Plan, including 
the South Godstone Garden Community. The IDP predominantly addresses infrastructure related to 
edge of settlement development and schemes that will come forward in our existing built areas such 
as Caterham and Oxted. 
15.10 The detailed  proposals of the Garden Community will be determined through the preparation 
of an Area Action Plan and master-planning exercise. It will be during this process that infrastructure 
requirements of the Garden Community for both the immediate development and that of the wider 
area where impact is identified, is addressed. 
TLP04: Infrastructure Delivery and Financial Contributions 
New development will be supported by the timely delivery of infrastructure, services and facilities 
necessary to provide balanced, more self-sufficient communities. 
Progress on  the delivery of infrastructure will be monitored and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(IDP) will be updated to reflect changes in infrastructure need, for example to highlight where 
projects have been delivered and to identify alterations to funding levels and sources. The IDP will 
be a 'living document' and sit alongside our development plan which will include and the 
subsequent
 South Godstone Garden Community Area Action Plan (AAP). Any a Applications  
should must demonstrate  mechanisms to provide infrastructure set out in the most up-to-date 
iteration of the IDP. 
As development  proposals progress through the development management process, the need 
for further mitigation measures could emerge, in addition to those required in the Housing 
Allocations policies. The policy requirements for specific contributions do not preclude the need 
to fund further mitigation measures that may be identified at a later stage as being required to 
make the development acceptable in planning terms. 
Community Infrastructure  Levy will be utilised to fund strategic infrastructure such as expansions 
to GP and educational facilities, as appropriate and on reflection of the Council's current and 
future strategic funding priorities. 
Planning permission  will be granted for development in accordance  with the phasing set out 
against each land allocation, subject to  solutions to  infrastructure constraints  being resolved in 
agreement with the Local Planning Authority. Infrastructure should be provided prior to 
commencement, where appropriate. Every effort should be made to Development will  be 
phased phase development  alongside in relation  to the delivery  of infrastructure so as to and/or 
performance
 against targets to reduce demands  on all associated infrastructure as far as is 
practicably possible. 
For non-allocated  sites the timing of infrastructure provision and/or contributions will be determined 
on a case by case basis. 
50 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 15 Infrastructure and Financial Contributions 
Applicants will either make on-site provision, or will contribute towards the provision of local and 
strategic infrastructure required by development, either alone or cumulatively with other 
developments. These contributions will be required in accordance with the IDP, unless an 
alternative arrangement is agreed with the Local Planning Authority. Community Infrastructure 
Levy and  other relevant financial agreement. 
The Council  would expect to be proactively involved in the early discussions between applicants 
and infrastructure providers, where relevant, to limit any potential delay to the overall application 
and delivery process. Applicants will also be expected are advised  to share any viability work 
they have had carried out early on in the application process, including at pre-application stage 
where available. 
The Council  will take a proactive role to delivery policy objectives, including through the use of 
statutory powers if needed and where possible. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule (2014) 
Tandridge Draft Local Plan: Viability Assessment (2018) 
Planning Obligations and Community Infrastructure Levy guidance note (2015) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Value of financial and CIL contributions secured and collected 
Spending of financial contributions. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 51 Development Viability 16 
16 Development Viability 
16.1 Our Local  Plan is based on a 'whole-plan' viability approach and an assessment of the viability 
of the plan has been carried out independently on behalf of the Council by BNP Paribas (2018). The 
plan viability assessment examines whether the Plan as a whole could realistically be delivered. The 
starting point for this whole-plan approach is that development of the proposed land allocations set 
out in Our Local Plan, can meet all of our planning policy and infrastructure requirements in full and 
be delivered within the Plan period. 
16.2 It is accepted that the wider economy and the property market are likely to vary through the 
lifetime of the Local Plan. Changes in land values, sale costs and build costs will all have an effect, 
as will government policy including the size and nature of support available to fund and secure 
development in general and infrastructure in particular. Individual sites may incur unforeseen or 
abnormal costs in their redevelopment or require additional specific infrastructure requirements that 
mean that, on occasion, additional costs arise unexpectedly. 
16.3 That said,  where there is insufficient justification, the Council will robustly defend against the 
reduction in affordable housing provision or the loss of proportionate infrastructure. Given that Our 
Local Plan has been subject to stringent viability testing the Council will expect applicants to set out 
whether or not full policy compliance can be achieved at the earliest stage. 
16.4 Applications seeking  development permissions which are not able to achieve full policy 
compliance will need to be accompanied by a viability appraisal from the outset. Exceptional 
circumstances may be recognised under which the benefits of development outweigh the harm of 
not providing for infrastructure contributions in full e.g. bringing buildings back into use, key regeneration 
schemes and restoring important listed buildings. 
16.5 Guidance will  be made available to applicants to set out the requirements of the viability study. 
This will include an agreed format or recognised development industry model clearly setting out 
evidenced assumptions which need prior agreement and that the applicant will normally be expected 
to pay for the Council’s costs in appointing independent assessors to appraise the viability appraisals. 
The viability evidence provided will be rigorously tested by the independent advisors on the basis 
that all development proposals shall seek to achieve all of the policy and infrastructure requirements 
set out in Our Local Plan so that provision comes forward when it is required to support the needs 
generated by the development and to offset impact appropriately. 
16.6 For larger  schemes where a proposal is to be phased over time, or where the opportunity 
exists to do so, the applicant will be asked to agree with the Council a programme or method for 
re-evaluating the viability of the scheme to capture changes in circumstances. The Council will require 
the applicant to agree a deferred contributions or 'claw back' approach to reduce any deficit where 
improved market conditions allow. This will discourage concerns over potential ‘banking’ of consents 
based on current day viability assumptions with delayed implementation until the market context 
improves, and encourage earlier build out of permitted schemes. 
16.7 While the  whole-plan viability takes account of the proposals for the South Godstone Garden 
Community the scheme is currently un-detailed, not anticipated to commence for some years and 
will be built out over a longer period. As such, further and more detailed viability assessments will 
take place on that development independently as part of the Area Action Plan. 
52 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 16 Development Viability 
16.8 The Council will require viability updates after planning permission has been granted and any 
costs incurred by the Council in having Viability Assessments inspected independently, will be met 
by the applicant. 
TLP05: Development Viability 
The Council will expect all policy requirements, including affordable housing provision and 
infrastructure delivery, to be fulfilled as is relevant to each development in accordance with the 
policies of Our Local Plan and, the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and government guidance. In 
addition, any application subject to TLP12 and all major applications and those where the applicant 
consider policy requirements cannot be met must be accompanied by development viability 
assessments during pre-application and/or at the point of submitting their application. 
The Council will require viability updates after planning permission has been granted, and any 
cost incurred by the Council in having Viability Assessments inspected independently, will be 
met by the applicant. 
The Council will work actively with applicants to establish whether any additional stream of 
funding may be available and work to assist in facilitating and securing delivery, where possible. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge Draft Local Plan: Viability Assessment (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Value of financial and CIL contributions secured and collected 
Spending of financial contributions 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 53 Settlement Policies 17 
17 Settlement Policies 
17.1 In accordance  with the Spatial Strategy set out at TLP01 and national policy, Our Local Plan 
sets out policies to protect, and enhance and  guide development for all the settlements of  the District, 
and to assist those that seek to prepare a Neighbourhood Plan for their areas. 
17.2 The National  Planning Policy Framework (Para 17) identifies that Local Plans should 'take 
account of the different roles and character of different areas, promoting the vitality of our main urban 
areas, protecting the Green Belts around them, recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the 
countryside and supporting thriving rural communities within it'. The Council has prepared a Settlement 
Hierarchy (2015) and subsequent Addendum (2018) to consider this and used it to inform the 
development of the Spatial Strategy to ensure it is suitably reflective of the settlements within the 
District and how they function. 
17.3 Through the  consideration of the Settlement Hierarchy (2015/2018) and other relevant evidence, 
the Council has been able to prepare policies that recognise the unique qualities of each of our 
settlements, as well as the issues and opportunities that face each of them. The policies set out below 
seek to protect the services that exist and to encourage the betterment of our settlements so that 
they continue to serve residents. 
17.4 Through the  policies of Our Local Plan, the Council also acknowledges the importance of 
maintaining a diverse range of services and community facilities (see glossary) in the District and the 
contribution that these facilities can make to residents’ quality of life. Although ultimately unable to 
prevent the closure of a community facility, the Council will seek to retain facilities of recognised 
community importance and will support the re-use of the facility for alternative community uses where 
appropriate. 
Urban Settlements  
17.5 The urban  settlements of the District are those that are identified in Tier 1 of the Council's 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015/2018). 
17.6 The Settlement  Hierarchy identified that although none of the settlements in the District can 
be considered urban when compared to larger towns and settlements in neighbouring authorities 
those such as Croydon, Crawley or Redhill, Tandridge does have settlements large enough and 
sufficiently 'built-up' developed to be considered urban within the local context. The built character, 
number of residents, range of services and development pattern of these settlements contributes to 
their built-up nature which distinguishes them from other settlements in the district. 
17.7 Urban settlements,  by their nature, are intended to be sustainable and provide a wide range 
of services and facilities to meet more than the everyday needs of the immediate community. This 
can include larger branches of retail stores, wider employment opportunities, leisure and community 
facilities and transport hubs which accommodate those who travel in to shop and work or who commute 
out to other settlements and beyond a district's borders. 
54 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
17.8 The Spatial Strategy identifies our most built up Urban (Urban -T ier 1) settlements as areas 
where development will be focused and where it can be supported by an existing framework of facilities 
and infrastructure. That said, these settlements are also those where services are often under most 
pressure and will undoubtedly need improvements to their infrastructure which can be facilitated by 
the proposals of the Local Plan. 
17.9 The following  policy is in place to ensure any development proposals for urban Tier 1 
settlements can be guided in a proportionate manner. It recognises the wider regeneration schemes 
that can also contribute to maintaining and increasing the success and sustainability of these 
settlements. 
17.10 This policy  can be used to both guide Neighbourhood Plans and assess applications relating 
to these settlements. 
TLP06: Urban Settlements 
The areas which make up our urban (Tier 1) settlements are: 
Caterham on  the Hill Oxted 
Caterham Valley Warlingham 
Hurst Green Whyteleafe 
Limpsfield 
Our Urban  Settlements will be the a focus of development and we will make provision for around 
768 new homes, including affordable housing and a mix of tenure. 
In all circumstances, infilling, redevelopment and other forms of development must respect and 
reflect the character of the settlement and will be subject to any other relevant Development 
Plan policies. 
A) Development within  the Urban Settlements will be permitted where the proposal comprises: 
I. Infilling within  an existing substantially developed frontage. Infilling does not include the 
inappropriate subdivision of existing curtilages to a size below that prevailing in the area; 
II. The partial  or complete redevelopment of previously developed land, even if this goes 
beyond the strict definition of infilling; 
III. The development  of sites within the settlement boundaries following allocation for affordable 
housing; 
IV. Extensions or  alterations to buildings and the erection of new ancillary domestic buildings 
within the curtilage of a dwelling; 
V. Development that  provides new, or assists in the retention of, community facilities; 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 55 Settlement Policies 17 
VI. In all circumstances, infilling, redevelopment and other forms of development must be in 
character with the settlement, or that part of it, and will be subject to any other relevant 
Development Plan policies. 
VII. Flood risk  management schemes, such as those at Caterham on the Hill and Caterham 
Bourne. 
B) Proposals involving  redevelopment or a change of use which would result in the loss of any 
premises or land currently or last used as a community facility will only be permitted where: 
I. There is no longer a demand for the facility, rendering it financially unviable. This should 
be demonstrated through a robust marketing strategy and viability assessment, 
demonstrating where the building or land has been offered for sale or letting on the open 
market at a realistic price and no reasonable offers have been refused; and 
II. There are  sufficient similar facilities nearby or where alternative provision can be made on 
another site to the same or a higher standard in terms of community benefit; or 
III. The current  use will be retained and enhanced by the development of part of the site. 
Where it can be demonstrated that proposals support settlement sustainability and help facilitate 
the enhancement of infrastructure and services the Council will also: In addition  we will: 
Support appropriate  levels of intensification and appropriate densities where development 
can be offset supported by  appropriate infrastructure and service provision, in accordance 
with the policies of Our Local Plan and most up to date Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
Support an  increase in employment opportunities in our urban centres, particularly our town 
centres with an emphasis on B1(a) Office uses that could include rentable desk space to 
limit the need for commuting; 
Protect the  loss of employment to alternative uses in our urban settlements and consider 
implementing Article 4 directives where necessary; 
Support mixed-use  development which makes the best use of land through developments 
which encourage 'living or working over the shop'; 
Work with  transport partners to require transport improvements, while ensuring appropriate 
levels of parking; 
Protect and  enhance open spaces and leisure facilities for the benefit and well-being of our 
communities, where appropriate. Including Local Green Spaces where they are designated 
through adopted Neighbourhood Plans; 
Protect and  enhance existing retail and leisure provision where our urban settlements lie 
within our designated town, local and neighbourhood centres, in accordance with policy 
TLP24: Retail Hierarchy; 
56 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
Positively view new community facilities including pubs and restaurants where they would 
bring community benefit; 
Support regeneration initiatives such as Regeneration Oxted (TLP29: Oxted Town Centre) 
and the Caterham Masterplan (TLP28: Caterham Town Centre); 
Support development which provides variety in the retail and services offered in our town 
centres to ensure viability and success is ensured; 
Support development that complies with the TLP13: Rural Housing Exception Sites; 
Support Neighbourhood Plans, where they exist, to help shape the local community. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Caterham Town Masterplan Supplementary Document (2018) 
RegenOxted 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres and Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 57 Settlement Policies 17 
The net number of permitted and completed homes in each of our settlements and parishes 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions within each 
of our settlements and parishes 
Types of new homes 
The net number of new homes by size (number of bedrooms) 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds and play 
spaces 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities. 
Number of gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Spending of financial contributions 
Number of applications permitted for rural exception homes within each of our settlements 
and parishes 
The number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans 
Monitor schemes  proposing SuDS and flood mitigation 
Semi-Rural Service  Centres 
17.11 Our Semi-Rural  Service Settlements, also described as Tier 2 settlements are set out in the 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015/2018). 
17.12 The majority  of settlements in the District are away from the our most built-up urban areas 
and
 some are more remotely located than others. They are still able to demonstrate levels of service 
provision and access to facilities and should be recognised for that and supported going forward. 
17.13 Lingfield and  Smallfield, both of these settlements have an established development history 
stemming from the policies of earlier development plans and they continue to be viewed as key 
settlements in the District. Both of these settlements are similar in population and neither has been 
constrained by the designation of Green Belt which has contributed to the number of homes located 
there and the number of services and facilities which have arisen in response to development. 
17.14 This does  not mean there aren't challenges in ensuring the services and facilities continue 
to support the residents, not just of the immediate settlements, but also those of more rural settlements. 
Sustainability is not just about how a settlement is currently served, but also how it can be sustained 
for the longer term and the Local Plan and Infrastructure Delivery Plan recognise this. 
17.15 In the case of Godstone, Our Local Plan removes the 'washing over' of the Green Belt 
designation in response to the established nature and built form of the settlement and in accordance 
with Paragraph 86 of the National Planning Policy Framework. However, the Green Belt boundary is 
firmly re-established around the settlement edge. 
58 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
17.16 Despite its previous status within the Green Belt, Godstone has developed over time to 
become a well-formed settlement where a number of important services such as a school and doctors 
surgery are located. Of all the settlements in the District, Godstone also has the most immediate 
access to the strategic road network where the M25, A22 and A25 intersect. 
17.17 The Spatial  Strategy recognises the role these settlements play in supporting both the 
residents of those settlements and those which rely on our semi-rural, and indeed urban, settlements 
for their services and facilities. The following policy is in place to help guide both Neighbourhood 
Plans and in the assessment of applications. 
TLP07: Semi-Rural Service Settlements 
The areas which make up our Semi-Rural Service settlements (Tier 2) are: 
Godstone Lingfield Smallfield 
We will make provision for 533 new homes in our semi-rural service centres within the settlement 
boundary, which  provide a mix of types and tenures, including affordable housing. 
In all circumstances, infilling, redevelopment and other forms of development must respect and 
reflect the character of the settlement and will be subject to any other relevant Development 
Plan policies. 
A) Development within  the semi-rural service settlements will be permitted where the proposal 
comprises: 
I. Infilling within  an existing substantially developed frontage. Infilling does not include the 
inappropriate subdivision of existing curtilages to a size below that prevailing in the area; 
II. The partial  or complete redevelopment of previously developed land, even if this goes 
beyond the strict definition of infilling; 
III. The development  of sites within the settlement boundaries following allocation for affordable 
housing; 
IV. Extensions or  alterations to buildings and the erection of new ancillary domestic buildings 
within the curtilage of a dwelling; 
V. Development that  provides new, or assists in the retention of, community facilities;. 
VI. In all circumstances, infilling, redevelopment and other forms of development must be in 
character with the settlement, or that part of it, and will be subject to any other relevant 
Development Plan policies. 
VII. Flood risk  management schemes, such as those at Burstow. 
B) Proposals involving  redevelopment or a change of use which would result in the loss of any 
premises or land currently or last used as a community facility will only be permitted where: 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 59 Settlement Policies 17 
I. There is no longer a demand for the facility, rendering it financially unviable. This should 
be demonstrated through a robust marketing strategy and viability assessment, 
demonstrating where the building or land has been offered for sale or letting on the open 
market at a realistic price and no reasonable offers have been refused; and 
II. There are  sufficient similar facilities nearby or where alternative provision can be made on 
another site to the same or a higher standard in terms of community benefit; or 
III. The current  use will be retained and enhanced by the development of part of the site. 
Where it can be demonstrated that proposals support settlement sustainability and help facilitate 
the enhancement of infrastructure and services the Council will also:To ensure  these settlements 
remain sustainable and to help facilitate the enhancement of infrastructure and services, the 
Council will also: 
Support appropriate  levels of intensification and appropriate densities where development 
can be offset by proportionate and appropriate infrastructure and service provision, in 
accordance with the policies of Our Local Plan and Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
Support development  that complies with the TLP13: Rural Housing Exception Sites; 
Protect and  enhance open spaces and leisure facilities for the benefit and well-being of our 
communities, where appropriate. Including Local Green Spaces where they are designated 
through adopted Neighbourhood Plans; 
Support regeneration  opportunities, where they arise; 
Ensure there  is a range of employment opportunities, with a particular emphasis on B1 
office, whilst supporting home working and the wider rural economy; 
Resist the  loss of local shops and facilities, including pubs, and support and protect existing 
local centres, in a accordance with policy TLP24: Retail Hierarchy 
Positively view  new retail development and community facilities including pubs and 
restaurants where they would bring community benefit; 
Work with  transport partners to require transport improvements, while ensuring appropriate 
levels of parking; 
Support tourist  facilities and the aspects which contribute to the wider rural economy, and 
Support Neighbourhood  Plans, where they exist, to help shape the local community. 
60 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres and Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Number of gains and/or losses proposing agricultural, farming and other land-based rural 
businesses 
The net number of permitted and completed homes in each of our settlements and parishes 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions within each 
of our settlements and parishes 
Types of new homes 
The net number of new homes by size (number of bedrooms) 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Number of gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Quarterly update on Gainshare Solution Deployment to promote home-working (updates 
on postcodes that have now been connected to the fibre network) 
Permissions proposing expansion/intensification of tourism assets 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 61 Settlement Policies 17 
Number of applications permitted for rural exception homes within each of our settlements 
and parishes 
The number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites 
Spending of financial contributions 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans 
Monitor schemes proposing SuDS and flood mitigation 
Rural Settlements  
17.18 Our Rural  Settlements, also described as Tier 3, are set out in our Settlement Hierarchy 
(2015/2018). 
17.19 The settlements  included in this tier, vary in size and character, but still provide basic levels 
of service provision while being predominantly rural in nature. However, the level of sustainability of 
these settlements cannot support notable levels of development without fundamentally changing the 
overall character of these settlements. All of these settlements, with the exception of Woldingham 
(see paragraph 17.26), remain 'washed over' by the Green Belt designation and this Local Plan does 
not alter this. 
17.20 As such,  these areas are not a focus for development through the Spatial Strategy, but do 
still need appropriate policy guidance to support the preparations of Neighbourhood Plans and respond 
to applications in the effected settlements. 
TLP08: Rural Settlements 
The areas which make up our Rural Settlements (Tier 3) are: 
Bletchingley South  Godstone* 
Blindley Heath South Nutfield 
Dormansland Tatsfield 
Felbridge Woldingham 
Old Oxted 
A) Development in  Rural settlements within the Green Belt as shown on the Policies Map, will 
be permitted where the proposal comprises: 
I. Infilling within  an existing substantially developed frontage; this does not include the 
inappropriate subdivision of existing curtilages to a size below that prevailing in the area; 
II. The partial  or complete redevelopment of previously developed land, even if this goes 
beyond the strict definition of infilling; 
III. The development  of sites within the villages boundaries following allocation for affordable 
housing; 
IV. Extensions or  alterations to existing buildings and the erection of new ancillary domestic 
buildings within the curtilage of a dwelling; 
62 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
V. Development that provides new, or assists in the retention of, community facilities; 
VI. Any other  form of development that is defined by the National Planning Policy Framework 
as not being inappropriate in the Green Belt. 
In all circumstances, including for Woldingham which is inset from the Green Belt, infilling, 
redevelopment and other forms of development must respect and reflect the character of the 
settlement and will be subject to any other relevant Development Plan policies. In all 
circumstances, including  for Woldingham which is inset from the Green Belt, infilling, 
redevelopment and  other forms of development must be in character with the settlement, or that 
part of it, and will be subject to any other relevant Development Plan policies. 
B) Proposals involving  redevelopment or a change of use which would result in the loss of any 
premises or land currently or last used as a community facility will only be permitted where: 
I. There is no longer a demand for the facility, rendering it financially unviable. This should 
be demonstrated through a robust marketing strategy and viability assessment, 
demonstrating where the building or land has been offered for sale or letting on the open 
market at a realistic price and no reasonable offers have been refused; and 
II. There are  sufficient similar facilities nearby or where alternative provision can be made on 
another site to the same or a higher standard in terms of community benefit; or 
III. The current  use will be retained and enhanced by the development of part of the site. 
Where it can be demonstrated that proposals support settlement sustainability and help facilitate 
the enhancement of infrastructure and services the Council will also: To support  the existing 
communities of our Rural Settlements the Council will: 
Support small-scale  housing development and infilling within defined settlement boundaries 
where it provides a mix of housing types and tenures in accordance with the Council's most 
up to date Housing Strategy; 
Support Neighbourhood  Plans, where they exist, to help shape the local community; 
Support tourist  facilities and the aspects which contribute to the wider rural economy; 
Support development  that complies with the TLP13: Rural Housing Exception Sites; 
Support development  that enables home working and other small-scale employment uses 
within Rural Settlements; 
Protect and  enhance open spaces and leisure facilities for the benefit and well-being of our 
communities, where appropriate. Including Local Green Spaces where they are designated 
through adopted Neighbourhood Plans; 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 63 Settlement Policies 17 
Resist the loss of local shops and facilities in Bletchingley neighbourhood centre, parades 
of shops and isolated individual village shops; 
Support development which delivers on the requirements of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(IDP); 
Support initiatives to establish local stores and facilities to meet local needs and support 
sustainable communities. 
*The extent  of development for the South Godstone Garden Community Ddevelopment will,  
inevitably, alter its position as a rural settlement. South Godstone will continue to be treated as 
a rural settlement and policies applied in accordance with this, until the South Godstone Garden 
Community Area Action Plan is adopted. Until such  time as the development commences South 
Godstone will continue to be treated as a rural settlement and policies applied in accordance 
with this. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres and Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
64 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of gains and/or losses proposing agricultural, farming and other land-based rural 
businesses 
The net number of permitted and completed homes in each of our settlements and parishes 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions within each 
of our settlements and parishes 
The number of applications permitted for rural exception homes within each of our 
settlements and parishes 
The number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites 
Spending of financial contributions 
Types of new homes 
The net number of new homes by size (number of bedrooms) 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Number of gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Quarterly update on Gainshare Solution Deployment to promote home-working (updates 
on postcodes that have now been connected to the fibre network) 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Defined Settlement Boundaries 
17.21 Settlement boundaries  for urban, semi-rural and rural settlements are depicted on the Policies 
Map. In applying and implementing the policies of this plan, understanding the role of boundaries is 
important. 
17.22 A key role of a boundary is to preserve the setting of existing settlements from inappropriate 
development and to control unchecked and unplanned outward sprawl. Defining appropriate settlement 
boundaries is important in identifying the point of transition between the built form of a settlement 
and the surrounding countryside. They are not solely a means of showing the limits of existing 
development as some developed areas can lie outside of a boundary and some undeveloped areas 
such as open spaces, can lie within them. 
17.23 For T andridge, settlement boundaries have been effective in preventing inappropriate 
development within the Green Belt, in depicting the extent of the Green Belt and identifying where 
Green Belt policies will be relevant. 
17.24 Green Belt  designation is not an environmental or landscape designation and is a policy 
mechanism put in place to preserve the openness of land. Development which is out of keeping with 
the purposes of the Green Belt and/or considered to be inappropriate, will be resisted. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 65 Settlement Policies 17 
Urban and Semi-Rural Settlements 
17.25 All settlements  defined as urban or semi-rural have defined boundaries that constitute the 
Green Belt boundary and shows the extent of the settlement which is not 'washed over' and which 
is inset from the wider Green Belt designation. 
Rural Settlements  
17.26 Settlement boundaries  have also been identified for our rural settlements. All areas within 
this category, with the exception of Woldingham (17), continue to be 'washed over' by the Green Belt 
designation. 
17.27 Given that  rural settlements are not a focus for development under the Spatial Strategy but 
are likely to have small scale development, it is important that the Council do all it can to ensure the 
settlement form is protected. Setting appropriate boundaries assists in this. National Planning Policy 
does not impose a blanket exclusion to development in the Green Belt, but can allow for sensitively 
designed infilling and small-scale schemes. As such, the role of the boundaries for our rural settlements 
accords with the core built form for the settlement and will be used to ensure that, in line with Green 
Belt policies, appropriate development can be contained. 
17.28 In the case of Woldingham, Green Belt policy will only apply to development which would 
be beyond the defined extent of the settlement. 
17.29 The defined  boundaries in all cases will help to guide Neighbourhood Plans and provide a 
steer for the delivery of Rural Exception Sites in accordance with policy TLP13. 
All other  settlements 
17.30 All other settlements, including those listed as Limited and Unserviced settlements within 
the Council's Settlement Hierarchy (2015/2018), are considered a Tier 4 settlement. 
17.31 These settlements  have very little or no service provision. In most cases these settlements 
are remotely located and take the form of a very small cluster of homes, or a sporadic dispersal of 
properties across a wider rural area or roadside. As such, no defined settlement boundary is identified. 
17.32 Services in  these areas are so limited that access to day-to-day services must be gained 
from elsewhere. Access to public transport and the strategic road network is such that there is an 
overt reliance on private transport. Travel to meet needs is generated by necessity rather than choice. 
17.33 The Council  wish to ensure that the delivery of affordable homes is supported where 
appropriate and where it contributes to meeting local needs. As with the other settlement policies, 
rural housing exceptions sites, which accord with TLP13 are supported in all of our settlements, where 
appropriate. 
17 Woldingham village is already 'inset' from the Green Belt and this plan does not alter this. 
66 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 17 Settlement Policies 
17.34 The aim of any housing scheme should be to deliver high quality housing that contributes to 
the creation and maintenance of sustainable rural communities and will need to clearly demonstrate 
their appropriateness in terms of scale, design and layout. Given the less established nature of some 
of our limited and unserviced settlements, smaller schemes may be better suited to the environment 
which provide less than the maximum 20 units set out in policy TLP13. 
17.35 In addition,  given that one of the key characteristics of rural exceptions housing is to ensure 
that the units remain affordable in perpetuity and any scheme would need to demonstrate that this 
would be guaranteed. As such, regard to relevant housing legislation (18) and the 'right to acquire' within 
certain parishes should be had. 
17.36 Development that  does not meet a local and demonstrable need in these areas will be 
robustly resisted as not only are they considered unsustainable, they are covered by the Green Belt 
designation. 
TLP09: Limited and Unserviced settlements 
All settlements not listed in policies TLP06, TLP07 and TLP08 are our Limited and Unserviced 
Settlements. 
Development will  also only be supported where it constitutes appropriate development in 
accordance with the NPPF, or where very special circumstances can be demonstrated. 
In addition,  Tthe Council will support the following types of development: 
Appropriate development  which complies with the TLP13: Rural Housing Exception Sites 
or has been identified through an adopted Neighbourhood Plan; 
Improved flood  resilience and Green Infrastructure schemes and enhancements of 
environmental assets; 
Infrastructure which  offsets the wider impacts of development and which meets a justified 
local need set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
The Council  will protect and enhance open spaces and leisure facilities for the benefit and 
wellbeing of our communities, where appropriate ,. Iincluding Local  Green Spaces where they 
are designated through adopted Neighbourhood Plans. 
Proposals involving  redevelopment or a change of use which would result in the loss of any 
premises or land currently or last used as a community facility will only be permitted where: 
I. There is no longer a demand for the facility, rendering it financially unviable. This should 
be demonstrated through a robust marketing strategy and viability assessment, 
demonstrating where the building or land has been offered for sale or letting on the open 
market at a realistic price and no reasonable offers have been refused; and 
18 Small Rural Settlements, located within parishes that have been designated for enfranchisement and right to acquire purposes 
(under Section 17 of the Housing Act 1996) by S.I 1997/620 - 25 inclusive and 1999/1307 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 67 Settlement Policies 17 
II. There are sufficient similar facilities nearby or where alternative provision can be made on 
another site  to the same or a higher standard in terms of community benefit; or 
III. The current  use will be retained and enhanced by the development of part of the site. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres and Retail; 
SO7 - Health and Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The number of applications permitted for rural exception homes within each of our 
settlements and parishes 
The number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites 
Spending of financial contributions 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Net gains in biodiversity 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
68 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
18 Providing Homes for All 
Types of Housing Need, Not Just Numbers 
18.1 Delivering housing  is not just about numbers. It is also about delivering quality homes, the 
right types (for example size, architectural design, tenure, energy efficiency) and their affordability. 
Each different type of housing plays a different role for our residents and our policies, assisted by 
wider corporate strategies, seek to achieve the right balance and ensure they benefit our District in 
a multitude of ways. 
18.2 Our Local  Plan is committed to ensuring there is real diversification in the homes which are 
built. It is through securing the right type and mix of property, both market and affordable, that we will 
ensure the different demographic sections of our community can be accommodated. 
18.3 The Council  has been consistently clear about its ambition to see more affordable homes 
delivered and will be active in not only building its own council properties, but also working to facilitate 
their delivery on market-led developments. A firm stance will also be taken with applicants who suggest 
that affordable housing requirements cannot be provided in full. 
18.4 In order to understand this District’s housing need better, a Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (2015 and 2018) has been carried out. Its findings are reflected throughout the policies 
of Our Local Plan and considered within the emerging Housing Strategy, which will play a key role 
in delivering the homes being proposed. 
Housing Strategy  
18.5 The Council's  Housing Strategy will be key to delivering the right housing in this District. and 
it
 is being developed to complement a number of corporate strategies, plans, policies and projects. 
It will adopt a whole housing market approach. It will not just focus on housing for those in highest 
housing need, but also those in specialist need. The latter include the elderly, those needing entry 
level homes and those wishing to build their own homes through the self-build initiative, for example. 
It will also assess the level of empty or under-utilised homes and set out a strategy for bringing some 
of these back into use, which will help meet the wider needs of the District and as such contribute to 
land supply. 
18.6 The Housing  Strategy document will not need to be examined before making changes to the 
strategy. This means the strategy can respond to the changing housing needs and demographics of 
the area as informed by regular monitoring. By setting out what types of homes are needed at a point 
in time and keeping it under review the Housing Strategy becomes more relevant and current than 
specific Local Plan policies that are fixed at the point of adoption. 
18.7 Our Local  Plan wants to maximise the opportunity that the Housing Strategy gives in terms 
of predicting and responding to future change and it will play an important role in assisting in achieving 
the housing targets and spatial objectives of Our Local Plan. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 69 Providing Homes for All 18 
TLP10: Responsive Housing Strategy 
In order to address the need for different types, sizes and tenures, including specialist types of 
housing, proposals which accord with the requirements of should take account of the Council's 
most up-to-date Housing Strategy, . will be viewed positively . 
Proposals should be informed by Tthe Housing Strategy which will set the need and key standards 
for various types of housing, including but not limited to direction for a variety of housing typologies 
including: 
Self-build - including the selection criteria 
Elderly persons 
Specialist housing 
Tenure, type, size and their mix 
Empty homes 
Neighbourhood Plans should assist in meeting the objectives of the Housing Strategy as far as 
is practicably possible unless localised housing needs surveys are undertaken which demonstrate 
otherwise. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015 and 2018 iterations) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions 
The number of new homes by size (number of bedrooms) 
Progress of the Housing Strategy 
Types of new homes 
70 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 
18 Providing Homes for All 
Number of empty homes brought back into use 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Retention and Supply 
18.8 The Council  has undertaken work to identify the District’s housing needs over the Plan period, 
also known as Objectively Assessed Need (OAN). Following the application of evidence and 
consideration of constraints, the Council has arrived at a delivery target figure which is lower than 
the identified need (OAN). This is explored further within the Section 11: Spatial Strategy and the 
Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018). 
18.9 The Council’ s work to determine land supply has demonstrated that to meet this delivery target 
figure, the release of some of the Green Belt is necessary and justified. Taking these factors together, 
the Council considers that it is important to resist the loss of residential land, including through the 
amalgamation of more than one dwelling, unless their there is a legitimate benefit such as to support 
regeneration. 
18.10 The Council  continues to recognise that where there is an over concentration of particular 
residential uses, for example sheltered housing, it can affect the viability of a community, how it 
functions and its services. As detailed in TLP11, the Council will only support schemes that would 
not result in an undue concentration of a specific demographic and which would be contrary to a 
mixed community. 
TLP11: Retention and Supply 
To ensure that housing supply is protected the loss of residential land and existing residential 
units to alternative uses will be resisted, as will schemes which include the amalgamation of 
dwellings resulting in a net loss i.e. where two properties are merged to become one larger 
property. 
Where redevelopment  is necessary and involves the loss of residential accommodation or land, 
replacement residential accommodation will normally be required to avoid a net loss. 
The Council  will support proposals for the change of use between residential use classes only 
where: 
I. There is a demonstrable and justified housing need for doing so; and 
II. It can also deliver any required infrastructure necessary to offset the impact of the 
development; and 
III. It does not result in an over-concentration of residential use types that would bey contrary 
to promoting mixed communities, or place undue burden on local services, and/or 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 71 Providing Homes for All 18 
IV. There are wider regeneration benefits, i.e. town centre master planning, if appropriate; 
and/or 
V. It would result in a net gain of residential units. 
In justifying  any change of use between residential use classes, proposals must demonstrate 
how they are responding to the requirements of the Council's most up-to-date Housing Strategy. 
Loss of residential use classes to other non-residential uses will be resisted unless there is a 
demonstrable benefit to regeneration schemes such as for town centres, or for the benefit of 
achieving the aims of the Economic Proposition. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015/2018) 
Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
RegenOxted 
Caterham Masterplan Supplementary Planning Document (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO12 - Green Belt. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The net number of permitted and completed homes 
Net number of C-Class uses permitted to alternative uses 
Progress of the Housing Strategy 
Progress of regeneration schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham Town Centre Masterplan 
72 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
Affordable Homes 
18.11 Affordable housing  is currently defined as that which includes social rented, affordable rented 
and intermediate housing and which is provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by 
the market. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and house prices. 
18.12 The need  for affordable homes within the District is confirmed by the extent of the Council’s 
housing waiting list and the evidence which underpins Our Local Plan. This includes the Council’s 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) 2015 and the update of 2018, which gives a clear 
idea of the extent of that need. The need identified in the SHMA update is for 391 dwellings per year 
over the first five years of the Local Plan (comprising backlog and newly arising need), before reducing 
to 310 dwellings per year for the remaining plan period. That said, the Council is not able to meet the 
identified need in its entirety but is balancing the requirement for affordable housing with the potential 
for it to be delivered and on reflection of the findings of the Tandridge Draft Local Plan: Viability 
Assessment (2018). 
18.13 The updated  SHMA: Affordable Housing Needs Assessment Technical Paper (2018) (part 
of the wider SHMA 2018 report) highlights that the need for affordable units is most acutely found 
within the urban  our most  built-up (tier 1) settlements of the District. However, there is a clear dichotomy 
in providing high levels of affordable properties in existing built areas where development is more 
expensive to deliver. As such, the approach taken by the Council is to require a slightly lower level 
of affordable properties within the built-up areas of those settlements. The approach also requires a 
higher level of affordable homes to be provided in the semi-rural and rural settlements and on sites 
which are released from the Green Belt for housing development and are overwhelmingly undeveloped. 
These sites and areas demonstrate fewer challenges to viability i.e. contaminated land remediation 
etc and can ensure that a supply of affordable homes can be secured and delivered across the area. 
18.14 The Council  is committed to maximising the provision of affordable housing as it will help 
ensure a more balanced demographic. It will enable residents to live in their home and suit their 
needs, as well as providing local workers and key workers with accommodation. The Council will be 
using a variety of means to secure affordable housing, including building Council Housing where the 
opportunity arises. 
18.15 Affordable housing  needs to be of the right size and tenure to meet the District’s needs and 
whilst the threshold of affordable housing is set through our Local Plan, the balance to be struck 
between size and tenure types will be set down in the Council’s Housing Strategy in accordance with 
policy TLP10. Applications will be required to have regard to the most up-to-date Housing Strategy, 
where it applies. 
18.16 The Council  have tested a variety of affordable thresholds through the evidence gathering 
and feel confident there should be limited situations where the requirements of the Plan cannot be 
met by a development, including affordable homes. Planning applications which seek to deliver 
development without meeting applicable affordable housing requirements, will need to demonstrate 
through a robust viability assessment, why affordable delivery is not possible, in accordance with 
Policy TLP05: Development Viability. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 73 Providing Homes for All 18 
18.17 The Council’s expectation is that the affordable housing requirement will be provided on-site 
and as part of the wider development. Alternative sites or financial contributions in lieu of on-site 
provision will generally be resisted. However, it is accepted that viability can be more of an issue in 
urban the most built-up areas. Where justified and accepted,commuted sums may be secured through 
an appropriate legal agreement. 
18.18 Similarly, greenfield  sites are accepted to be those where viability is primarily assured and 
faces fewer obstacles. As such, higher requirements will be required here through on-site provision 
and the need to accept financial contributions or off-site provision is not considered to be necessary 
and will be resisted. 
18.19 Early engagement  with the Council is recommended where it is proposed to deviate from 
the Council’s affordable housing requirements. 
Affordable 
housing 
requirement Size Location/settlement type 
20%15 dwellings and over, or 0.5ha 
or moreUrban Settlements (Tier 1) 
40%10 dwellings and over, or 
0.25ha or moreSemi-Rural Service Settlements (Tier 2) 
40%10 dwellings and over, or 
0.25ha or more All allocated housing sites which have 
been released from the Green Belt* 
40% 5 dwellings and overAny site not in the above categories 
excluding rural exception sites TLP12: Affordable Housing Requirement 
To ensure sufficient affordable homes are delivered over the Plan period the Council will expect 
a proportion of affordable homes to be provided on all sites in accordance with the size of the 
development the table  below: 
For all sites the tenure and size split will be determined by is set out in the Council's most 
up-to-date Housing Strategy. In addition, meeting the overall target for affordable housing will 
also be secured through the delivery of the South Godstone Garden Community. Allocated and 
windfall sites cannot defer their contribution to affordable housing requirements to the Garden 
Community. 
Detailed consideration  of the appropriate threshold for affordable homes for the Garden 
Community will be determined and set out through the Area Action Plan. 
74 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
Should it be demonstrated that the required level of affordable housing cannot be met on-site for 
legitimate reasons, a commuted sum will be required to ensure that the provision of affordable 
units is not lost. In cases where applicants suggest that the provision of affordable housing would 
render a site unviable, robust viability assessments which justify this must be presented to the 
Council at the earliest stage. 
* Applicable sSites released from the Green Belt where 40% affordable housing is applicable 
are set out in the relevant allocated sites in the Plan. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015) 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2018) 
Affordable Housing Needs Assessment Technical Paper (2018) (SHMA Paper) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Tandridge District Draft Local Plan: Viability Assessment (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The number of new (gross) affordable homes and proportion of all completions within our 
settlements and parishes 
Progress of the Housing Strategy. 
Rural Housing Exception Sites 
18.20 The National  Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) advises local planning authorities to support 
sites in rural areas through the use of a Rural Exception Site policy. This allows limited provision of 
small sites to be developed for affordable housing in rural communities. 
18.21 Tandridge is  a predominantly rural district with high house prices. While Our Local Plan 
makes provision for housing needs, both market and affordable, it directs this towards our most 
sustainable settlements. As a consequence, many of our rural settlements, being in unsustainable 
locations, are unlikely to benefit from the affordable housing secured through normal planning 
applications. This can lead to an imbalance in the demographics and contrary to the NPPF’s (2012) 
core principle of supporting thriving rural communities. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 75 Providing Homes for All 18 
18.22 A major advantage of Rural Exception Sites is that people with a local connection (living in 
the parish with close family living in the parish, employed in the parish or who grew up in the parish) 
and with a housing need are given priority in the affordable housing allocation process. In the first 
instance, and for any future vacancies, exception site housing must always be offered to households 
in the parish within which it is located. In instances when there is no local need, people in adjoining 
parishes may become eligible for the housing, and eventually households District wide. 
18.23 Small numbers  of open market homes may be allowable on an exception site as a way to 
increase viability. The Council considers that this will be only acceptable, however, where it has been 
demonstrated to be necessary to secure viability and enable delivery. Applications where the proportion 
of market housing exceeds 10% of the total units and which would otherwise undermine the purpose 
of exception sites to provide affordable homes, will not be supported. 
18.24 The nature  of a rRural eException  sSite is that they are reflective of a rural setting in terms 
of their scale. As such, development of no more thant 20 units will be considered eligible as a rRural 
eException  sSite. This threshold is determined on reflection of past permissions for rRural eException  
sSites and ensures consistency. However, sites of 20 units may not be considered suitable in all 
locations, particularly in the less established areas where service provision is particularly low. 
18.25 The development  and occupancy of each rural exception site is controlled through a legal 
agreement, which the developer signs with the Council prior to issuing the planning application 
decision notice. This agreement ensures the houses developed on the exception site remain affordable 
in perpetuity, once the first occupiers have moved on. Any scheme for rural exceptions housing would 
need to demonstrate that regard to relevant housing legislation (19) and the 'right to acquire' within 
certain parishes should be had, to ensure that retention in perpetuity can be guaranteed. 
18.26 This is not a new policy and the Council has a successful record of delivering Rural Exception 
Sites in settlements such as Tatsfield and Bletchingley. However, the policy set out below differs from 
its predecessor in a number of ways and the Council feels that a policy which restricts exception sites 
to specific settlements does not flexibly respond to the local needs of all our areas. 
18.27 Our Local  Plan continues to support Rural Exception Sites for housing within our rural 
settlements, but considers it more appropriate to extend that opportunity to all our settlements and 
regardless of where they are placed within the settlement hierarchy or Spatial Strategy. 
18.28 As set out in the updated Affordable Housing Needs Assessment Technical Paper (2018) 
(part of the wider SHMA 2018 report) the higher levels of housing need, particularly affordable need, 
is primarily experienced in our urban most built-up  settlements. While our Local Plan allocates new 
sites for housing provision which will provide for local people, there will also be an opportunity for 
those out of dDistrict and  who may be better financed to purchase market housing. In addition, as 
discussed within Section 18: Providing Homes for All, providing affordable homes within existing built 
areas can be challenging when it comes to viability and even though other non-urban developments 
of a certain size and over, will be required to provide 40% affordable homes, the level of development 
anticipated in our Plan will still not enable us to meet our affordable needs in full. By allowing our 
19 Small Rural Settlements, located within parishes that have been designated for enfranchisement and right to acquire purposes 
(under Section 17 of the Housing Act 1996) by S.I 1997/620 - 25 inclusive and 1999/1307 
76 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
most sustainable settlements to also have an opportunity to secure affordable homes for people with 
an established local connection where justified through rural exceptions policy, we can respond more 
flexibly to the justified housing needs of all. 
TLP13: Rural Housing Exception Sites 
Support will be given to Rural Exception Sites of no more than 20 units, on the edge of any 
settlement where there is a demonstrable local need as established in a robust and up to date 
Local Housing Needs Survey (LHNS). Only surveys carried out using a methodology agreed by 
both the relevant Parish Council and the Council, will be considered suitable. 
On sites of more than 10 units, no more than 10% of the total number of units can be market 
housing. The provision of market housing will need to be justified by viability reports setting out 
why the scheme is unviable without the addition of market housing. 
Urban and Semi-Rural Service Settlements (Tier 1 and 2) 
For those settlements 'inset' from the Green Belt, exception sites should be adjacent to the 
settlement boundary. 
Rural, Limited and Unserviced Settlements (Tier 3 and 4) 
In the case of settlements covered ('washed over') by the Green Belt designation with a defined 
boundary, the focus for any development should be within the settlement boundary. Where this 
is not possible the site must be adjoining or closely related to the defined boundary where they 
exist, or in other cases closely related to the settlement form. It must be demonstrated that the 
development has considered the impacts of sprawl and encroachment into the countryside by 
selecting the most appropriate site and the use of good design. 
To be supported in any settlement a Rural Exception Site for housing must demonstrate that: 
it will provide affordable housing in perpetuity and that the type and tenure reflects the local 
and affordable needs of the community, 
that the housing will be for those with a local connection in the first instance and this will be 
ensured through legal agreement such as Ss106, 
the development is of a scale and character that fully respects the existing settlement and 
local built form and the surrounding landscape; and 
that the development would accord with all relevant local and national policies. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 77 Providing Homes for All 18 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2018) 
Affordable Housing Needs Assessment Technical Paper (2018) (SHMA paper) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of applications permitted for rural exception homes within each of our settlements 
and parishes 
Number of market homes approved on Rural Exception Sites. 
Specialist Housing 
18.29 The Council’ s Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2015 (20)indicates that during the Plan 
period, an additional 9,825 older residents (aged 65 and over) are projected to live in the District by 
2033. This represents a 59% increase in the older population, with those aged 85 and over growing 
by 136%. National Planning Practice Guidance advises that plan makers need to consider the size, 
location and quality of dwellings needed in the future for older people to allow them to live independently 
and safely in their own homes for as long as possible, or to move to suitable accommodation if they 
so wish. This provides wider benefits as it can help reduce the costs to health and social services. 
When living in their own home is no longer possible, local authorities should seek to enable specialist 
accommodation to come forward for the elderly. Specialist housing covers a spectrum of housing 
types e.g. sheltered housing, enhanced sheltered, extra care or registered care. 
18.30 The Housing  Strategy will be addressing the District’s need for the different types and tenures 
of specialist housing. It is being undertaken with input from our partners to ensure these needs are 
satisfactorily understood and addressed as part of the wider health and wellbeing picture and to allow 
our residents to live safely and independently for as long as possible. 
18.31 Our Local  Plan will play an important role in ensuring the needs of the affected demographics 
are addressed. This includes enabling the provision of some extra care through site allocation in an 
area where there is a recognised need and supporting the provision of additional units where they 
can be demonstrated to be appropriate. 
20 For clarity, whilst the Council have updated the technical papers which form part of the SHMA in 2018, no alteration to the needs 
for elderly accommodation has occurred and the 2015 papers remain accurate. 
78 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
TLP14: Specialist Need Housing and Extra Care 
The Council will allocate land for the delivery of 25 Extra Care units through the allocation of 
appropriate sites (see HSG16). The Council will also support proposals which contribute to the 
delivery of additional units of Specialist or Extra Care accommodation where it can be 
demonstrated they are sustainable by virtue of their location, with a preference for sites within 
defined settlement boundaries. 
Proposals will take full account of the Council's most up-to-date Housing Strategy and ensure 
that Specialist/Extra Care facilities are provided in the location where need is identified. 
In addition, regard should be had: 
I. to the potential for development to be self-contained in terms of access to facilities and 
reduce travel requirements; and 
II. to the availability of public transport; and 
III. to the priority for the re-use of previously developed land, and 
IV. to the potential to co-locate a nursing/residential care home on sites where there is an 
evidenced need. 
The Council will also work with its partners, Surrey County Council, Surrey Supporting People 
and the Clinical Commissioning Group, in securing the provision of schemes. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2015) 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO7 - Health and Wellbeing; 
SO11 - Best Use of Land; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 79 
Providing Homes for All 18 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Permissions granted for new housing on brownfield/previously developed land 
Net number of C-Class uses permitted to alternative uses 
Types of new homes. 
Providing for Gypsies, Travellers and Showpeople 
18.32 It is important that Our Local Plan makes provision for the housing needs of all sections of 
our community, including Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople. The Government's Planning 
Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) (2015) emphasises the importance of assessing the accommodation 
needs of these specific groups and taking a strategic approach to meeting identified need. 
18.33 The Council  carried out a Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) (2017) 
which examines the current and future need for Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
accommodation in the District. The study found a need for five additional pitches for Gypsies and 
Travellers and 21 plots (also termed sites, comprising both living space and working space) for 
Travelling Showpeople between 2016 and 2033. 
18.34 The PPTS  requires plans to identify specific sites, and where this is not possible to consider 
broad locations. As stated in The Road Ahead: Final Report of the Independent Task Group on Site 
Provision and Enforcement for Gypsies and Travellers (21) published by the Department of Communities 
and Local Government in December 2007 integrating the provision of accommodation for Gypsies, 
Travellers and the settled community as part of a new development from conception, can be planned 
in an integrated and coordinated manner and can help erode misconceptions and distrust between 
these communities. 
18.35 That said,  sustainably-located, suitable and edge-of-settlement sites will rarely be 'available' 
for use as Traveller sites irrespective of the stigma associated with the use, primarily because land 
is more profitable for bricks and mortar accommodation. As such, some pragmatism must be applied 
when considering where Traveller sites will be located. 
18.36 The Council  has carried out an assessment of potential sites for allocation through its Housing 
and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA) and found some to be suitable in HELAA terms. 
However, all of them are within the Green Belt and a couple of the sites are also located within the 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. As clearly stated by national policy, Traveller sites 
are considered inappropriate development within the Green Belt and, despite being assessed through 
the Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) report, the 
exceptional circumstances needed to justify their release from the Green Belt are not judged to exist. 
As such, no Gypsy and Traveller sites have been allocated. 
21 http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20120920063208/http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/housing/pdf/roadahead.pdf 
80 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
18.37 However, to meet needs for the longer term, the Council recognises the South Godstone 
Garden Community could provide an opportunity to deliver traveller accommodation in a sustainable 
location close to services and facilities. This could be planned for from the outset and through the 
Area Action Plan. 
18.38 Until then,  however, Our Local Plan must still seek to allow for pitches/sites to come forward 
where they meet essential criteria and assist in meeting identified needs for those who, in accordance 
with Government Guidance, meet the definition of traveller. 
18.39 To ensure  appropriate and necessary consideration of traveller sites can take place, the 
criteria-based policy set out below will be used to determine whether the very special circumstances 
exist for development within the Green Belt. This can be considered on a case-by-case basis and on 
reflection of national policy and the identified need set out within the GTAA (2017). This approach 
allows public consultation to take place on individual sites through the planning application process 
and each site will be considered on its own merits. 
18.40 It should  also be noted that proposals for traveller sites are predominantly for residential 
uses. They will likely be acceptable within settlement boundaries where policies in Our Local Plan 
are met - in particular in terms of the scale and design of development being appropriate to the 
settlement. Development outside settlement areas however is tightly controlled, and proposals seeking 
planning permission will by default of national and local policy, have to meet a more stringent set of 
requirements, including demonstrating their impact on the Green Belt. In addition, issues of 
sustainability apply to Traveller sites and national planning guidance requires that local planning 
authorities very strictly limit new Traveller site development in open countryside away from existing 
settlements. 
18.41 Travelling Showpeople  sites differ slightly in that they need to provide secure, permanent 
bases for the storage of equipment when not in use. Most Showpeople need to live alongside their 
equipment, so sites must be suitable for both residential and business use, and be capable of 
accommodating equipment which is sometimes large. Care needs to be taken that such sites are 
appropriately designed and located to avoid nuisance to neighbouring uses. 
TLP15: Gypsy, Traveller and Showpeople Provision 
Planning permission for Gypsy, Traveller and Showpeople sites and or plots/pitches will be 
granted where: 
I. The occupant(s)  meet the definition set out in national policy 
II. The applicant  has clearly demonstrated a need for the number, size, type and tenure of the 
proposed pitches/sites, and 
III. It is within or adjacent to the settlement boundary of an Urban or Semi-Rural Service 
Settlements as set out at policy TLP06 and TLP07, or 
IV. It has been considered as part of the comprehensive master planning of the South Godstone 
Garden Community. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 81 Providing Homes for All 18 
And/or: 
A sites/pitches/plot will only be supported when: 
V. It is located within a reasonable distance of local services and facilities including shops, 
GP’s and schools, even if the site is not directly adjacent to the settlement boundary, and 
VI. It has safe highway access, adequate space for parking and emergency and service vehicles; 
and 
VII. It can be sympathetically assimilated into the surroundings; and 
VIII. It is appropriate to the scale of the nearest settlement and its local services and infrastructure; 
and 
IX. It will not cause unacceptable nuisance to existing neighbours by virtue of noise and other 
disturbance caused by the movement of vehicles to and from the site/pitch/plot; and 
X. The impact  of the development in combination with existing or other planned development, 
would not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the amenity of surrounding land uses, 
the character of the settlement, countryside and/or landscape, heritage assets, biodiversity, 
or from traffic generated. 
Sites/pitches/plots which  do not provide a safe environment for the occupants, including in terms 
of their general health and wellbeing, will not be supported. Therefore planning permission will 
not be granted where: 
By virtue of their location in the vicinity of the dangerous roads, railway lines, water bodies 
or power lines, present unacceptable adverse impacts on the health, safety and living 
conditions of the residents of the site/pitch/plot, unless those impacts can be suitably 
mitigated. 
Make use of unstable or contaminated land, or hazardous areas, unless appropriate 
mitigation can be achieved. 
Are in areas which have a high probability of flood risk, are on the functional floodplain, or 
where their development would increase the risk of flooding elsewhere. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (2017) 
Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (all iterations) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) 
82 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO5 - Housing; 
SO7 - Health and Wellbeing. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The number of new traveller pitches 
The number of new plots for travelling showpeople 
Number of temporary permissions for traveller pitches and plots for travelling showpeople. 
Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Design Matters 
18.42 The Government  has provided very little guidance in terms of design standards for Gypsy 
and Traveller pitches and sites, but it is important that design requirements for accommodation are 
clear and consistent. As such, while it was withdrawn as formal guidance in 2015, the Council is 
continuing to use the Designing Gypsy  and Traveller Sites: Good Practice Guide (2008) as it remains 
the most thorough design guide for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation. However there is no 
comparable guidance for Travelling Showpeople accommodation and this would need to be considered 
on a case-by-case basis against other relevant policies of the development Plan and national policy. 
18.43 For all sites, whether or not they include non-residential uses, the site design and layout 
should ensure the safety and security of residents and the public where relevant. If external lighting 
will help achieve this, it should be designed into the proposal at the outset to ensure it is the minimum 
required and appropriate for the location. Safe access to, and movement within, the site for pedestrians, 
cyclists and vehicles is essential, as well as ensuring access is retained at all times for emergency 
vehicles and servicing requirements, including refuse collection. 
18.44 Sites must  also be capable of being serviced by all necessary utilities to provide an appropriate 
residential environment. Foul drainage to a public sewer should be provided wherever possible. 
Where foul drainage to a public sewer is not feasible, sites will only be permitted if proposed alternative 
facilities are considered adequate and would not pose an unacceptable risk to the quality or quantity 
of ground or surface water, pollution of local ditches, watercourses or sites of biodiversity importance. 
Sites must incorporate appropriate measures for surface water drainage, using sustainable drainage 
systems where practicable. 
18.45 Each site/pitch/plot  should be designed to provide appropriate accommodation for a household, 
and should normally allow for the siting of at least one trailer/mobile home, a touring caravan and 
space for car parking. Transit site pitches, providing short-term accommodation, are likely to be 
smaller and each site/pitch should be capable of accommodating touring caravans, rather than space 
for a static caravan. 
18.46 Proposals for  family sites, such as to accommodate an extended family within a number of 
caravans, will be required to establish the number of pitches the site is capable of providing if it were 
occupied by separate family units, the impacts of a site are fully considered. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 83 Providing Homes for All 18 
18.47 The number of parking spaces will be considered against car parking standards contained 
in the wider development plan, based on the anticipated number of residents. If appropriate, planning 
conditions will be applied to any planning permission, restricting the parking of larger vehicles or the 
number of commercial vehicles. 
18.48 Built development  in the Green Belt will be kept to the minimum required to minimise harm 
to Green Belt and the surrounding area. Amenity blocks, which typically include kitchen and bathroom 
facilities, will be considered on their merits and must be compatible with the scale of development 
and the pitch on which it is to be accommodated. The energy and water efficiency of built development 
should also be considered, reflecting policies contained elsewhere in the development plan. All private 
and communal buildings will need to comply with mobility standards as required by building regulations. 
TLP16: Traveller Pitch/Site/Plot Design 
Proposals for Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites/pitches/plots, including the 
enlargement of existing sites will be granted planning permission where they are of a good 
design, have regard to government good practice guidance , and where: 
I. The proposal clearly demarcates the site and pitch boundaries using appropriate boundary 
treatment and landscaping sympathetic to, and in keeping with, the surrounding area. There 
should also be clear delineation of public communal areas and private space; 
II. Site design takes account of the needs of residents, and provides an appropriate pitch/plot 
layout that ensures security and safety of residents, and allows ease of movement, whether 
walking, cycling or driving; 
III. There is safe access for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles, including for turning and parking, 
vehicles, towing caravans, emergency vehicles and servicing requirements, including waste 
collection; 
IV. All necessary utilities can be provided on the site including mains water, electricity supply, 
drainage, sanitation and there is provision for the screened storage and collection of refuse, 
including recyclable materials; 
V. The site is not located on contaminated land, unless the land is capable of adequate 
amelioration prior to occupation; 
VI. The proposal would avoid any unacceptable adverse or detrimental impact on the health 
and living conditions of the residents of the site or on neighbouring uses, including as a 
result of excessive noise, dust, fumes, lighting, traffic generation or activity; 
VII. Built development, including amenity buildings, is of an appropriate scale which relates 
reasonably to the size of the pitch, and is of an appropriate design for the location; 
VIII. Pitches/plots should be an appropriate scale for the size and number of caravans and trailers 
to be accommodated, without over-crowding or unnecessary sprawl and at an appropriate 
density; 
IX. Either adequate play space or gardens should be provided. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Gypsy and Traveller Accomodation Assessment (2017) 
84 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 18 Providing Homes for All 
Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (all iterations) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO5 - Housing; 
SO7 - Health and Wellbeing; 
SO8- Design; 
SO9- Design. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The number of new traveller pitches allocated 
The number of new plots for travelling showpeople 
Number of temporary permissions for traveller pitches and plots for travelling showpeople. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 85 
Health and Wellbeing 19 
19 Health and Wellbeing 
19.1 Health is  influenced by a wide range of social, economic, and environmental determinants 
inherently linked to quality of life. These include earning a living wage and access to employment as 
well as community and healthcare facilities, appropriate and good quality housing, and access to 
open spaces. 
19.2 The wider  links between health, education, community and planning are highlighted by the 
National Planning Policy Framework which acknowledges the role that the planning system can play 
in facilitating social interaction and creating healthy, inclusive communities. It emphasises the 
importance of working with public health partners to understand and take account of the health status 
and needs of the local population, including expected future changes, and barriers to improving health 
and wellbeing. 
19.3 Efforts to  improve the wider determinants of health and wellbeing through Our Local Plan will 
be maximised by the application of those policies which seek to ensure that new development takes 
account of: 
Access to services and facilities; 
Enables walking and cycling; 
Provides access to formal and informal community meeting spaces; 
Sports facilities; 
Reduces the fear of crime; 
Supports the development of education and health facilities; and 
Seeks to protect health through policies that ensure only appropriate developments are granted 
in close proximity to populated areas - such as policies considering levels of pollution and 
exposure to hazardous substances. 
19.4 The Health  and Social Care Act 2012, and changes to the planning system through the 
Localism Act 2011 and the National Planning Policy Framework 2012, have resulted in local 
government being required to give greater consideration to local health and wellbeing in formulating 
policies and making planning decisions. Our policy seeks to ensure that development enhances the 
wider determinants of health and wellbeing by ensuring that public health partners are consulted on 
development proposals. 
19.5 Where proposals  for development are likely to have a significant impact on the health and 
wellbeing of the local population or particular groups within it, a Health Impact Assessment will be 
required. A Health Impact Assessment should measure the potential health impacts of a development 
proposal on the wider population. It is a tool to appraise both positive (e.g. physical, social and mental 
wellbeing benefits), and negative (e.g. generation of pollution) impacts on different subgroups of the 
population that might result from the proposal’s implementation. Health Impact Assessments will add 
value and assist decision making in the planning process by maximising the benefits and opportunities 
86 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 19 Health and Wellbeing 
from a development to contribute towards creating healthy communities. Health Impact Assessments 
allow any necessary mitigation measures to be identified and can help to assess the potentially 
cumulatively significant effect a proposal could have on health infrastructure and/or the demand for 
healthcare services. The potential need for an Assessment in relation to a planning application will 
be raised with applicants through the pre-application process. 
19.6 Whilst our  policy for health and well-being goes beyond the remit and responsibility of GP 
surgeries, the Clinical Commissioning Group and NHS England, the role they play in achieving the 
intentions of the policy, is essential. The Council already an established working relationship with the 
Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) and NHS England and this will continue. In addition the Council's 
Health and Well-Being Board, which include a number of health-related bodies, providers and 
organisers, will provide an effective mechanism where all related matters can be discussed, issues 
identified and actions determined, where possible. 
TLP17: Health and Wellbeing 
The Council will support programmes and strategies which aim to reduce health inequalities and 
promote healthier lifestyles, and will: 
I. Carry out Health Impact Assessments, which may be incorporated into sustainability 
appraisals, on all relevant planning policy documents. In the case of Neighbourhood Plans, 
this can be considered on a case-by-case, basis. 
II. Require Health Impact Assessments of all residential and mixed-use sites of 50 homes or 
more, employment sites of five hectares (gross) or more, retail developments over 500 
square metres (Gross Internal Area), or any other sites as requested by the local planning 
authority. 
III. Require development to be designed to promote healthy, safe and active living for all age 
groups, including healthy living options for older people, active space for children and adults 
and encourage physically active lifestyles through the provision of sustainable modes of 
transport (e.g. walking and cycling routes). 
IV. Support and deliver Green Infrastructure initiatives in accordance with the policies set out 
in Section 26: Green Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment. 
V. Safeguard existing and encourage the provision role of allotments, garden plots within 
developments, small scale agriculture and farmers markets in providing access to healthy, 
affordable locally-produced food options. 
VI. Work jointly with health providers to help deliver and protect a network of health, education 
and recreation facilities where this will meet an existing deficiency, or support regeneration 
or new development. 
VII. Ensure that health and recreation and education facilities are within a reasonable distance 
for residents. Where they cannot be immediately provided within a settlement, they should 
be accessible by sustainable modes of transport i.e. cycle, bus, train etc. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 87 Health and Wellbeing 19 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge Wellbeing Space Strategy (2015) 
Surrey Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2018) 
Tandridge Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Typologies and Standards (2017) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
88 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 
20 Place-Making 
20 Place-Making 
20.1 Our quality  of living is affected to a great extent by our surroundings and how our place can 
influence levels of crime, health, inclusion, community cohesion and well-being. Planning Practice 
Guidance (PPG) sets out that good quality design is integral to sustainable development, and that 
plan-makers should always seek to secure high quality design. Development should add to what is 
locally distinctive or help to create a new sense of place where this is needed. Our Local Plan seeks 
to ensure development creates attractive places, enhancing heritage assets, townscape characteristics 
and local distinctiveness. 
20.2 We are committed to achieving high quality design in all new development and where 
appropriate, will encourage the involvement of design panels and where the opportunity arises, 
participate in planning and architectural competitions. This will be particularly relevant to major 
applications and our Garden Community at South Godstone. 
20.3 Many parts  of the built-up areas have a distinctive character that derives from the wooded 
hillsides that still exist. These wooded hillsides can be found in Caterham Valley, Whyteleafe, 
Warlingham, Oxted - extending along the slopes of the greensand ridge into Limpsfield and Hurst 
Green and a significant part of the built-up area of Woldingham. The Council will protect the distinctive 
and special character of wooded hillsides by ensuring new development respects this character and 
that tree cover is maintained. 
20.4 Many of the  built-up areas and villages have particularly distinctive characteristics that derive 
from the size of buildings, size of plot, distance from the road, boundary treatments, design features, 
materials and tree and shrub planting. The Council will ensure that new development reflects this 
local distinctiveness. 
TLP18: Place-Making and Design 
The Council will require that new development is of a high standard of design that must reflect 
and respect the character, setting and local context, including those features that contribute to 
local distinctiveness. 
All new development across all settlements and within the countryside, irrespective of use is 
required to: 
I. Be of the highest design quality and contribute positively to the area’s character and identity, 
and 
II. Respect the  context within which it will sit and address the opportunities to enhance the 
character and quality of the area and local distinctiveness, and 
III. Have particular  regard to heritage assets and successfully integrate with the historic 
character, and 
IV. Provide accessibility  and permeability for all by creating safe and welcoming places that 
connect with each other, and 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 89 Place-Making20 
V. Provide a sense of place to include attractive streets, squares and other public spaces with 
a defined sense of enclosure, multi-functional open spaces and green infrastructure, and 
VI. Incorporate measures  to promote community safety ensuring that private and public amenity 
spaces are clearly defined and are designed to be inclusive, useable usable, safe  and 
enjoyable, and 
VII. Promote environmental  resilience through sustainable design and have regard to energy 
use and resistance to changing climates including through the orientation and layout of 
properties, and 
VIII. Integrate functional  needs such as refuse / recycling storage and collection points, car and 
cycle parking. 
Development proposals  will be required to adhere to the principles of good design as set out in 
national policy and locally recognised design guides, and give particular attention to all of the 
following considerations: 
IX. The relationship  of the development with the topography of the site, important trees or 
groups of trees and other important features that need to be retained. Wooded hillsides, as 
depicted on the policies map, will be protected by ensuring that new development does 
not adversely affect the character of the surrounding areas and that there is no overall loss 
of tree cover. 
X. The quality  of the development in terms of scale, density, massing, height, materials and 
layout, including the provision of private space where appropriate. 
XI. The quality  of the public spaces created by new buildings in terms of public safety, hard 
and soft landscaping, and how buildings interact with public space. 
XII. The development  does not significantly harm the amenities of the occupiers of existing 
development by reason by overlooking, overshadowing, visual intrusion, noise, traffic or 
any adverse impact. 
XIII. Developers will  be required to implement or contribute towards measures to mitigate adverse 
impacts. 
The Council  will be considering the role of design codes and panels in future and this should be 
discussed at the earliest opportunity in the application process. Pre-application discussions 
should address any early design (and other) factors of the scheme which will be essential to 
successful development. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Planning Practice Guidance (2014) 
90 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 20 Place-Making 
National Planning Practice Guidance (2012) 
Urban Capacity Study (2017) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Studies (2016, 2017 and 2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Well-being; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO9 - Design; 
SO10 - Design; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO14 - Historic Environment; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Number of anti-social behaviour incidents 
Local emissions from commercial and domestic resources 
Average energy consumption/carbon emissions per household 
Number of permissions proposing a loss of statutory and local listed buildings 
Permissions on Conservation Areas and listed buildings 
Value of financial and CIL contributions secured and collected 
Spending of financial contributions 
Number of applications including provision of cycle spaces 
Number of electrical charging points 
Number of approved planning applications following a pre-application submission 
Monitored through assessments by Surrey Air Alliance and Local Transport Plan. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 91 Best Use of Land and Densities 21 
21 Best Use of Land and Densities 
21.1 Key factors  which ensure the best use of land for development include: 
Prioritising brownfield and previously useddeveloped land  (PDL), such as redundant buildings 
Increasing densities where possible and appropriate, and 
Ensuring any site selected for development is the best alternative and once delivered will be 
of benefit to the wider community. 
21.2 In arriving  at the proposals for Our Local Plan, much work was carried out to understand the 
capacity our existing built areas had to absorb further development and enable the Council to defend 
against Green Belt release. The Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) details this further and 
highlights the main evidence bases that have been relevant to this matter. 
21.3 During the  evidence-gathering process it became apparent that the opportunities to primarily 
rely on existing built areas to deliver development were limited. This is primarily because in past years 
development has always been concentrated to the same areas to the point where capacity is reaching 
exhaustion. As a result, it has been necessary to release some areas of land from the Green Belt to 
development. 
21.4 Further, and  as demonstrated in the Council's Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment (HELAA), Urban Capacity Study (UCS) and Brownfield Register, opportunities for the 
redevelopment of brownfield sites is limited. Over time, the number of non-Green Belt brownfield and 
previously-developed sites, such as old hospitals, military barracks and other disused sites, have 
depleted and already been used. 
21.5 While there  are some brownfield sites, also known as previously developed land, within our 
Green Belt, many of them are existing employment sites and located away from our sustainable 
settlements. The Council do not agree that viable employment land should be lost for new homes, 
nor do we agree that supporting 'scattergun' development within our Green Belt is the best use of 
land, nor is it sustainable. 
21.6 As such,  whilst the NPPF at paragraph 17 identifies the reuse of previously developed, or 
brownfield land as a core principle, achieving this within Tandridge District is not a reasonable option. 
That is not to say that brownfield opportunities such as town centre regeneration will not be a key 
focus, but it is in the public interest to have access to infrastructure and good design and this cannot 
be achieved by brownfield development alone. Instead, the Council want to support high-quality 
designed developments that benefit our communities and improve the infrastructure while having the 
least impact upon our landscape as is practicably possible. 
21.7 Where evidence  has supported it, brownfield sites are accounted for and allocated within this 
Plan. While an argument may be made that brownfield sites could become available over the course 
of the Plan period, we cannot rely on this in the absence of evidence or certainty. As such, where 
this does take place, they will still contribute to meeting annual housing supply targets and be captured 
through the Authority's Monitoring Report. 
92 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 21 Best Use of Land and Densities 
21.8 In preparing the Plan, much discussion and consideration has taken place around the potential 
to make the best use of land by increasing densities within our built areas. The Local Plan: Issues 
and Approaches (Regulation 18) (2015) consultation also considered this approach by applying a 
blanket increase of 70 dwellings per hectare (dph) across main settlements. This was not found to 
be a sustainable option for the very reasons detailed throughout this Plan: there is insufficient space 
to accommodate growth in a positive way. 
21.9 The densities  of the built form in our District vary massively. Settlements such as Woldingham 
and Dormans Park have no more than an average of four dwellings per hectare, characterised by 
detached properties on large plots. Places like central Caterham have over 150 dwellings per hectare 
where there are clusters of flatted development. In a predominantly rural district like Tandridge, and 
indeed much of Surrey, lower density development is synonymous with the long-standing character 
of settlements. For Tandridge, in many cases even the built form in conservation areas is higher than 
some of the more recent developments in our rural settlements. 
21.10 While minimum  densities are not currently set by Government policy, it is evident that the 
Government is encouraging Councils to be more accepting of increasing densities, particularly in built 
up areas. Density is a key matter identified in the Governments White Paper 2017, Fixing Our  Broken 
Housing Market, as a way to make the best use of land and deliver more homes. That said, the 
prospect of applying a blanket approach, or assuming everywhere has the capacity to build at higher 
densities, should be treated with caution and not at the cost of a forever-changed settlement character 
and identity. 
21.11 Due to the concern the Council have surrounding the increasing view of the Government to 
arbitrarily increase densities just for the sake of increasing housing supply, and to understand the 
extent to which increasing densities could benefit our dDistrict, an  Urban Capacity Study (2017) was 
carried out. The study looked at the existing built form of our urban, semi-rural and rural settlements 
(tiers 1-3) and determined character areas based upon current densities whilst also considering 
whether there is any opportunity to optimise those densities through intensification. In arriving at its 
findings the study had regard to the amount of land that would be needed not just for the provision 
of homes, but also the infrastructure that would be needed alongside the development such as gardens 
and parking spaces. 
21.12 Where appropriate,  the findings of the Urban Capacity Study have been fed into the Council's 
understanding of potential site yields. In order to ensure the best use of land, the Council support 
development designed and delivered at optimised densities where appropriate and as far as is 
practicably possible, but only where it can be properly accompanied by proportionate infrastructure 
to offset the impact of any development, as well as having regard to the matters set out in paragraph 
21.13. 
21.13 The density  of a new development will depend on a number of factors, including the location 
of the site, access point/s, the local road network, amenity space and characteristics of the surrounding 
area. When determining layouts applicants need to ensure there is sufficient space for appropriate 
garden sizes, car parking in line with the parking standards applied by the Council, the Surrey Local 
Transport Plan, where relevant, and any required landscaping, open space and drainage. The Council 
would expect justification of development substantially below the current level prevailing in the area. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 93 Best Use of Land and Densities 21 
TLP19: Housing Densities and the Best Use of Land 
All developments must make the most efficient use of land to ensure a sufficient supply of homes, 
for the benefit of the wider community. Proposals must have regard to the Council's Urban 
Capacity Study (2017) and any subsequent update, as well as any locally supported Conservation 
Area and/or character appraisals, including those which inform Neighbourhood Plans. 
The Council  will support proposals which demonstrate that the most efficient use of land has 
been made subject to all other policies and requirements of the Development Plan. 
Applications for  residential development should accord with following criteria: 
I. Where appropriate,  utilise previously developed and brownfield land; 
II. Create permanent  and defensible boundaries for the Green Belt, where they apply; 
III. Ensure the  character of the site and its immediate surroundings, as well as the wider locality 
and landscape, are not negatively impacted; 
IV. Ensure adequate  access; 
V. Provide appropriate  densities that make the most efficient use of the land, taking into account 
other policies within the Development Plan; 
VI. Ensure suf ficient landscaping is provided; 
VII. Provide on-site  amenity space in accordance with the most up to date open space standards; 
and 
VIII. An appropriate  standard of residential accommodation and private amenity space for the 
occupants. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Urban Capacity Study (2017) 
Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (all iterations) 
Tandridge District Brownfield Register 
Authority's Monitoring Report 
Settlement Hierarchy (2015) 
Settlement Hierarchy: Addendum (2018) 
Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) 
Trees and Soft Landscaping Supplementary Planning Document (2017) 
94 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 21 Best Use of Land and Densities 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO9 - Design; 
SO11 - Best Use of Land; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
The net number of permitted and completed homes 
Permissions granted for new housing on brownfield/previously- developed land 
Net number of permissions granted for new housing on Green Belt land 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Number of approved planning applications following a pre-application submission 
Average density per annum within each of our settlements and parishes. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 95 Housing22 
22 Housing 
Housing Allocations 
22.1 The following  policies identify and allocate specific sites suitable for residential development 
and that meet the Spatial Strategy requirements and support its implementation. The acceptability 
of any proposal will be judged at the planning application stage and against the site-specific 
requirements of these sites and the wider development plan as well as all other material considerations. 
22.2 The site allocations have been determined upon the consideration of numerous evidence 
bases including the Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment. Factors such as landscape 
impact, ecology, Green Belt impact, flooding and infrastructure were all material considerations to 
the sites which have been selected. 
22.3 In preparing  the Local Plan, some alterations to the Green Belt boundaries have taken place 
in order to release land for housing development. These alterations have only taken place where 
exceptional circumstances have been demonstrated and in accordance with the National Planning 
Policy Framework (2012). The Council's  Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Insetting and Exceptional 
Circumstances (2018)  report and  its appendix, set out the assessments. Please note that site 
assessments have been carried out using Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment 
(HELAA) references. All site allocations below include the relevant HELAA references for consistency 
and clarity. 
Summary T able of Housing Allocations 
Number of 
Units*Parish Site Address Policy Ref 
160 BurstowLand at Plough Road and Redehall Road, 
SmallfieldHSG01 
15 Burstow Chapel Road, Smallfield HSG02 
120 Burstow Land North of Plough Road, Smallfield HSG03 
10 BurstowWoodlands Garage, Chapel Road, 
SmallfieldHSG04 
14 Caterham on the Hill Sandiford House, 40 Stanstead Road, 
CaterhamHSG05 
75 Caterham on the Hill Land off Salmons Lane West, Caterham HSG06 
15 Caterham on the Hill Coulsdon Lodge, Coulsdon Road, 
CaterhamHSG07 
60Caterham on the Hill 
/ Whyteleafe 156 - 180 Whyteleafe Road, Caterham HSG08 
6 Caterham Valley Land at Fern Towers, Harestone Hill HSG09 
96 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Number of 
Units*Parish Site Address Policy Ref 
18 GodstoneWilliams Way Builders Merchant, 38-42 
High Street, Godstone HSG10 
150 Godstone Land to the West of Godstone HSG11 
60 LingfieldLand at The Old Cottage, Station Road, 
LingfieldHSG12 
60 Oxted Land West of Red Lane, Hurst Green HSG13 
50 Oxted Warren Lane Depot, Hurst Green HSG14 
190 Warlingham Land West of Limpsfield Road, 
Warlingham HSG15 
50 Warlingham Land at Green Hill Lane and Alexandra 
Avenue, Warlingham HSG16 
50 Warlingham Land at Farleigh Road, Warlingham HSG17 
110 Warlingham Former Shelton Sports Ground, 
Warlingham HSG18 
6 Whyteleafe Edgeworth Close, Whyteleafe HSG19 
82 Multiple North Tandridge: One Public Estate HSG20 
*Some figures have been rounded and may appear slightly different to the indicative housing trajectory 
at Appendix 1 and the Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018). 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 97 Housing22 
98 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG01: Land at Plough Road and Redehall Road, Smallfield 
(C3) 160 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 5.0ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is an area on the southern edge of Smallfield, south of Plough Road. It is predominantly 
green fields and a small number of existing residential properties are included within the 
boundary. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA SMA 004, SMA 008 and SMA 040 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material considerations, 
complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating to affordable 
housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Ecology/Landscape I. Proposals will recognise the importance of the hedgerows on this site and allow for them 
in design and layout. Where retention is not possible compensatory landscape measures 
will be required 
II. Where proposals include the demolition of properties within the site boundary, bat and 
bird surveys would be required 
New Defensible Boundaries 
III. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Flooding/water-related matters 
IV. Proposals should respond to the risk of fluvial flooding (Flood Zone 2) which is adjacent 
to the western boundary of the site, surface water flooding which is primarily to the north 
and west of the site, but which also includes isolated areas in the south-east corner, as 
well as the risk of surface water, groundwater and fluvial flooding close to the site. 
Infrastructure V. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Explore opportunities for junction improvements at Plough Road/Redehall Road/Chapel 
Road/Wheelers Lane 
Provision of attenuation ponds. 
Plough Field Park Youth Provision 
On site provision of amenity green space in accordance with the most up to date open 
space assessment 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 99 Housing22 
Applicants will need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss matters pertaining to Waste Water Treatment Works and resolve these, 
where necessary. 
100 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG02: Chapel Road, Smallfield 
(C3) 15 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.5ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This a brownfield site within the existing built-up area of Smallfield, historically used for a 
scaffolding yard. It contains a number of storage sheds as well as an office building believed 
to be vacant. The site is surrounded by residential development and the current access is on 
Chapel Road. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA SMA 015 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 101 Housing22 
Flooding/water-related matters 
I. Proposals should  respond to the risk of fluvial flooding, being within Flood Zones 2 and 
3, and partially within the functional floodplain (Flood Zone 3b) and the potential increase 
in extent as a result of climate change. Furthermore, proposals should respond to the 
risk of surface water ponding, primarily within the south-west corner, across a wider area 
in a 1 in 100-year or 1 in 1000-year return period event, and close to the site and the risk 
from groundwater flooding to the western side of the site. 
Infrastructure 
II. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Pedestrian crossing on Redehall Road 
Applicants will  need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss matters pertaining to Waste Water Treatment Works and resolve these, 
where necessary. 
102 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG03: Land North of Plough Road, Smallfield 
(C3) 120 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 9.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is an area of agricultural land immediately to the east of Smallfield. The site is bounded 
by a mixture of hedgerows and has frontage with Meadow View to the west. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA SMA 030 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 103 Housing22 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Landscape I. Design and layout will need to ensure that any visual impact of the development is 
minimised and sympathetically reflects the edge of settlement location. 
Ecology II. An enhanced ecological network including buffers to north and east boundaries would 
be required. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
III. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Flooding/water-related matters 
IV. Proposals should respond to the risk of fluvial flooding (Flood Zone 2) along its southern 
boundary, the risk of surface water flooding along the northern boundary, through the 
centre of the site from the east and potential ponding to the west of the site and close to 
the site. 
V. The redevelopment of this site is required to enable flood mitigation for the wider area. 
Proposals which do not make provision for flood mitigation as a main focus in design and 
layout, will not be supported. 
Infrastructure VI. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Explore opportunities for junction improvements at Plough Road/Redehall Road/Chapel 
Road/Wheelers Lane 
On site provision of attenuation ponds 
Plough Field Park Youth Provision 
104 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Applicants will need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss matters pertaining to Waste Water Treatment Works and resolve these, 
where necessary. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 105 Housing22 
HSG04: Woodlands Garage, Chapel Road, Smallfield 
(C3) 10 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This is a brownfield site within the built-form of Smallfield, with an existing car garage and 
petrol station on the land. Residential development surrounds the site to the north, east and 
south, and there is a woodland TPO to the west of the site. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA SMA 039 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Proposals must accord with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, comply with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing, and design and site specific considerations , as appropriate. 
As a brownfield site within the built-up area, appropriate densities and the best use of land will 
be required. 
106 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Flooding/water-related matters 
I. Proposals should  respond to the risk of fluvial flooding as the site is in an area within 
Flood Zone 3, and partially surrounded by Flood Zone 3b (functional floodplain), as well 
as the potential increase in extent of Flood Zone 3 across the whole of the site as a result 
of climate change. 
II. The site is also at risk of surface water flooding, with potential ponding to its north and 
east sides and surface water flooding close to the site. Furthermore, it is at risk of 
groundwater flooding to both surface and sub-surface assets. 
Applicants will  need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss matters pertaining to Waste Water Treatment Works and resolve these, 
where necessary. 
Infrastructure 
III. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Pedestrian Crossing on Redehall Road 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 107 Housing22 
HSG05: Sandiford House, 40 Stanstead Road, Caterham 
(C3) 14 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This site is located along the south-western edge of the settlement, within the urban built-up 
area of Caterham, and currently contains a block of residential flats, hard-surfaced car park 
and open garden space. The site has direct access onto Stanstead Road along its south-eastern 
boundary. The site is bounded to the north and west by open fields and a recreation ground, 
and an area of residential dwellings and gardens to the south and east. 
Other evidence-based references: Urban Capacity Study UCS 002 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Proposals must accord with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, comply with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing, and design and site specific considerations , as appropriate. 
As a site within the central urban built-up area, appropriate densities and the best use of land 
will be required. 
108 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Infrastructure 
I. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Footway improvements - Stanstead Road/Park Avenue 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 109 Housing22 
110 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG06: Land off Salmons Lane West, Caterham 
(C3) 75 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 4.4ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is located on the edge of Kenley Airfield and within the Kenley Aerodrome Conservation 
Area, and close to the border with the London Borough of Croydon. The site forms part of a 
wider area that was once a Battle of Britain Airfield and It comprises the land surrounding the 
Grade II listed former NAAFI building. To the west, on the other side of the access road, is a 
flat open area with a number of semi mature trees. The northern part of the site includes 
redundant workshops, that are not listed, an area of hard-standing and there are some deposits 
of building materials. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA CAT 040 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 22 Housing 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Conservation I. Development will conserve and enhance the conservation area and the setting of nearby 
heritage assets, including the listed building, Scheduled Monument and be considered 
in accordance with the Kenley Aerodrome Conservation Area Proposals Statement, or 
any subsequent update. 
II. In keeping with the heritage value of the site and the principles of the Conservation Area, 
any scheme should focus development primarily to the northern area of the site and a 
sympathetic design, scale and layout must be demonstrated in any application. 
III. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology/
Landscaping 
IV. Retention and mMitigation measures relating to protected significant trees will be required 
and they should be utilised as a feature of the development , where possible and 
appropriate . Density and design should be cognisant of the quality woodland and mature 
parkland tree corridors. 
V. The visual connection between the NAAFI listed building/school and the Kenley Airfield 
to the north should remain legible and kept intact. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent. 
Flooding/water-related Mmatters 
VII. Proposals should respond to the medium risk of surface water flooding and the site's 
location within a Groundwater Source Protection Zone 2 and 3, and 'Major Aquifer High' 
Groundwater Vulnerability Zone. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 111 Housing22 
Infrastructure 
VIII. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Multi-use sports hall and multi-use games area 
Pedestrian Ccrossing at  Burntwood Lane/Milner Close 
Pedestrian access improvements across Buxton Lane 
Pedestrian crossing at Salmons Lane/Whyteleafe Road 
Cycle route from Salmons Lane to Whyteleafe Station 
112 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG07: Coulsdon Lodge, Coulsdon Road, Caterham 
(C3) 15 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.4ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This is a previously-developed site in the built-up area of Caterham, surrounded by housing 
to all directions but separated from the main roads by a thick band of trees. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA CAT 081 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Ecology/Landscaping 
I. Mitigation measures relating to protected trees will be required and should be a feature 
of the development 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 113 Housing22 
Infrastructure 
II. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Chaldon Road/High Street/Mini Roundabout/Junction Upgrade 
114 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG08: 156-180 Whyteleafe Road, Caterham 
(C3) 60 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 2.6ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is within the urban built-up area of Caterham with properties and gardens sited on 
the west and north of the site and woodland and schools lying to the east and south, 
respectively. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA CAT 007 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Ecology 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 115 Housing22 
I. Mitigation measures will be required in relation to Ancient Woodland to the east and other 
mature trees, woodland and protected trees 
Flooding /water-related Mmatters 
II. Proposals should respond to the risk of surface water flooding from the surface water 
flow path which may run from south-west to north-east in a 1 in 1000 year event, as well 
as surface water flooding close to the site., Tthe risk to sub-surface assets from 
groundwater flooding and the site's location within a groundwater source protection zone 
2 and 3 should also be addressed. (Zone 2 – Outer Protection Zone). 
New Defensible Boundaries 
III. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Infrastructure 
IV. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Multi-use sports hall and multi-use games area 
Pedestrian crossing at Burntwood Lane/Milner Close 
Pedestrian access improvements across Buxton Lane 
Pedestrian crossing at Salmons Lane/Whyteleafe Road 
Cycle route from Salmons Lane to Whyteleafe Station 
116 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG09: Land at Fern Towers, Harestone Hill 
(C3) 6 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is an area of parking and garaging in the urban built-up area of Caterham. The site 
is surrounded by different types of residential properties, although separated from such 
properties by a mixture of fencing and trees. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA CAT 044 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Proposals must accord with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, comply with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing, and design and site specific considerations , as appropriate. 
As a brownfield site within the central urban built-up area, appropriate densities and the best 
use of land will be required. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 117 Housing22 
118 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG10: William Way Builders Merchant, 38-42 High Street, Godstone 
(C3) 18 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.23ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site was, until recently, an operational builder's yard with operations related to the storage 
and selling of building materials. It is located within the built-up area of Godstone, and 
surrounded by both residential development and a larger builder's yard and outlet. Access is 
currently provided directly onto the A25. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA GOD 021 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Conservation 
I. The site is located in an Area of High Archaeological Potential and proposals would need 
to be sympathetic to the rich heritage of the area, Godstone Conservation Area and a 
range of Grade II listed buildings in the vicinity. 
II. All development  proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology/ Contamination 
III. As a former builder's yard and landfill site before that, proposals will ensure any risk of 
contaminated land is assessed and evidence submitted as part of an application. Where 
contaminated land is identified, remediation will be necessary prior to the commencement 
of development 
Flooding/water-related  matters 
IV. Proposals should  respond to the risk of groundwater flooding to surface and sub-surface 
assets, the site's position within an area designated as a historic landfill and its location 
within a groundwater source protection zone (Zone 3 – Total Catchment). 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 119 Housing22 
120 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG11: Land to the West of Godstone 
(C3) 150 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 10.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
A greenfield site located immediately west of the main built form of Godstone and to the north 
of Godstone Reservoir. The northern area of the site is located within the Surrey Hills Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, and the M25 and Junction 6 are also to the north. Associated 
access for North Park Farm Quarry, also forms part of the site area. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA GOD 010 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Ecology/Landscape I. Existing woodland should be retained as far as practicably possible and be subject to an 
ongoing landscape management regime. 
II. Development would need to provide buffers for and maintain connectivity to adjoining 
Ancient Woodland in Godstone Wood. There are opportunities for development to 
contribute to ecological networking through extension of the north-south corridor towards 
the East Reservoir Nature Reserve 
III. Proposals should ensure no major development will be located within the northern area 
of the site affected by the Surrey Hills AONB. It could be used for community facilities 
and access. The remainder of the site should be designed in recognition of its setting 
adjacent to the AONB. 
Flooding/water-related Mmatters 
IV. Proposals should respond to the medium risk of surface water flooding and its location 
within a Groundwater Source Protection Zone 3 and 'Major Aquifer High' Groundwater 
Vulnerability Zone 
Public Rights of Way 
V. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Infrastructure VII. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Contribution towards expansion of and relocation of Pondtail GP Surgery to South 
Godstone; without the delivery of this infrastructure, the site cannot be brought forward 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 121 Housing22 
Contribution towards Junction 6 capacity improvements 
Off-road cycle route along A25 
Off-road cycle route along A22. 
122 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG12: Land at The Old Cottage, Station Road, Lingfield 
(C3) 60 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 6.3ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site, also known as Star Fields, is an agricultural field, adjacent to the south east boundary 
of Lingfield. The site has residential properties to the south and west, and a graveyard to the 
north. The site is predominantly within a Conservation Area, with several listed buildings 
(including Grade I Pollard House/Cottage) located off-site to the west beyond the intervening 
Star Public House. Grade II* listed structures also sit to the east. Sympathetic consideration 
of the historical setting will be necessary in any layout as well as in the choice of materials. and 
a Grade II* listed building sits to the east. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA LIN 030 and Urban Capacity Study UCS 11 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 123 Housing22 
In addition to according with all relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Conservation I. Development must conserve and enhance the Conservation Area and be sympathetic 
to the setting of both the wider historic area and nearby listed buildings. The impact on 
the conservation area and nearby listed buildings will be compensated for through quality 
and sensitive design and layout. 
II. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology III. Opportunities for green infrastructure enhancements and habitat protection will be 
maximised by proposals. Areas affected by s41 habitats sensitively avoided in site layout 
and design. 
Landscape IV. To limit the impact to the wider landscape, development should be focused toward the 
areas adjacent to existing built form and the north of the site 
Public Rights of Way 
V. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison 
with Surrey County Council and TLP31. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
124 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Flooding/water-related matters 
VII. Proposals should  respond to the risk of fluvial flooding (Flood Zone 2) in the south-east 
corner of the site, as well as ponding in the south-east corner from surface water flooding, 
the site's location close to an area at risk of reservoir flooding (Bough Beech) and the 
potential extension of flood zones over a larger area as a result of climate change. 
Infrastructure 
VIII. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Mobility impaired persons bridge at Lingfield Station 
Opportunities to improve Lingfield station car park 
Rebuilding of Lingfield Surgery 
On-site provision of open space 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 125 Housing22 
126 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG13: Land West of Red Lane, Hurst Green 
(C3) 60 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 2.8ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is comprised of fields and a limited number of residential properties. It is located south 
east of Hurst Green and adjacent to the existing built-up area. The railway line borders the 
western edge of the site with the main built form to the north. The site is contained by Red 
Lane on the eastern side and woodland to the south. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA OXT 021, OXT 048 and OXT 063 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Ecology I. Woodland and hedgerow buffer zones will be a requirement of the development which 
should maximise on the opportunity for wildlife corridors and screening for the site 
New Defensible Boundaries 
II. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent. 
Public Rights of Way 
III. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
Infrastructure IV. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Increased capacity to Hurst Green Station car parking 
Footpath extension at Mill Lane 
Pedestrian crossing on Pollards Oak Road 
Multi-use sports hall 
Playground improvements at Warren Lane Park and Mill Lane recreation ground 
Allotment provision 
Youth play space 
Oxted Library refurbishment 
Cycle route from Holland to Hurst Green Station 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 127 Housing22 
Applicants will need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss odour issues and resolve these, where necessary. 
Strategic Opportunity 
It is recognised there may be an opportunity to rationalise the current infant and junior school 
sites with this site to provide an all-through primary school. However, any redevelopment of 
this nature would need to be explored and agreed with the Surrey Education authority. Until 
such support is justified and agreed, the site will be considered for housing development. 
128 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG14: Warren Lane Depot, Hurst Green 
(C3) 50 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 1.2ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is a Waste and Recycling Depot on the south-western edge of Hurst Green. It contains 
a number of buildings, as well as storage and parking areas related to its depot use which will 
need to be relocated. The site lies adjacent and opposite properties on Mill Lane and Warren 
Lane. It is screened by trees and shrubbery from open countryside to the north-west. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA OXT 067 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 129 Housing22 
Ecology/ Contamination 
I. As a waste and recycling depot, proposals will ensure any risk of contaminated land is 
assessed and evidence submitted as part of an application. Where contaminated land is 
identified, remediation will be necessary prior to the commencement of development 
New Defensible Boundaries 
II. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Infrastructure 
III. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Improvements to Mill Lane/Hurst Green Lane 
Increased capacity to Hurst Green Station car parking 
Footpath extension at Mill Lane 
Pedestrian crossing on Pollards Oak Road 
Multi-use sports hall 
Playground improvements at Warren Lane Park and Mill Lane recreation ground 
Allotment provision 
Youth play space 
Oxted Library refurbishment 
Cycle route from Holland to Hurst Green Station 
Applicants will need to have early engagement with the Environment Agency and Water 
companies to discuss odour issues and resolve these, where necessary. 
130 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG15: Land West of Limpsfield Road, Warlingham 
(C3) 190 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 10.9ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
HSG15 comprises two sites. The northern parcel (Part A), consists of a recreation ground and 
a small paddock. The southern parcel (Part B), consists of an under-utilised recreation ground, 
sports pavillion and scrub land. The site covers a variety of land uses including an underutilised 
recreation ground and built facilities, poor quality paddock land and car parking. The site is 
surrounded by residential development on all sides excluding the western edge. Woodland 
contributes to screening on the western side. 
Other evidence-based references: WAR 005 and WAR 036 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 131 Housing22 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Conservation I. Development will conserve and enhance the setting of the Grade II* listed All Saints 
Church to the east of the site 
II. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Landscape III. Sensitive landscaping reflective of the site’s contribution to the character of Warlingham 
and its Green Belt location will need to be factored into any application for the benefit of 
the local community and local character, neighbouring properties and the open fields 
beyond. (This to include a green strip to the frontage of the site bordering Limpsfield Road 
which will, inter alia, provide local amenity space) 
Ecology IV. Proposals will ensure that woodland edges to the site are retained and protected with 
appropriate unlit habitat buffer 
Public Rights of Way 
V. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison 
with Surrey County Council and TLP31. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent. 
Open Space 
VII. Redevelopment of this site would result in a loss of playing pitch provision. Permission 
will only be granted where replacement provision is provided to an equal or better 
standard quantity and quality (or unless all shortfalls are alleviated) and in a suitable 
location in accordance with the requirements and standards of the most up-to-date Open 
Space Assessment and Playing Pitch Strategy either locally or as part of the South 
Godstone Garden Community. 
132 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
VIII. Loss of space and subsequent re-provision, including location, will need to be determined 
in liaison with any users, Sport England and any relevant National Governing Bodies 
IX. Replacement space will need to be provided ahead of development 
Infrastructure 
X. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Relocation and expansion of Warlingham Village Primary School to parcel 15B, to provide 
an on-site 32FE primary school 
Re-provision of high quality and suitably located playing pitches; where possible these 
should be provided in the Warlingham area and/or in accordance with the requirements 
of the most up to date Open Space Assessment and Playing Pitch Strategy 
Traffic calming at Hillbury Road 
Pedestrian Ccrossing between Warlingham Green and Trenham Drive 
Kerb improvements and informal crossing point at Tithepit Shaw Lane 
Expansion to doctors surgery in Warlingham 
On site amenity green space in accordance with the most up to date open space 
assessment. 
Cycle route from Warlingham Green to Upper Warlingham Station 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 133 Housing22 
134 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG16: Land at Green Hill Lane and Alexandra Avenue, Warlingham 
(C2 Extra Care and 
C3) 50 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 3.1ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site contains a horse paddock, a hay storage facility and partially cleared woodland. It 
lies on the edge of the urban built-up area of Warlingham and is contained on three sides by 
Alexandra Avenue, Chelsham Road and Green Hill Lane. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA WAR 011 and WAR 023 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Extra Care Facility 
I. Proposals should provide a mix of market housing and extra care accommodations to 
assist in meeting need local to Warlingham East 
Conservation II. Development will conserve and enhance the setting of the Grade II listed Chelsham Place 
Farm 
III. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology/Landscape IV. Development should incorporate tree and shrubbery belts along boundaries to form soft 
edges to the development. retain boundary woodland and hedgerows using a buffer along 
Green Hill Lane 
Public Rights of Way 
V. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison 
with Surrey County Council and TLP31. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Infrastructure VII. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Congestion alleviation at Sunny Bank 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 135 Housing22 
136 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) HSG17: Land at Farleigh Road, Warlingham 
(C3) 50 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 1.3ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is currently in use as a grazing paddock and riding school, adjacent to the urban built-up 
area of Warlingham. The site borders residential properties and gardens on three sides and 
is separated from the more open fields to the north by a wooded boundary. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA WAR 012 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 22 Housing 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Conservation I. Development will conserve and enhance the setting of the Grade II* listed All Saints 
Church to the north-west 
II. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology/Landscape III. Development would need to mitigate ecological impacts on the Ancient Woodland and 
provide appropriate buffer zones. Design should also account for the TPOs on the site 
Flooding/water-related Mmatters 
IV. Proposals should respond to the risk of surface water flooding running south to north 
through the middle of the site, with potential additional flow to the west during a 1 in 
1000-year event and should respond to surface water flooding close to the site. The 
sites's location within a groundwater source protection zone 2 and 3 (Zone 2 – Outer 
Protection Zone) should also be addressed. 
Public Rights of Way 
V. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison 
with Surrey County Council and TLP31. 
New Defensible Boundaries 
VI. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Infrastructure VII. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Congestion alleviation at Sunny Bank 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 137 Housing22 
Youth Play Space 
Cycle route from Warlingham Green to Upper Warlingham Station 
138 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG18: Former Shelton Sports Ground, Warlingham 
(C3) 110 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 6.3ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
The site is a former privately run sports and recreation facility adjacent to the urban built-up 
area of Warlingham. The site is surrounded by a vegetation beltwoodland, which serves to 
screen it from the surrounding development and fields beyond the northern and western 
boundaries. 
Other evidence-based related references: HELAA WAR 019 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the following site-specific 
matters/requirements are addressed: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 139 Housing22 
Green Belt Amendment 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Due to the undeveloped nature of the land, proposals will be required to provide 40% affordable 
housing. 
Conservation I. Development would need to conserve and enhance the setting of the Grade II* listed 
vicarage to the south-east of the site. 
II. All development proposals must be accompanied by a detailed heritage assessment. 
Ecology III. Development would need to mitigate ecological impacts through appropriate buffer zones 
New Defensible Boundaries 
IV. Design and layout should actively seek to create and preserve, clear and defensible 
boundaries between the edge of the site and the Green Belt to which it is adjacent 
Flooding/water-related matters 
V. Proposals should respond to the medium risk of surface water flooding and the site's 
location within a Groundwater Source Protection Zone 2 and 3, and 'Major Aquifer High' 
Groundwater Vulnerability Zone. 
Public Rights of Way 
VI. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
Open Space 
VII. Redevelopment of this site would result in a loss of playing pitch provision. Permission 
will only be granted where replacement provision is provided to an equal or better standard 
quantity 
and quality (or unless all shortfalls are alleviated) and in a suitable location in 
accordance with the requirements and standards of the most up-to-date Open Space 
Assessment and Playing Pitch Strategy either locally or as part of the South Godstone 
Garden Community. 
140 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
VIII. Loss of space and subsequent re-provision, including location, will need to be determined 
in liaison with any users, Sport England and any relevant National Governing Bodies 
IX. Replacement space  will need to be provided ahead of development 
Infrastructure 
X. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contribution to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Relocation and expansion of Warlingham Village Primary School to provide an 3FE 
primary school 
Traffic calming at Hillbury Road 
Re-provision of high-quality and suitably located playing pitches 
Pedestrian crossing between Warlingham Green and Trenham Drive 
Kerb improvements and informal crossing point at Tithepit Shaw Lane 
Cycle route from Warlingham Green to Upper Warlingham Station 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 141 Housing22 
HSG19: Edgeworth Close, Whyteleafe 
(C3) 6 Use / Estimated Site 
Yield: 0.17ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This is an area of amenity land within the existing urban built-up area of Whyteleafe and lays 
adjacent to flats on Edgeworth Close. The car park for Upper Warlingham Station is to the 
immediate east albeit it is screened off to some extent by a band of trees. 
Other evidence-based references: HELAA WAR 016 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Proposals must accord with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, comply with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing, and design and site specific considerations , as appropriate. 
As a site within the central urban built-up area, appropriate densities and the best use of land 
will be required. 
142 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
Flooding/water-related matters 
I. Proposals should  respond to the risk of groundwater flooding to surface or subsurface 
assets, the risk of surface water flooding close to the site and its location within a 
groundwater source protection zone 2 and 3. (Zone 2 – Outer Protection Zone). 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 143 Housing22 
North Tandridge: One Public Estate Programme (NTOPE) 
22.4 Unlike the  rest of the land allocations for housing set out in this section, the One Public Estate 
programme covers a number of public sector sites owned and managed by the Local Authority, Surrey 
County Council and the NHS. The aim of the programme is to assist public sector landlords to work 
in partnership to make best use of collective assets. This could include facilitating major service 
transformation such as health and social care integration and unlocking land for new homes and 
commercial space. 
22.5 While the  North Tandridge One Public Estate Programme is at an early stage at the time of 
writing Our Local Plan, we want to ensure the intentions for the programme are clear and demonstrate 
our commitment to delivery which will have benefits for our communities. 
22.6 The Programme  will seek to address a number of issues in the north of the District including: 
Demand for all types of housing, particularly affordable housing. 
Challenges presented by an ageing population in respect of health and social care services. 
The need for more efficient recycling centre facilities and for a review of current community 
service provision, including libraries, community centres and other associated activities. 
22.7 The programme  will be underpinned by the Caterham Masterplan and Town Centre Design 
Statement where they apply, and any proposals for the sites related to the One Public Estate will be 
considered in accordance with policy HSG20 below and all other relevant policies. No spatial 
representation in the form of a map of the NTOPE is provided at this time, but will be further informed 
and detailed as the project evolves. 
22.8 The associated  yield of 82 units stems from the Council's current understanding of the assets 
that could be included within the programme, in particular the Douglas Brunton Centre and adjacent 
Community Recycling Centre. It is not the intention of the NTOPE initiative to redevelop all assets 
and facilities included in the programme for housing. Ensuring efficient and accessible community 
facilities is at the heart of the programme and the initiative will seek to make better use of land. 
144 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 22 Housing 
HSG20: North Tandridge: One Public Estate (NTOPE), Caterham 
Use / Estimated Site Yield: (C3 and community uses) 82 
Site Description: 
A strategic allocation which rationalises a number of public sector previously-developed sites 
within the existing built-up areas of Caterham and Warlingham, including sites such as the 
Douglas Brunton Centre and adjacent Community Recycling Centre. 
Scheme Specific Policy Requirements: 
The Council will support proposals which achieve the objectives of the North Tandridge: One 
Public Estate Programme and which provide, enhance and facilitate the delivery of community 
facilities, including: a library, recycling centre, improved health provision, homes and jobs. 
In addition to according with relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations, complying with other relevant policies of Our Local Plan including those relating 
to affordable housing and design, applications will be supported where the relevant requirements 
of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) and infrastructure provision are met: 
Multi-use sports hall and multi-use games area 
Upgrade to Town End Amenity Green Space 
Chaldon Road/High Street/Mini Roundabout/Junction Upgrade 
Pedestrian safety improvements on corner of High Street and Court Road 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (All iterations) 
Urban Capacity Study (2017) 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2018) 
Site Based Ecology Assessments (2016) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Study (2016) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) 
Tandridge Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Typologies and Standards (2017) 
Tandridge District Playing Pitch Strategy (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Regulation 19 Housing Topic Paper (2018) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 145 Housing22 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO9 - Design; 
SO10 - Design; 
SO11 - Best Use of Land; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO13 - Landscape and Natural Environment; 
SO14 - Historic Environment; 
SO15 - Flooding; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Annually monitor as part of the five year housing and land supply within the 
Authority's Monitoring Report (AMR). 
146 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
23 Employment 
23.1 The National  Planning Policy Framework places great emphasis on the role of the economy 
in achieving sustainable development, and states that 'planning should operate to encourage and 
not act as an impediment to sustainable growth. Therefore significant weight should be placed on 
the need to support economic growth through the planning system. To help achieve economic growth, 
local planning authorities should plan proactively to meet the development needs of business and 
support an economy fit for the 21st century' (22). As such, Our Local Plan has been prepared with 
policies to positively enhance our local economy, employment spaces and businesses, and to support 
sustainable growth. 
23.2 As discussed  in the District Portrait at Section 7, despite being well located to transport 
networks and in excellent proximity to the employment areas of Gatwick Airport and Crawley, the 
District faces a number of barriers to growth. This includes a number of environmental constraints, 
including road congestion,  rail disruption, availability of commercial space and a lack of high-value 
employment opportunities. These factors have resulted in our District being the least competitive in 
the County in terms of what we can offer businesses. 
23.3 We know  that to tackle these challenges we need the right investment, support and 
infrastructure. Our Local Plan helps to make this shift from the District's earlier, more reactive, approach 
to employment to taking steps to actively seek out opportunities for the businesses of the District and 
encourage a stronger economy and employment base as far as is practicably possible. 
23.4 To inform  the preparation of Our Local Plan and give better insight into the employment space, 
market trends, and businesses operating in Tandridge, the Economic Needs Assessment (ENA) 
(2015) and Update (2017) were carried out. These evidence-based documents also informed the 
Economic Proposition (2017) - the Council's pro-active strategy setting out how we plan to grow and 
prosper by re-balancing the dDistrict's economy  and attracting inward investment. 
23.5 In relation  to our employment sites, the ENA (2015 and 2017) found that some played a more 
significant role into our economy, both locally and beyond, than others. It identified that of all the sites 
assessed, 11 were considered to provide high quality employment land and premises, and 
recommended that the sites were protected for continued employment use. It recommended proposals 
for redevelopment to alternative uses should be resisted (see Policy SES01 - SES04 and IES01 -
IES07). 
23.6 Our businesses  told us that skills are an issue, and that one in five cannot get the 
skilled-employees they need to grow their business. Through Our Local Plan and in support of the 
Council's Economic Proposition (2017), we are being ambitious in demonstrating our commitment to 
developing a thriving economy with high-value, high-tech businesses by supporting the growth of 
these industries and facilitating the training of local people to enter or remain locally in these 
professions. 
23.7 In actively  supporting our local economy and employment spaces, the Council must be 
pragmatic and recognise that our close connections with major employment locations such as Crawley, 
Gatwick, Croydon and Redhill, are likely to almost always influence the location of employment for 
our residents. Industrial and office property markets rarely correspond to local government 
22 NPPF, Paragraph 19 - 20 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 147 Employment23 
administrative boundaries, and thus Our Local Plan must focus on the task of making Tandridge a 
unique place to work and locate a business, while balancing meeting the employment space and jobs 
sought by companies in a wider economic market area and without adversely affecting neighbouring 
areas. 
23.8 Over the  Plan period, a net requirement of an employment  space requirement of 15.3ha 
employment
 space has been identified. Opportunities for intensification on employment sites, both 
Strategic and Important sites amount to around 21ha and exceeds identified need by around 6ha 
(see Summary Table of Employment Allocations). However, given that the all sites,  barring the 
Strategic Employment Sites, are within the Green Belt and schemes may not all be pursued or 
appropriate for intensification, the Council must remain pragmatic. Schemes may also be dependent 
on an element of sui generis uses, roads and parking which may mean that available space for 
employment uses could be less thant the opportunities  identified. 
23.9 Further, the  Government's extension of Permitted Development Rights, allowing for a change 
of use from business premises to residential use without the need to go through the planning process, 
place an element of uncertainty over current and future supply of employment sites. The Council will 
consider if and where the implementation of Article 4 directions would be of benefit in curtailing 
employment loss and pursue these where possible. As such, Wwe are remaining flexible to our 
employment land supply this and the possibility that loss in one place will increase the need for 
re-provision elsewhere. 
23.10 While an important key element of  the South Godstone Garden Community will include be 
the
 inclusion of employment space, this will and more  than likely be delivered  in the longer term 
and assist in meeting employment needs later and beyond the plan period. As such, the employment 
space identified in allocations SES01 -SES04 and IES01 -IES07 does not include that which will be 
located within the Garden Community and the detailed approach to be taken on employment for the 
Garden Community allocations and  the level of provision has not yet been determined, and will be a 
matter for the Area Action Plan. 
TLP20: Supporting a Prosperous Economy 
The Council will support the seek to deliver sustainable growth of  the local economy , supported 
by providing  a flexible and sustainable supply of employment land and premises to meet the 
varying needs of different economic sectors by through: 
I. Protecting and  enhancing existing viable employment areas and premises in order to meet 
the needs of existing and new businesses; 
II. Encouraging the  improvement and redevelopment of land within existing employment areas 
in order to enable business growth, and improve the attractiveness of these areas; 
III. Identifying at  least 15.3ha (net) of additional employment land for B1, B2 and B8 uses, and 
any associated employment generating Sui Generis uses; 
148 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IV. Facilitating the training and education of local people to gain skills required to enter or 
remain part of the local workforce; and 
V. Supporting and  facilitating proposals for new and improved sites and initiatives which 
contribute to implementing the priorities identified in the the most up-to-date Economic 
Proposition, through ensuring local business support and training opportunities. 
Loss of and non-employment change of use 
Proposals for  development that would result in a loss of employment land will not normally be 
supported. Proposals for alternative use on 'other employment sites' set out in TLP21, will be 
permitted only where it can be demonstrated that: 
VI. The site is unsuitably located, for example because of inadequate access for heavy goods 
vehicles or harm/potential harm to the amenities of nearby residential property by reason 
of traffic, noise or general disturbance, and that these issues cannot be sufficiently mitigated 
whilst retaining its use; or 
VII. The current  site use is no longer viable, for an alternative commercial use, or as part of a 
redevelopment or mixed-use development scheme. The application would need to be 
justified by evidence that there is no reasonable prospect of a site's continued employment 
use. This could include evidence regarding what steps have been taken to maintain, re-let 
or sell the site and would need to demonstrate a robust marketing strategy in terms of the 
rates or value at which it has been marketed, and the length and ways it has been 
advertised. The property  is vacant or is currently occupied by a pop-up or temporary use 
and the applicant is able to demonstrate that the property has been effectively marketed 
for sale or letting at a realistic price on the open market for a minimum period of 12 months 
and that no reasonable offers have been refused*; and 
* The Council  may seek independent advice to test the veracity of any marketing exercise. 
This will be considered by the Council on a case-by-case basis. 
Where proposals  are seeking a change of use to residential, either in full or partially, applications 
will, in addition to other requirements in this policy, need to demonstrate that the principles of 
sustainable development would be achieved. Proposals will also need to show that the 
redevelopment of the site for residential purpose is identified through the Council's most up to 
date brownfield register and in line with the Council's most up to date Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. 
Key Supporting  Documents and Evidence 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 149 Employment23 
Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces 
within SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07 
Percentage of residents whose job and skill set is identified within occupation skill group 1-6 
Percentage of employment and unemployment within the District 
Competitive Ranking 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General 
Permitted Development Rights. 
Employment Hierarchy 
23.11 In carrying  out the detailed review of employment sites in the District, the ENA (2015) and 
ENA Update (2017) were able to identify those sites which are of most significant benefit to the area 
and those which also play an important role, albeit to a lesser extent. In seeking to protect those 
employment sites, proposals for development will be considered in line with the Council's Employment 
Hierarchy and where the site sits within it. 
23.12 The Employment  Hierarchy consists of Strategic Employment Sites, Important Employment 
Sites, and all other existing employment sites. The ENA Update (2017) identified four Strategic 
Employment Sites - these sites are the most important for employment uses and will be protected. 
They are: 
Godstone Road  Business Centre, Whyteleafe 
Hobbs Industrial  Estate, Felbridge 
Lambs Business  Park, South Godstone 
Westerham Road  Industrial Estate, Limpsfield Tatsfield.  
150 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
23.13 A number of Important Employment Sites were also identified in the Update (2017). These 
are good quality sites and a presumption of retention for continued employment use was recommended, 
although it was recognised that some operational flexibility may be required. Not all of the 
recommendations from the Update (2017) have been accepted, as in some instances, other evidence 
or information led us to discount sites. One example of this is Ladycross Business Park, Dormansland; 
landscape evidence did not support any intensification on this site due to low landscape capacity and 
sensitivity. Therefore, no formal policy designation is given. As such, those sites the Council identifies 
as Important and policy protected are: 
Brewer Street,  Bletchingley 
Cophall Farm,  Copthorne 
Paddock Barn  Farm, Godstone Road, Caterham 
Priory Farm,  South Nutfield 
Snowhill Business  Centre, Copthorne 
Systems House,  Blindley Heath 
Redhill Aerodrome  Industrial Area, South Nutfield(23) 
23.14 Further information  and the wider details on each of the employment allocations are set out 
at policy SES01 - SES04 and IES01 - IES07. All applications for any employment site will need to 
have regard to the content of the Council's employment evidence and wider development plan policies. 
TLP21: Employment Hierarchy 
Development proposals regarding existing sites within the District will be considered in accordance 
with their position within the following employment hierarchy, the most up-to-date Economic 
Needs Assessment, Economic Proposition and against other relevant policies in the Development 
Plan. 
Employment sites  and their allocated status are set out on the Policies Map and policies 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07. 
23 At the time of carrying out the ENA Update (2017), Redhill Aerodrome and the employment area was considered to be part of a 
reasonable alternative location for a Garden Community. Since then, that location has been ruled out by the Council as the preferred 
location and on reflection of both pieces of evidence the Council have followed the recommendations of the ENA (2015) and allocated 
a protective status as an Important Employment Site. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 151 Employment23 
Strategic Employment Sites (SES) 
Employment sites in this category will be supported for intensification and expanded where 
appropriate. SES are the largest employment sites in the District and will be retained protected 
for their capacity for commercial, industrial and the employment opportunities they offer not just 
locally, but in the wider Functional Economic Area, County and beyond. Alternative 
non-employment related uses that do not support the functioning of the site, will be resisted. 
Important Employment Sites (IES) 
These are good quality employment sites that offer diversity to the types of employment in the 
District. These sites will be protected for their employment use and intensification supported 
where appropriate. 
Other existing employment sites 
For all other employment sites, while no formal allocation is given, any loss of employment space 
will need to accord with policy TLP20: Supporting a Prosperous Economy. 
Office Space and Sequential Testing 
Any proposals for office space outside of town centres will need to demonstrate how it has 
responded to the sequential test set out in NPPF. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Study (2016) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
152 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces within 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights. 
Rural Economy 
23.15 The NPPF  states that planning policies should support economic growth in rural areas in 
order to create jobs and prosperity, by taking a positive approach to sustainable new development 
which includes economic, social and environmental dimensions. 
23.16 The majority  of our District is rural. Even our main towns share some characteristics with 
typical rural life including access to an abundance of open landscapes, relatively low density living 
when compared to larger towns in the county, and the aesthetic character which is so precious to 
our communities. For the purposes of considering our rural economy, however, we must be mindful 
of what rural means for Tandridge as a whole so that we can plan most appropriately for the area. 
We must also be mindful that many of employment sites we are seeking to protect are in the rural 
areas. As such, employment sites located in any settlement outside of those defined as Urban 
Settlements in TLP06, should be considered rural in the context of this policy. 
23.17 Given that  the vast majority of our employment space is located in rural areas, it stands to 
reason that our rural economy must be supported and encouraged. oOur approach seeks to do so 
and considers that all forms of employment use can be acceptable in the countryside, where it meets 
the relevant aesthetic and sustainability criteria of the policies set out in Our Local Plan. 
23.18 Much of the use and formal allocations of our existing employment sites is dealt with through 
policy TLP21 above and the corresponding allocations. However, it is important to remember the role 
played by smaller rural businesses and those more in keeping with the historic concept of rural life 
such as farming and agriculture. Tourism also plays a key role in supporting our rural economy and 
our policies for this are set out in Section 28. 
23.19 Our Local  Plan commits to assisting our rural areas, and we will support rural and agricultural 
initiatives that improve local services and facilities and contribute to the rural economy. The Council 
will support the retention and development of important local community facilities, such as shops and 
public houses, which play fundamental roles in terms of social cohesion, fulfilling day-to-day needs 
of rural residents and a settlement's sustainability. 
23.20 We need  to balance the creation of new business opportunities with the needs of the farming 
industry. Farming is an important contributor to the rural economy. It can help to maintain the landscape 
- which attracts tourists and helps to produce food locally. As such, Our Local Plan will support the 
development and diversification of farming in the District. Further, in the selection of all land allocations 
we have been mindful of good grade agricultural land and ensured it is avoided for redevelopment 
plans in recognition of the role it serves. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 153 Employment23 
TLP22: Rural Economy 
In order to support a prosperous rural economy and assist in the provision of jobs and in 
accordance with other policies of the development plan, the Council will positively consider: 
I. the sustainable growth and expansion of all types of business and enterprise in rural areas 
through conversion of existing buildings and provision of well-designed new buildings of 
appropriate scale; 
II. schemes which support tourism in accordance with policies TLP41 and TLP42; 
III. the development and diversification of agricultural, farming and other land-based rural 
businesses, where appropriate; and 
IV. the retention and development of local services and community facilities in our semi-rural 
service (Tier 2) settlements and rural (Tier 3) settlements, such as local shops, meeting 
places, sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship, which respect 
the character of the countryside. 
The Council will work positively with our rural businesses and relevant partners to support and 
improve the provision of internet services in rural areas and identify and pursue any funding 
streams,including s106 contributions, and rural initiatives that could support and facilitate our 
rural economy. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces within 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07 
154 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 
23 Employment 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights 
Number of gains and/or losses proposing agricultural, farming and other land-based rural 
businesses 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Quarterly update on Gainshare Solution Deployment to promote home-working (updates 
on postcodes that have now been connected to the fibre network) 
Permissions proposing expansion/intensification of tourism assets. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 155 Employment23 
Employment Land Allocations 
23.21 The following  policies identify and allocate specific sites that are suitable for employment 
development and which should be protected for that use. The acceptability of any proposal will be 
judged at the planning application stage and against the site-specific requirements of these sites and 
the wider development plan as well as all other material considerations. 
23.22 The site allocations have been determined upon the consideration of numerous evidence 
bases including the Housing and Economic Land Availability and Economic Needs Assessment 2015 
and 2017 update. Factors such as landscape impact, ecology, gGreen bBelt impact, flooding and 
infrastructure were all material considerations to the sites which have been selected. 
23.23 In preparing  the Local Plan, some alterations to the Green Belt boundaries for Strategic 
Employment Sites have taken place. These alterations have only taken place where exceptional 
circumstances have been demonstrated and in accordance with the National Planning Policy 
Framework (2012). The Council's  Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Insetting and Exceptional 
Circumstances (2018)  report and  its appendix, set out the assessments. Please note that site 
assessments have been carried out using Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment 
(HELAA) references and those of the Economic Needs Assessment (ENA). All site allocations below 
include the relevant HELAA and ENA references for consistency and clarity. 
Summary T able of Employment Allocations 
Potential available 
space Site Address Policy Reference 
0.00ha Godstone Road Business Centre, Whyteleafe SES01 
3.88ha Hobbs Industrial Estate, Felbridge SES02 
8.00ha Lambs Business Park, South Godstone SES03 
2.84ha Westerham Road Industrial Estate, Tatsfield SES04 
0.03ha Snowhill Business Centre, Copthorne IES01 
1.22ha Brewer Street, Bletchingley IES02 
4.15ha Cophall Farm, Copthorne IES03 
0.00ha Systems House, Blindley Heath IES04 
0.43ha Redhill Aerodrome Industrial Area, South Nutfield IES05 
0.44ha Paddock Barn Farm, Godstone Road, Caterham IES06 
0.00ha Priory Farm, South Nutfield IES07 
156 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
SES01: Godstone Road Business Centre, Whyteleafe 
.00ha Estimated additional 
provision: 2.09ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Godstone Road Business Centre is an office park on the edge of the built form of Whyteleafe. 
The site offers large, high quality office units and is the location of Ann Summers Head Office. 
It is located on the A22 at the northern end of the Caterham bypass which links to the M25. 
The site has considerable car parking provision with secure access, and is accessible via 
public bus services, and at walking distance from Whyteleafe South railway station. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 01 (2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support applications for the 
regeneration, enhancement and development of Strategic Employment Sites which: 
I. support high value business growth 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 157 Employment23 
II. facilitate the achievement of the Council's most up-to-date Economic Proposition. 
III. maximise opportunities  for the intensification of B-Class use employment uses and 
supporting sSui gGeneris uses 
Applications which  result in the loss of employment uses will be resisted. 
Infrastructure 
IV. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Whyteleafe Roundabout Approaches Redesign 
Wapses Lodge Roundabout Improvements 
158 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
SES02: Hobbs Industrial Estate, Felbridge 
3.88ha Estimated additional 
provision: 22ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Site located on the A22 and used for a mix of employment units including: airport and car 
parking, scaffolding and crane operations and other workshops etc. Access is good, directly 
off the A22 which provides good access to Gatwick Airport and road networks. The business 
park has security check-point access and is screened from the wider area by dense trees and 
shrubbery. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 22 (2015) ENA 16 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 159 Employment23 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support applications for the 
regeneration, enhancement and development of Strategic Employment Sites which: 
I. support high value business growth 
II. facilitate the achievement of the Council's most up to date Economic Proposition will also 
be supported 
III. maximise opportunities for the intensification of B-Class use employment uses and 
supporting Sui Generis uses 
Applications which result in a loss of employment or for the use of Airport Parking, will be 
resisted. 
Public Rights of Way 
IV. Any Public Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
Infrastructure V. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Felbridge Junction Improvements A22/A264 
Felbridge Road/Crawley Down Road Junction Improvements 
Felbridge Traffic Calming 
160 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
SES03: Lambs Business Park, South Godstone 
8ha* Estimated additional 
provision: 12.8ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Lambs Business Park is an industrial estate just outside South Godstone. The site is one of 
the larger employment locations in the District. The eastern half of the site comprises the 
existing business park which offers a range of units of medium size and the south western 
part is comprised of a disused clay quarry former claypit. It is accessed via Terra Cotta Road, 
close to the A22, Eastbourne Road. The area is predominantly screened from the surrounding 
area by tree lines and shrubbery and an active railway siding runs adjacent to and has been 
previously used by the site. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 12 (2015), ENA 08 
(2017) and Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA) SGOD 008 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 161 Employment23 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support applications for the 
regeneration, enhancement and development of Strategic Employment Sites which: 
I. support high value business growth 
II. facilitate the achievement of the Council's most up-to-date Economic Proposition 
III. maximise opportunities for the intensification of B-Class use employment uses and 
supporting Sui Generis uses 
IV. deliver data centre uses, technological innovation and any necessary supporting facilities. 
Applications which result in the loss of employment uses will be resisted, as will any proposals 
for operational uses which unacceptably increase road-based transport movements. Proposals 
for the site must demonstrate how the opportunities presented by the direct access to the rail 
network have been maximised, as is appropriate. 
It is recognised that the Surrey Waste Planning Authority is currently considering Lambs 
Business Park for a potential waste allocation which could be associated with energy generation. 
In the event of the site accommodating a new Energy from Waste plant, this should be designed 
to enable the future use of surplus heat to serve the South Godstone Garden Community and 
the operations of Lambs Business Park. 
Infrastructure 
V. In accordance with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site: and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
A22/Tilburstow Hill Road Improvements on reflection of up to date transport assessment 
and relative to the size, type and nature of the scheme proposed. 
* Estimated additional space slightly deviates from the figures set out in the ENA 2017 and better 
reflects more up to date detailed site information . 
162 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
SES04: Westerham Road Industrial Estate, Tatsfield 
2.84ha Estimated additional 
provision: 8.61ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Westerham Road Industrial Estate, also known as Moorhouse Tileworks, is situated within the 
Surrey Hills AONB in a rural location between Oxted and Westerham, and currently used for 
large-scale open storage. Site access is sufficient for current uses and links directly to the 
A25. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 08 (2015), ENA 36 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
The exceptional circumstances to justify the release of this site from the Green Belt have been 
identified and the allocation of this site has resulted in an alteration to the Green Belt boundary. 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support applications for the 
regeneration, enhancement and development of Strategic Employment Sites which: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 163 Employment23 
I. support high value business growth 
II. facilitate the  achievement of the Council's most up-to-date Economic Proposition 
III. maximise opportunities  for the intensification of B-Class use employment uses and 
supporting Sui Generis uses 
IV. which is sensitive to its location within does not  negatively impact upon the setting of the 
Surrey
 Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. 
Applications which  result in the loss of employment uses will be resisted. 
Infrastructure 
V. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Junction Improvements at A25 Westerham Road / B269 High Street Limpsfield / Wolfs 
Row 
Improvements to access 
164 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES01: Snowhill Business Centre, Copthorne 
0.03ha Estimated additional 
provision: 0.35ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Snowhill Business Centre is a small-scale office park situated on the B2037 close to the junction 
with the A264, outside of Copthorne. The site is in a semi-rural / semi-residential area, is 
occupied by small local businesses and provides small-scale space suitable for start-ups and 
Small and Medium Enterprise s.There is a small area of unused land to the east. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 27 (2015) ENA 29 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 165 Employment23 
Proposals for Snowhill will be supported where they are sensitive to its location in the Green 
Belt. 
Infrastructure 
I. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Copthorne Junction (Copthorne Hotel/A264/A2220) Improvements 
166 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES02: Brewer Street, Bletchingley 
1.22ha Estimated additional 
provision: 2.38ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Brewer Street is a local business park located in a rural area to the north of Bletchingley to 
the south of the Surrey Hills AONB. The former farm site has been converted to provide a 
range of small-scale office and industrial units as well as a specialist veterinary hospital and 
plasma research centre. The site includes a vacant and disused agricultural building. Site 
accessibility is limited, being via Brewer Street - a residential and country road inappropriate 
for large-scale traffic or HGVs. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 30 (2015), ENA 02 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 167 Employment23 
In addition to complying according with  all relevant policies  within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Proposals for  Brewer Street will be supported where they: 
I. would not  unacceptably exacerbate the rural road network, and 
II. relate to the existing business and uses on the site, or are B1(a) focused, and 
III. are sensitive  to the location in the Brewer Street Conservation Area and Green Belt. 
Infrastructure 
IV. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Outwood Lane/ A25 signalisation 
168 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES03: Cophall Farm, Copthorne 
4.15ha Estimated additional 
provision: 8.00ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Site located on the B2037, north of Copthorne. The majority of the site is used for Airport Car 
Parking, however the site is also home to other employment uses, including mechanics and 
scaffolding. There is the opportunity for intensification in the south-eastern part of the site. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 16 (2015), ENA 09 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Proposals for Cophall Farm will be supported where they are sensitive to the location in the 
Green Belt. Applications for further use as Airport Parking will not be supported. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 169 Employment23 
Public Rights of Way 
I. Any Public  Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison 
with Surrey County Council and TLP31. 
Infrastructure 
II. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Copthorne Junction (Copthorne Hotel/A264/A2220) Improvements 
170 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES04: Systems House, Blindley Heath 
0.0ha Estimated additional 
Provision: 0.98ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Systems House is a mixed employment site on Eastbourne Road (A22) comprising showroom 
and engineering units. The site is serviced by a local bus route, but access is tight with limited 
car parking provision. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 26 (2015), ENA 31 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Proposals for Systems House will be supported where they are sensitive to the location in the 
Green Belt. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 171 Employment23 
Public Rights of Way 
I. Any Public  Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
Infrastructure 
II. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Footway/Cycleway A22 Godstone Road 
172 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES05: Redhill Aerodrome Industrial Area, South Nutfield 
0.43ha Estimated additional 
provision: 6.01ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Redhill Aerodrome site is located in a rural location to the south east of Redhill and south west 
of South Nutfield. The employment element of the site is located on the north western edge 
of the grass airfield. Much of the employment element is primarily taken-up by aviation-related 
industries and services. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 11 (2015), ENA 26 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 173 Employment23 
Proposals for Redhill Aerodrome will be supported where they are sensitive to the location in 
the Green Belt. 
Part of the employment area continues into the administrative area of Reigate & Banstead 
Borough Council. Any application for this particular area should engage in early discussions 
with both planning authorities to maximise the effectiveness of any scheme. 
Infrastructure 
I. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Traffic Ccalming along  A25 
174 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES06: Paddock Barn Farm, Godstone Road, Caterham 
0.44ha Estimated additional 
provision: 1.09ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
Paddock Barn Farm is located on the A22 with site access directly off the main road 
(southbound access only). The site is located in a rural AONB setting approximately one mile 
north of Junction 6 of the M25. The site comprises two parts, however only the area adjacent 
to the A22 is recommended for protection containing a redundant building which could potentially 
provide an intensification opportunity. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 02 (2015), ENA 23 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 175 Employment23 
Proposals for Paddock Barn Farm will be supported where they are sensitive to the location 
of the Green Belt and the Surrey Hills AONB. 
Public Rights of Way 
I. Any Public  Right of Way within or abutting the site should be retained in liaison with Surrey 
County Council and TLP31. 
Infrastructure 
II. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Contributions towards Junction 6 capacity Iimprovements 
176 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
IES07: Priory Farm, South Nutfield 
0.00ha Estimated additional 
provision: 1.46ha Site Size: 
Site Description: 
This out-of-town office, retail and tourism area has operations linked to its rural location. The 
sites comprises a number of small buildings under a variety of retail and office uses and 
provides suitable accommodation for start-ups. The Priory Farm farm shop is located here 
and acts as an anchor for the wider farm and secures footfall. The access to the site is via 
Sandy Lane, which is a rural road and not well-suited to larger vehicles and HGVs. 
Other evidence-based references: Economic Needs Assessment: ENA 09 (2015), ENA 25 
(2017) 
Site-specific Policy Requirements: 
In addition to complying according with all relevant policies within the development plan and 
material considerations, the Council will actively encourage and support the regeneration, 
enhancement and protection of Important Employment Sites for their local contribution to 
business and economy. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 177 Employment23 
Proposals for Priory Farm will be supported where they: 
I. are sensitive  to the location in the Green Belt; and 
II. do not undermine the tourism elements of the wider location. 
Infrastructure 
III. In accordance  with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), financial contributions to/onsite 
provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of this site and 
will be a requirement of any proposal: 
Traffic Ccalming along  A25 
178 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 23 Employment 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Economic Needs Assessment (2015) 
Economic Needs Assessment Update (2017) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (all iterations) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Green Belt Assessment (Part 3): Exceptional Circumstances and Insetting (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO12 - Green Belt; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Net number of permissions enabling intensification of employment spaces within 
SES01-SES04 and IES01-IES07. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 179 
Education24 
24 Education 
24.1 There is a strong supportive approach to education provision at the national level and the 
NPPF reflects the joint policy statement of the Secretary of State for Communities and Local 
Government and the Secretary of State for Education on 'Planning for  Schools Development' (August 
201
1). It advises there should be a presumption in favour of developing state-funded schools. 
24.2 The demand  for school places in an area can change quite rapidly, not just because of the 
impacts of new housing, but also changes in the birth rate (which is itself influenced by a broad range 
of factors) and the type of households migrating into and out of a district. 
24.3 The education  facilities within the District are essential to the success and function of our 
communities both in supporting academic achievement and our wider economy in terms of the skills 
learnt and improving life chances. 
24.4 Through engagement  with the education authority at Surrey County Council, and through our 
plan-making consultations with residents and interested parties, we know that generally sufficient 
education facilities  for the District are strained. In some locations, too many of our schools are over 
capacity and too many students are having to commute unnecessarily further afield and out of district 
to secure a school place. 
24.5 Over recent  years the District has experienced an increase in the requirement for school 
places across primary and secondary sectors and this is common across Surrey authorities. The 
scale of new housing development that our Local Plan proposes over the Plan period will create an 
additional requirement for pupil places and it is appropriate for us to include policy mechanisms to 
manage this. This includes support for those schools that wish to expand, where it is appropriate to 
do so, in addition to requiring the provision of new schools. Policy TLP23 below and our Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP) sets these requirements out in greater detail. 
24.6 It will be important to secure further enhancements in education provision throughout the Plan 
period and to ensure sufficient flexibility to accommodate future changes in the requirement for pupil 
places. This is likely to involve extending existing schools and building new schools while also 
responding to changing patterns of demand. Our policies allow for this and we will continue to work 
proactively with the education authority and ensure that developments accord with the requirements 
for provision as set out in the IDP, Surrey School Organisation Plans and the site-specific requirements 
of the housing allocations in Our Local Plan. 
24.7 Securing improvements  in education facilities is likely to require a reasonably flexible approach 
given the likely availability of sites and the competing demands for land resources in the District. 
Nevertheless, it will be important to ensure that investment in schools and further education facilities 
function effectively in the long-term, and do not suffer from locational or design failings that significantly 
constrain their ability to deliver improved learning outcomes. 
24.8 Our District  is home to three secondary schools, and 25 primary age schools - all of which 
are state run, academies or church schools. There is also a number of independent schools which 
offer private education, but which are not covered by this policy as they are more self-regulated in 
terms of the admissions process and their contribution to meeting the educational needs of all, and 
180 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 24 Education 
they are not under the control of the education authority. Any applications for new, expansions and/or 
alterations to independent schools will be assessed against all other relevant policies of the wider 
development plan. 
Primary Schools 
24.9 The 25 primary age schools are made up of all-through primary schools, infant only (ages 
5-7) and juniors only (8-11) many of which are not located within the same site. Surrey Education 
Authority is seeking to encourage 'through-schools' where new schools are provided or where there 
is an opportunity, to amalgamate schools onto one, better-suited site. 
24.10 At the time of writing our Local Plan it is understood there is localised pressure on primary 
school places in Oxted and Limpsfield. In the short to medium term, in addition there is short and 
long term pressure on primary places in the north of Tandridge in places such as Caterham, 
Warlingham and Whyteleafe. 
Secondary Schools  
24.11 De Staf ford, Oxted and Warlingham offer the District secondary provisions for those aged 
11 -16. Oxted and Warlingham also provide sixth form education. There is no college provision within 
the District. 
24.12 Oxted School  is the third largest in Surrey and sits within the built up area of Oxted, constrained 
in its surrounds by both housing development and the Green Belt. Further challenges for Oxted are 
access and, while there is a good public transport network for the school, the surrounding roads are 
easily congested and further increasing capacity in Oxted School is not necessarily appropriate, nor 
easily accommodated in the wider infrastructure. 
24.13 Warlingham Secondary  sSchool is located within Tandridge, close to the boundary with the 
London Borough of Croydon. The site is surrounded by Hamsey Green Primary School and Tithepit 
Shaw Lane and as such is heavily constrained, limiting the possibility of expansion. 
24.14 De Staf ford school campus is located within the Green Belt where there is a general 
presumption against development. The Council do not feel that removing the school from the Green 
Belt is necessary, however policy mechanisms are needed to support the school, whilst also continuing 
to recognise the role and purposes of the Green Belt. Under previous national policy(24) the 
development of schools was acceptable within the Green Belt. Since then new national policy has 
been adopted and the NPPF has altered its position on Green Belt with regards to schools. While 
playing fields that accompany a school may be considered appropriate in the Green Belt, the physical 
structure of a school is not. 
24.15 As such,  policy TLP23 includes mechanisms to set out what 'very special circumstances' 
could include, and if demonstrated, would enable the school, and any other state school located in 
the Green Belt, to operate and to remain a local option for students, where there is evidence of need. 
24 Planning Practice Guidance 2: Green Belts 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 181 Education24 
TLP23: Protection, Provision and Enhancement of Schools 
Improvements in the quality and accessibility of state/church , schools/academies and 
further education facilities will be supported where agreed by the education authority and where 
it complies with other policies in the Development Plan. 
New schools  and further education facilities should: 
I. Be highly  accessible to their intended catchments, particularly by walking, cycling and public 
transport; 
II. Be located  and designed and managed  to minimise  the impacts of associated traffic and 
car parking on the surrounding area; 
III. Provide high  quality indoor and outdoor facilities suitable for the intended number and age 
range of students; and 
IV. Wherever practicable  and appropriate, provide for the community use of playing fields and 
other school facilities. 
A flexible  approach will be taken to the reuse and redevelopment of redundant schools and 
further education sites, particularly where this would support the provision or improvement of 
education facilities elsewhere in the settlement. Land may be protected for educational use as 
part of wider development proposals where this is necessary , to secure  an appropriate scale 
and distribution of education facilities to meet future needs. 
In all cases, development should be phased so that the school places are delivered before 
demand exceeds existing capacity, but not so in advance that school buildings are left vacant 
or forced to resolve capacity issues from elsewhere, or out of catchment. 
Where a  school is in the Green Belt, expansion will be permitted only where: 
There is full support from both the school and the education authority; and 
It is fully supported by a School Travel Plan; and 
There is a legitimate and identified need; and 
It is designed in such a way to allow for future expansion should this be required; and 
The design and scale of the development does not unacceptably harm the Green Belt or 
wider Landscape. 
182 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 24 Education 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey County Council School Organisation Plan (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO16 -Infrastructure; 
SO17 -Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Gains and/or losses of schools and educational facilities (Class D1 and D2) 
Number of applications that propose expansion of schools and other associated facilities. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 183 Retail25 
25 Retail 
25.1 Our retail  centres are the heart of our communities and serve as a location for retail, leisure 
and community life. The centres in the District range from principal shopping areas that contain a 
variety of retail and leisure facilities; to essential shops and services catering for neighbourhood 
needs. 
25.2 Both District-wide  retail studies and more focused town and local centre reviews have been 
undertaken to better understand how our areas function and what retail provisions will be needed to 
the end of the Plan period. Our District contains towns, local and neighbourhood centres which this 
Local Plan positions within a dDistrict-wide retail  hierarchy. 
25.3 While it is recognised there are other town centres within the wider area that offer a more 
extensive range of services and retailing, including Croydon to the north, Redhill to the west and 
Crawley to the south-west, our own town centres in Oxted and Caterham remain vital and must remain 
resilient. They should encourage wider diverse retail and leisure opportunities to be competitive and 
remain attractive. 
25.4 Our designated  local and neighbourhood centres include a mix of retail, leisure and local niche 
operators designed to cater for local and neighbourhood need. They contribute towards facilitating 
sustainable communities by reducing the need to travel for essential items. Although these centres 
are smaller in scale than our towns, their function remains an integral role in providing for the needs 
of the community. 
TLP24: Retail Hierarchy 
The Council will seek to protect the role of all identified retail centres and the significant role they 
play in ensuring our communities have access to retail shopping and leisure services to enhance 
their sustainability. 
All designated  retail centres and their boundaries are identified on the Policies Map*. 
Town Centres  
Our T own Centres are: Caterham Valley and Oxted and they serve as the main service centres 
for our District. The principal shopping areas offer diverse retail and leisure opportunities and 
the Council will support a balance of uses within town centre shopping areas, in accordance with 
Policy TLP25. 
In addition,  the Council will support proposals and facilitate schemes which enable regeneration 
including Caterham Town Centre Masterplan ** and RegenOxted, in accordance with Policies 
TLP28 and TLP29. 
Delivery of  successful development within town centres which protect and enhance town centre's 
function will be secured by proactively working with partners such as the Business Improvement 
Districts and other relevant parties. 
184 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
Local Centres 
Our Local Centres are: 
Warlingham Caterham on the Hill 
Whyteleafe Godstone 
Smallfield Lingfield 
Most Local Centres have primary retail frontages which will be monitored by the Council to protect 
the centres from unacceptable changes of use that would negatively impact on the level of retail 
they provide. Retail proposals for Local Centres will need to accord with policy TLP25: Retail 
Frontages and other relevant policies of Our Local Plan. Regeneration will be supported where 
considered necessary. 
Neighbourhood Centres 
Neighbourhood centres are located in areas of our District where retails clusters serve the 
population but to a lesser extent than our Town and Local Centres, these are: 
Caterham Westway Hurst Green Bletchingley 
Neighbourhood centres will be protected from the loss of retail which serves the local need. Any 
proposals relevant to neighbourhood centres will be considered in accordance with the relevant 
settlement policies set out at TLP06 and TLP08. 
Annual Retail Centre Health Checks will be conducted to ensure the performance of our centres 
is monitored and identify if and where action is needed. Where decline of a centre is identified, 
the Council will support proactive Neighbourhood Plans which seek to regenerate and facilitate 
successful centres, or seek to prepare a Supplementary Planning Document, if appropriate. 
The Retail  Centre Health Check will be published with the Authority's Monitoring Report. 
*South Godstone  Garden Community, once developed, is anticipated to be of a significance so 
as to place it within the Retail Hierarchy. This will be determined through the South Godstone 
Garden Community Area Action Plan and the policies map will be updated accordingly, once it 
is adopted. 
** Retail  boundaries for the town centre vary from the remit of the Caterham Town Centre 
Masterplan due to the wider regeneration objectives of the SPD which include elements of 
Caterham On the Hill. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 185 Retail25 
Retail and Leisure Study (2015) 
Retail and Leisure Study Update (2018) 
Caterham Masterplan Supplementary Planning Document (2018) 
RegenOxted 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO2 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO16 - Infrastructure 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) due to Permitted Development Rights 
Progress of regeneration schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham Town Centre Masterplan 
Annual Health Check 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
Retail Frontages 
25.5 It is important that our retail centres remain attractive and well managed. To ensure they have 
a mix of uses for shoppers and visitors, the Council will continue to define Primary Shopping Areas 
in town centres and distinguish between defined primary and secondary frontages. By designating 
and protecting key frontages within the town and selected local centres, it is possible to control the 
distribution of retail and non-retail uses so they remain attractive places to shop. 
25.6 To ensure  the success of a town and local centre, it will be important to avoid a concentration 
of similar uses which might have a cumulative impact on such things as environmental quality, amenity 
or parking, or would increase the risk of anti-social behaviour. This will also allow for consumer choice. 
Where variety is not sufficient, visitors are travelling to town centres elsewhere so footfall is low. 
186 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
25.7 The role of residential uses within retail centres to ensure a footfall for shops and services, is 
recognised, but for the sake of maintaining active frontages at street level, residential use should 
primarily be above ground floor level. 
25.8 Our T own and Local Centre Review (2018) and Retail and Leisure Study Update (2018) 
conducted reviews of our existing primary and secondary frontages. Each of the frontage sections 
were measured against the concentration of retail (Class A1) uses that were present along the frontage 
width and whether they met the minimum percentage threshold. As detailed in Policy TLP25, the 
performance of each active frontage will be reviewed and the threshold set within the most up-to-date 
Town and Local Centre Review. 
25.9 The Council  will continue to monitor the balance of retail uses and ensure that convenient 
access to essential shopping needs is maintained and identify where action may need to be taken. 
TLP25: Retail Frontages 
Primary and secondary retail frontages are shown on the Policies Map. 
Primary 
Within the  primary shopping frontages of our retail centres, proposals for new Class A1 retail 
use will generally be supported. Changes of use from Class A1 to other uses at ground floor 
level will be permitted where: 
A. The property  is vacant or is currently occupied by a pop-up or temporary use and the 
applicant is able to demonstrate that the property has been effectively marketed for sale or 
letting at a realistic price on the open market for a minimum period of 12 months and that 
no reasonable offers have been refused*; and 
B. It would result in no less than the following percentage of the total primary frontage remaining 
in A1 use: 
Town Centre's  - 70%; 
Local Centre's - 50% 
These percentages  will be kept under review through monitoring processes and updated within 
the most up to date Town and Local Centre Review, or a Retail Centre Health Check, if necessary . 
* The Council  may seek independent advice to test the veracity of any marketing exercise. 
Secondary Within the
  secondary shopping frontages a range of uses will be supported provided that: 
I. No less than 45% of the town centre's total secondary frontage remains in retail (Class A1), 
or the percentage set out in the most up to date Town and Local Centre Review, or Retail 
Centre Health Check, if different; and 
II. They contribute  to the vitality, viability and diversity of the town or local centre; and 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 187 Retail25 
III. They avoid the concentration of similar uses. 
Acceptable uses  within secondary shopping frontages are likely to include: retail, food and drink, 
office, community and educational uses (subject to addressing any harmful impacts). 
Residential use  will be supported above ground floor level throughout allocated town and local 
centres, provided the use would have safe and convenient access and would not inhibit the 
functioning of the ground floor use. 
Local Centres  
In the case of all Local Centres, proposals which would result in a loss of A1 to alternative uses 
will be permitted where it contributes to the vitality and viability of the centre and that the centre 
retains its position as set out in the retail hierarchy set out at TLP24. 
Neighbourhood Centres  and Isolated Shops 
Neighbourhood Centres  do not contain designated primary or secondary frontages. Proposals 
involving the change of use of retail (Class A1) shops within neighbourhood centres, parade of 
shops and isolated neighbourhood or village shops, will be permitted only where: 
IV. The balance  of uses accord with the most up-to-date Town and Local Centre Review, or 
Retail
 Centre Health Check; 
V. The neighbourhood  centre's total frontage width remains in majority Class A1 use; 
VI. It can be shown that there is no demand for the premises in retail (class A1) use justified 
by evidence and that there is no reasonable prospect of a site's continued retail use. This 
could include evidence regarding what steps have been taken to maintain, re-let or sell the 
site and would need to demonstrate a robust marketing strategy in terms of the rates or 
value which it has been marketed, and the length and ways it has been advertised; 
VII. In the case of a shop that currently provides an essential day-to-day 'top up' retail (class 
A1) use (or where such a use existed within the preceding three years), there is another 
shop of comparable use that is similarly accessible to serve the customers within the same 
local catchment area. 
VIII. The design  of the frontage is compatible with the use of the premises and the surrounding 
area. Additionally, the proposals must not adversely affect the environment and amenities 
of the surrounding areas including residential properties, by reason of smell, noise or other 
environmental problems. 
Where a proposal would result in the proportion of A1 frontage falling below the relevant threshold 
set out in the most up-to- date Town and Local Centre Review, or Retail Centre Health Check, 
permission will only be granted where it can be demonstrated that the proposed use would make 
a positive contribution to the viability and vitality of the centre. 
188 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Retail and Leisure Study Update (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) due to Permitted Development Rights 
Progress of regeneration schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham Town Centre Masterplan 
Annual Health Check 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2). 
Town and Local Out of centre provision  
25.10 National planning  policy requires that when considering proposals for main town centre 
uses(25) outside designated town centres, a sequential test should be applied. Paragraph 24 of the 
NPPF (2012) states the following: 
'Applications for  main town centre uses [are] to be located in town centres, then in edge of centre 
locations and only if suitable sites are not available should out of centre sites be considered'(26) 
25.11 In the instance where the sequential test is applied and out-of-centre proposals are considered, 
preference is given to sites that are accessible and connected to the town centre. It should also be 
demonstrated that flexibility on issues such as format and scale are discussed with the Council at 
the earliest opportunity. 
25 Main town centre uses include A1-A5, B1a, C1, D1, D2 and SG 
26 NPPF (2012), paragraph 24. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 189 Retail25 
25.12 Furthermore, the NPPF requires that when assessing applications for retail, leisure and office 
use outside of town centres, local authorities should require an impact assessment if the development 
is over a proportionate, locally-set floorspace threshold. The default threshold that the NPPF stipulates 
in cases where local authorities do not have one in place for the area is 2,500sq.m gross. 
25.13 The Retail  and Leisure Study Update (2018) reviewed the default threshold and concluded 
that this was inappropriate for the scale of Tandridge. Therefore, the thresholds stated in Policy 
TLP26, reflect the recommendations made in the report and take account of the individual retail 
centres in the District. 
TLP26: Development Within and Outside Town and Local Centres Sequential testing  and 
retail impact 
In order to protect the viability and vitality of the District's centres and provide a diverse range 
of services and facilities, the Council will apply a sequential approach to retail and other main 
town centre uses in accordance with the NPPF 'Town Centre first' principle and Policy TLP21: 
Employment Hierarchy. 
A sequential  test will be applied to proposals that seek to provide main town centre uses develop 
for
 more than local significance and exceed  500 sq.m floorspace .: 
On the edge of, or outside of town centres Within, on the edge of, or outside of Local 
Centres Local Centres Town Centres 
For the Districts Local Centres and in order to protect their key role as service centres, the same 
approach to sequential testing will also be applied. 
The sequential approach will not be applied to applications for small-scale rural offices or other 
small-scale rural development. 
Retail Impact  Assessments 
A retail impact assessment will be required for applications that propose the following: 
I. Retail development  over 500 sq.m gross and located outside the town and local centres 
II. Leisure and  other main town centre uses over 1,000 sq.m gross and located outside town 
and local centre boundaries. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Town and Local Centre Review (2018) 
Retail and Leisure Study Update (2018) 
190 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO16 - Infrastructure 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Annual Health Check 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2). 
Retail Needs 
25.14 The Retail  and Leisure Study Update (2018) provides the projections for the retail and leisure 
capacity in the District up to 2033. 
25.15 Recommendations deriving  from the study provide an indication of the floorspace capacity 
available within each of the study zones measured. The cumulative impact of the proposal together 
with recent developments and committed floorspace may also be a relevant consideration for an 
impact assessment detailed within Policy TLP26. 
TLP27: Retail Provision 
The Council will support proposals which contribute to the delivery of additional retail space 
needed over the Plan period to support the development identified within the plan: 
1,500 sq.m gross convenience goods floorspace; 
2,000 sq.m gross comparison goods floorspace; 
1,500 sq.m gross food/beverage (class A3-A5) floorspace. 
Proposals should reflect the most up-to-date Retail and Leisure Study, Retail Centre Health 
Check, and the wider policies of the development plan. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 191 Retail25 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Retail and Leisure Study Update (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Annual Health Check 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre. 
Town Centre Initiatives 
25.16 Our main  town centres are in Caterham and Oxted. The Local Plan seeks to protect and 
enhance both of these areas to maintain their role as retail centres that also provide key services for 
the wider community, particularly in terms of day-to-day needs and in reducing the need to travel. 
The boundaries for our town centres are depicted on the Policies Map. 
Caterham 
25.17 Caterham is  one of the key urban built-up settlements  in Tandridge. The area is a sought-
after place to live with a broad range of housing, a strong choice of high quality schools and other 
services, and a distinctive and pleasant environment. However, Caterham tTown cCentre does  not 
currently operate to its full potential and has been negatively impacted by the Governments introduction 
of Permitted Development Rights, where much of the office space in the area, has been lost to 
residential use. As such, it is apparent that Caterham would benefit from regeneration and 
redevelopment that increases what the area can offer. Further, Caterham faces competition from a 
number of other centres including Croydon, Redhill and Reigate and has been unable to offer the 
quality of environment, experience and choice that many local residents' expect and desire, 
exacerbating residents choice to shop and socialise elsewhere. 
25.18 In order to reverse the outflow of town centre users, we have committed to support wholesale 
regeneration of Caterham Town Centre and improve the offer made and facilitate positive and 
quantifiable change for Caterham and the wider District. 
25.19 During the  preparation of Our Local Plan, we have also worked with a number of parties, 
including community groups, local residents and businesses, to undertake a master planning exercise 
for the wider town centre. A Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) for Caterham Town Centre 
192 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
Masterplan , which covers both Caterham on the Hill Local Centre and Caterham Valley Town Centre, 
was adopted in March 2018. Our Local Plan will continue to support the SPD going forward. It sets 
out more detail for regeneration , and for the future growth  and development. of the town centre. 
25.20 It should be noted that developments within the Caterham Town Centre Masterplan boundary  
that have already been permitted, including the Former Rose & Young building, are not included 
within the delivery figure. Any permission will be included within the existing commitments element 
of our housing land supply. 
TLP28: Caterham Town and Local Centre 
To support and enhance the role of Caterham Valley Town Centre as a key service hub and 
Caterham on the Hill Local Centre, which supports wider regeneration for the District, the Council 
will: 
I. Support the  delivery of around 190 residential units across Church Walk, the Furniture Store 
and The Golden Lion. In particular, the Council will seek to diversify the existing housing 
stock in the town centre to cater for a range of house types and sizes as supported by the 
Council's Housing Strategy; 
II. Support the  redevelopment of sites within the town centre boundary as set out on the Policies 
Map and those in the Caterham Town Masterplan , including the former Rose & Young site, 
Quadrant House, the Raglan Shopping Centre, Church Walk and Hallmark House; 
III. Support schemes  which facilitate the delivery of the North Tandridge: One Public Estate, 
in accordance with Policy HSG20; 
IV. Improve and  diversify the retail offer, concentrating A1/A3 uses within the Caterham Town 
and Local Centre retail boundaries (A1 within the Primary Shopping Areas) in accordance 
with TLP25. Encourage the evening economy through eateries and leisure facilities; 
V. Ensure sites  come forward in a coherent manner and contribute to the overall objectives 
for the area as set out in the Caterham Town Design Statement Centre and Caterham  Town 
Masterplan SPD, or subsequent update; 
VI. Ensure there  is a range of employment opportunities within Caterham Valley Town Centre, 
with an emphasis on B1(a) (Office) facilities. Loss of existing employment space will be 
resisted; 
VII. Ensure suf ficient community facilities (as defined in the glossary) are provided; 
VIII. Ensure streetscape  and public realm improvements are central to design to create an 
attractive environment with active frontages; 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 193 Retail25 
IX. Improve connectivity between Caterham Valley and Caterham on the Hill both for pedestrian 
use and via public transport; and 
X. Ensure that  parking provision is delivered in line with the parking standards applied by the 
Council. 
In accordance with  the Infrastrcuture Infrastructure Delivery  Plan (IDP), financial contribution 
to/on site provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the development of sites within 
the Caterham Valley Town Centre and Caterham on the Hill Local Centre boundaries y and will 
be a requirement of any proposal: 
Signage to determine the boundaries for Caterham Valley and Caterham on the Hill 
Wapses Lodge improvements 
Multi-use sports hall and multi-use games area 
Chaldon Road/High Street/mini roundabout/junction upgrade 
Pedestrian safety improvements on corner of High Street and Court Road. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Caterham Town Masterplan Supplementary Planning Document (2018) 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO16 - Infrastructure; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
194 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) due to Permitted Development Rights 
Progress of regeneration schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham Town Centre Masterplan 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Net number of new dwellings in each of our settlements and parishes 
Types of new homes 
Progress of the Housing Strategy 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities 
Annual Health Check. 
Oxted 
25.21 Oxted T own Centre has a rich and diverse range of local independent retailers and eateries. 
Despite this it does not perform as successfully as it could. We want to see Oxted Town Centre thrive 
and perform in the way we know it can. To achieve this, the RegenOxted initiative will be supported. 
It is an ambitious plan to revitalise the town centre through a multi-million pound programme of 
strategically-important projects. The programme comprises four key projects: 
Redevelopment of  the Gasholder 
An Urban  Redesign Project for Station Road East & West 
Additional parking  capacity 
Creation of  a business hub 
25.22 The programme  will be delivered by in partnership between Tandridge District Council, Surrey 
County Council, Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership, St William property developers and 
the Love Oxted Business Improvement District. 
25.23 It should  be noted that developments within the Oxted Town Centre boundary that have 
already been permitted, including the Gas Holder, are not included within the delivery figure. Any 
permission will be included within the existing commitments element of our housing land supply. 
TLP29: Oxted Town Centre 
To support and enhance the role of Oxted Town Centre as a key service hub for the District, the 
Council will: 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 195 Retail25 
I. Support the delivery of around 60 residential units at 110 Station Road East and 43 East 
Hill. In particular, the Council will seek to diversify the existing housing stock in the town 
centre to cater for a range of house types and sizes as supported by the Council's Housing 
Strategy; 
II. Support the redevelopment of sites within the  town centre boundary as set out on the Policies 
Map, including Oxted Gas hHolder, Ellice  Road Car Park, the creation of a business hub 
and urban design project for Station Road East and West and 1 10 Station Road and 43 
East Street; 
III. Improve and  diversify the retail offer and encourage the evening economy through eateries 
and leisure facilities; 
IV. Ensure sites  come forward in a coherent manner and contribute to the overall objectives 
for the area in accordance with the public realm aspirations of the RegenOxted initiative 
and in keeping with the appearance of the town centre and its historic character; 
V. Ensure there  is a range of employment opportunities and support the delivery of at least 700 
Ssq.m of B1(a) Office. Loss of existing employment space will be resisted; and 
VI. Ensure that  parking provision is delivered through the redevelopment of Ellice Road and in 
line with the parking standards applied by the Council. 
Financial contribution  to/on site provision of the following infrastructure are relevant to the 
development of sites within the Oxted Town Centre boundary and will be a requirement of any 
proposal: 
A25/Church Lane signalised junction 
Footpath improvements and widening along Woodhurst Lane 
Multi-use sports hall 
Station Road East public realm improvements. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
RegenOxted 
Tandridge District Housing Strategy (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO1 - Economy; 
196 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 25 Retail 
SO3 - Economy; 
SO4 - Housing; 
SO6 - Town Centres & Retail; 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Amount of net gains and/or losses of employment floorspace (B-Class and Sui Generis) 
Number of employment applications (B-Class) permitted under General Permitted 
Development Rights 
Changes in the net amount of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each retail centre 
Amount of vacant retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) according to each retail centre 
Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) due to Permitted Development Rights 
Progress of regeneration schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham Town Centre Masterplan 
Gains and/or losses of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2) 
Net number of new dwellings in each of our settlements and parishes 
Types of new homes 
Progress of the Housing Strategy 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities 
Annual Health Check. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 197 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
26.1 It is understandable that one of our community's most highly-valued assets in the District is 
the abundance of Green Infrastructure. For example, Green Infrastructure relates to the network of 
green spaces, pathways, public rights of way, bridleways, river and wildlife corridors and how they 
link our urban most built-up  and rural areas. Our Local Plan seeks to improve both those connections 
and enhance their quality for the benefit of wildlife, our communities and recreation. 
26.2 Our District  is very fortunate to have such an established network of green spaces, spectacular 
landscapes and other natural assets including Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, numerous Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Biodiversity Opportunity Areas, Local Nature Reserves and 
extensive Ancient Woodland and precious trees. Public open spaces, playing fields and allotments 
also play a key role in Green Infrastructure, contributing to the delivery of wider environmental benefit, 
the character setting of the District and health and wellbeing. 
26.3 Blue infrastructure  is also a key feature to of our landscape. It refers to water features including 
streams, ponds and, reservoirs and the like. Blue infrastructure does not just serve an aesthetic 
benefit to our District, but also acts to help with  support biodiversity , sustain our wildlife, mitigate 
climate change and limit flood risk. Together, blue-green infrastructure within our District must be 
supported. 
26.4 The consultation  undertaken on the preparation of the Local Plan and the extensive evidence 
which has been gathered confirms the quality and significance of these natural assets. We have been 
cognisant of these in preparing the Plan, selecting sites for development only where our natural assets 
are not inappropriately impacted. Our policies commit to the protection of our natural assets and 
establish the mechanisms to ensure enhancement and retention for the long term. 
TLP30: Green and Blue Infrastructure 
The existing green and blue infrastructure in the District shall be protected, enhanced and 
managed for the future benefit of the environment, people and the economy. 
Development willshall provide a  net gain in green infrastructure, which should includeincluding 
suitable biodiversity , which could  include biodiversity habitats and  wildlife corridors, while seeking 
to provide a high quality multi-functional green infrastructure network, as is appropriate . 
Brooks and  watercourses and other blue infrastructure corridors should be used to guide the 
creation of new network paths for the benefit of biodiversity and habitat creation, to help offset 
the impact of climate change and mitigate flooding. 
The Council  will work with developers and other partners to deliver strategic green and blue 
infrastructure projects where those opportunities arise and to offset the impact of development. 
This will be particularly relevant for the South Godstone Garden Community which requires a 
single area of 100ha of natural green space, in accordance with Natural England's ANGsT ANGSt 
Standards.
 
198 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
Such matters will be further explored through the preparation of a Green-Blue Infrastructure 
Supplementary Planning Document and in the preparation of the South Godstone Garden 
Community Area Action Plan. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2015, 2016 and 2017) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity (2016) 
Surrey Landscape Character Assessment Report (2015) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Site Based Ecology Assessments (2016) 
Tandridge District Wellbeing Space Strategy (2015) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO15 - Flooding. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Net number of gains and/or losses granted on SSSI, SNCI, LNR, pSNCI, BOA sites 
Net gains in biodiversity 
Schemes proposing SuDS and flood mitigation. 
26.5 Fundamental to the success of Green Infrastructure is that it is accessible and available. A 
key part of this is our public rights of way network. As a District we have many opportunities to enjoy 
our unspoiled countryside which in Tandridge is designated Green Belt and AONB. Our Local Plan 
expects all development to support our communities in making the best use of our countryside, not 
just by ensuring landscape and the countryside are is fundamental  to any design, but that it encourages 
access. to and use of the countryside. 
TLP31: Access to Countryside Public Rights  of Way 
In considering  proposals for all types of development the following criteria will apply: 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 199 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2015, 2016 and 2017) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity (2016) 
Surrey Landscape Character Assessment Report (2015) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Site Based Ecology Assessments (2016) 
Tandridge District Wellbeing Space Strategy (2015) I. I. Existing public rights of way will be safeguarded and should be incorporated into the 
development in the first instance and only if necessary should diversion be considered. 
II. Where diversions  to the existing public rights of way are proposed, it should be demonstrated 
there are no other alternatives and that the benefits of the development outweigh the any 
harm
 resulting from the proposed diversion. 
III. Development should,  where possible, provide improvements to the public rights of way 
network for the benefit of promoting sustainable connectivity across the District including 
across railways where applicable. 
IV. All new routes should be provided as will be multi-user routes  and be designed with suitable 
widths to enable use as bridleways, avoiding the need for horse riders to rely on our rural 
roads. network. 
V. All new rights of way and gates must be designed to be in compliance with the Equalities 
Act 2010 or relevant legislation so they are suitable for those with mobility impairments . 
VI. All new routes should seek to extend be incorporated  to extend the existing  public rights of 
way network and reduce fragmentation by roads, railways and other infrastructure. 
VII. All new developments should be designed to enable safe crossing of roads/rail and railway  
lines from new public rights of way. 
VIII. New permissive  paths are encouraged to fill in gaps in the public rights of way network. 
The Council  will expect applicants to have engaged with the Surrey County Council on Public 
Rights of Way matters at the earliest opportunity. 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s)  
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
200 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
SO8 - Design; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net gains and/or losses to designated public rights of way. 
Landscape Character 
26.6 The landscape  of Surrey is extremely varied, but of consistent high quality with some of the 
best views in the country. We believe Tandridge District has some of the best landscapes in the 
county. 
26.7 It is inevitable that over time landscapes will change as ways of life alter and populations grow, 
placing greater pressures on land. Our Local Plan seeks to both recognise the landscape of the 
District, protect and enhance it and put in place mechanisms to ensure that where development does 
take place, the intrinsic character of an area is understood and used to guide the appearance of built 
form. 
26.8 While Surrey  Hills and High Weald are nationally-designated Areas of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty, there are other landscapes that have their own distinctive attractive character and these need 
to be recognised appropriately. 
26.9 In 2015, a county-wide assessment of the landscapes in Surrey was carried out and is being 
used to inform plan-making across the county. The Surrey Landscape Character Assessment (2015) 
takes account of the framework of the National Character Areas recently reviewed by Natural England 
and describes variations in the landscape character at a county level. 
26.10 A landscape  character assessment looks at local landscapes and their unique qualities in a 
detailed way. It identifies the components of the landscape including the underlying geology, soils, 
topography, land cover hydrology, vegetation, historic and cultural development and physical features. 
It describes how these elements and features combine together to make one place different from 
another. In the case of Tandridge, eight landscape types were found to exist in the District. 
26.11 The landscape  types were then further sub-divided into local landscape character areas and 
16 are identified for Tandridge, each with their own key characteristics which contribute to local 
distinctiveness and sense of place. It is important that development reflects and embraces these 
differences: 
Chaldon Chalk  Down with Woodland 
South Woldingham Chalk Down with Woodland 
Forestdale to Woldingham Chalk Down with Woodland 
Tatsfield Chalk Down with Woodland 
Hooley to Chaldon Open Chalk Farmland 
Caterham to Woldingham Open Chalk Farmland 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 201 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
Woldingham to New Addington Open Chalk Farmland 
Box Hill to Tatsfield Chalk Ridge 
South Caterham Wooded North Down 
Merstham to Clacket Lane Greensand Valley 
Earlswood to Oxted Wooded Greensand Hills 
The Chart Wooded Greensand Hills 
Horley to Swaynesland Low Weald Farmland 
Domewood to Dormansland Wooded High Weald 
Dormansland East Wooded High Weald 
Holmthorpe Pits and Mercer’s Park. 
26.12 As set out in the Surrey Landscape Character Assessment (SLCA) (2015) each local 
landscape character area has its own detailed description, key landscape features and visual 
sensitivities. We will expect all applications for development to be designed in recognition of their 
individual landscape characteristics to protect the landscapes from adverse change and to encourage 
positive change in weak or degraded landscapes. 
26.13 It is important to note that the SLCA and the policies of Our Local Plan should be read 
alongside and considered with the principles set out in AONB Management Plans where they are 
relevant, and should also be referenced when designing schemes. 
26.14 Given the  importance of landscapes in the District, the Council carried out further work 
independently on a site-by-site basis when determining site allocations. These are set out in the 
Tandridge Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Study which were undertaken between 2016 and 
2018 and are published as evidence for Our Local Plan. 
TLP32: Landscape Character 
Landscape Character Areas for the District are set out on the Policies Map. 
All proposals  for development in the District will protect and enhance the key landscape features 
and visual sensitivities of the landscape character areas identified in the Surrey Landscape 
Character Assessment 2015 and the Tandridge Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Assessment 
2016-18, or subsequent updates where they apply. 
Proposals will  be required to incorporate and implement the landscape guidance set out in the 
SLCA, 2015, and to: 
I. Protect and  enhance the character and qualities of the local landscape through appropriate 
design and management, and 
II. Make provision  for the retention and enhancement of features of landscape importance, 
and 
III. Protect and  where possible, enhance key public views and vistas, and 
202 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
IV. Protect the landscape setting and contribute to maintaining the individual and distinct 
character of settlements by preventing coalescence, and 
V. Where appropriate, provide landscape mitigation. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Landscape Character Assessment (2015) 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Assessment (2016-2018) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number and nature of applications proposed within designated Landscape Character Areas. 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
26.15 Around 16%  of our District holds the national designation of Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty (AONB). These areas are designated as such as they have significant landscape value in 
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. 
26.16 The District  has two areas of land covered by AONB. The Surrey Hills covers much of the 
northern part of the District. The High Weald covers the south-eastern corner of our area before 
crossing into Mid Sussex, Wealden and Sevenoaks districts. 
26.17 AONBs were  originally identified via the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 
1949, with the primary purpose of conserving the natural beauty of the landscape. Natural beauty is 
not just the look of the landscape, but includes land form and geology, plants and animals, landscape 
features and the rich history of human settlement over the centuries. All of these are important 
considerations when assessing any proposal in the context of AONB. 
26.18 Natural England  is currently responsible for the designation and review of AONBs. The Surrey 
Hills AONB was designated in 1958 and the High Weald AONB in 1983. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 203 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
The Surrey Hills and Area of Greater Landscape Value 
26.19 The Surrey  Hills AONB offers access to high quality natural green space and views and 
covers 12% of the District. The Surrey Hills AONB stretches across a quarter of the county of Surrey 
and includes the chalk slopes of the North Downs at Farnham and flows through landscapes and 
multiple districts and boroughs through to Tandridge and Oxted and Woldingham in the east. 
26.20 Land designated  as Area of Greater Landscape Value (AGLV) was included in previously 
adopted plans. The majority of this abuts the AONB across six Surrey authorities and originates from 
the expired Surrey County Structure Plan. Historically, the AGLV has acted as a buffer to the AONB 
but also has its own inherent landscape quality. It has performed an important role in conserving the 
landscape setting of some towns and villages. 
26.21 For much  of Tandridge, the AONB and AGLV designations are contiguous and have served 
the landscapes of the District well. They have also proven to be important to our communities. This 
has been made clear through the comments received through consultation. That said, as a local 
designation, the AGLV holds less weight than the AONB in policy terms and this is confirmed by the 
National Planning Policy Framework (paragraphs 113 and 115). 
26.22 On reflection  of the consistently important role the AGLV has played across Surrey and the 
quality of it in its own right, a countywide review of the AGLV was undertaken in 2007, the outcome 
of which grouped the AGLV into three categories: 
parts that shared identical characteristics with the AONB; 
parts sharing some characteristics with the AONB; and 
parts sharing few or no characteristics with the AONB. 
26.23 The assessment  recommended an urgent review of the AONB boundary and that no areas 
should be removed from AGLV designation until the case for an amended AONB boundary has been 
considered. With the introduction of the NPPF in 2012 the need for the review increased to ensure 
that the appropriate level of protection could be afforded. 
26.24 In 2013, Natural England, which is the statutory body charged with the review and designation 
of AONBs, agreed there should be a Landscape Character Assessment and Evaluation of natural 
beauty of neighbouring areas to the AONB. This assessment recommended 38 candidate areas to 
be included within the Surrey Hills AONB, primarily including land which is part of the AGLV, but other 
areas too where AONB characteristics were identified. Natural England have included the boundary 
review in its corporate plan to 2018 and is anticipated to commence in late 2018  2019. 
26.25 Therefore, until  the AONB Review is completed, the AGLV will be retained in Our Local Plan 
and has remained a consistent consideration throughout the preparation of the Plan and when 
considering constraints. This approach recognises the landscape quality of the AGLV and the role it 
plays as a buffer to the AONB and indeed recognises those candidate areas which could become 
part of the actual AONB. 
204 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
26.26 Once the AONB review is completed any remaining parts of the AGLV, not included in the 
AONB will have less status. However, the landscape character of the countryside outside the AONB 
will be protected and informed by the Surrey Wide Landscape Character Assessment as set out at 
TLP32. 
26.27 The approach  we are taking in Our Local Plan is consistent with other affected Local Authorities 
across Surrey and also follows a similar approach we have previously taken through the earlier Core 
Strategy (2008). 
26.28 The Council  continue to work with the Surrey Hills AONB unit and board on all relevant 
matters and remain supportive of the role played by the Management Plans, the most recent of which 
covers the period 2014-2019 and is currently being updated. expected to  commence update by the 
time this Plan is submitted for examination . 
The High  Weald 
26.29 The High  Weald AONB covers around 4% of our District in the south-eastern corner, adjacent 
to the administrative areas of Sevenoaks, Wealden and Mid Sussex District Councils. It is described 
as a medieval landscape of wooded, rolling hills studded with sandstone outcrops; small, 
irregular-shaped fields, scattered farmsteads, and ancient route-ways which covers parts of Kent, 
Sussex and Surrey(27). 
26.30 In comparison  to the Surrey Hills where important and far-reaching views are synonymous, 
the High Weald can be characterised as having a very 'hidden' landscape where the varied topography 
and copious woodland hinder long-views. Instead, the focus in the High Weald is much more on 
landscape components, biodiversity and cultural heritage. Any development proposals will be 
considered in the context of its unique character and proposals which attempt to argue that 
development cannot easily be 'seen' as a result of the landscape, will not be considered acceptable. 
26.31 Unlike the  Surrey Hills AONB, there is limited built form within the vicinity of the High Weald 
and none of the District's established settlements are covered by the designation. We will continue 
to work with the AONB unit as is relevant and remain supportive of the role played by the Management 
Plans, the most recent of which covers the period 2014-2019 but has recently commenced update. 
Review of  National Parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
26.32 In further  support of our approach to our AONB, in May 2018, the Government announced 
its commitment to conserving and enhancing England’s most cherished landscapes by launching a 
nation-wide review into the nation’s National Parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs). 
26.33 Information available  is not sufficiently detailed to indicate does not indicate that this will 
replace the review of the Surrey Hills AONB, but is likely to supplement it. It is understood that the 
national review will be more high-level and look at how these iconic landscapes meet the needs of 
the 21st century – including whether there is scope for the current network of 34 AONBs and 10 
National Parks to expand. The Council will continue to liaise with both AONB units as to how the 
review will effect the areas in the District. 
27 High Weald AONB -http://www.highweald.org/learn-about/high-weald-boundary.html 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 205 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
26.34 The national review will also explore how access to these landscapes can be improved, how 
those who live and work in them can be better supported, and their role in growing the rural economy. 
26.35 Weakening or  undermining their existing protections or geographic scope will not be part of 
the review, which will instead focus on how designated areas can boost wildlife, support the recovery 
of natural habitats and connect more people with nature. 
26.36 Undertaking a  review is one of the key commitments of the government’s 25 Y ear Environment 
Plan, which outlines their vision for improving the environment over a generation by connecting people 
with nature and helping wildlife to thrive. 
TLP33: Surrey Hills and High Weald Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
The Surrey Hills and High Weald Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), as shown on 
the Policies Map, will continue to respect and reflect their high national landscape status, scenic 
and natural beauty and the purposes they serve. 
Any planning applications relevant to within the AONB and that influence its setting will need to 
demonstrate that the development: it: 
I. has sought to conserve and enhance: the special landscape character, heritage, 
distinctiveness, sense of place of the locality and where appropriate, relative tranquillity, 
II. would safeguard public views out of and into the AONB and not adversely impact skylines 
and slopes, 
III. is designed to take advantage of existing landscape features and tree screening; and 
IV. has met the provisions and objectives of the most up-to-date AONB Management Plan for 
the area. 
Major development in the AONB will not be permitted other than in exceptional circumstances 
and where it can be demonstrated to be in the public interest. 
Small-scale affordable housing schemes and/or rural exceptions development may be acceptable 
where they would serve a demonstrable local need, in perpetuity and conform with the policies 
in the Development Plan. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Landscape Character Assessment Report (2015) 
Surrey Hills AGLV Review (2007) and further work (2013) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
206 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number and nature of applications proposed within Surrey Hills and High Weald AONB and 
AGLV. 
TLP34: Area of Greater Landscape Value and Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Candidate 
Areas 
The Area of Greater Landscape Value (AGLV), will be retained for its own sake until a review 
of the Surrey Hills AONB has been completed. The AGLV and AONB candidate areas are 
designated on the Policies Map. The two areas will be treated accordingly to and reflect how 
land has been categorised for the purposes of the forthcoming review: 
AONB Candidate Area: Areas of land which have been shown to meet Natural England's criteria 
of 'Natural Beauty' for inclusion in share the characteristics of the AONB and which are candidate 
areas could be added to the Surrey Hills designation; and 
AGLV: Areas of land that form currently designated as part of the wider AGLV, but which have 
not been shown to meet Natural England's criteria of 'Natural Beauty' for inclusion indo not share 
the characteristics of the AONB and are not candidate areas to be included in the Surrey Hills 
AONB. Any planning applications within the AGLV will be required to demonstrate that they would not 
result in harm to the setting of the AONB or the distinctive character of the AGLV itself, until such 
time as there has been a review of the AONB boundary. 
Following the completion of the AONB review, any land which does not form the new boundary 
for the Surrey Hills, will no longer hold the AGLV status and applications will be assessed in 
accordance with Policy TLP32. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Landscape Character Assessment Report (2015) 
Surrey Hills AGLV Review  (2007) Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Evaluation (2013) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Landscape Capacity and Sensitivity Study (2016 - 2018) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 207 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number and nature of applications proposed within Surrey Hills and High Weald AONB and 
AGLV. 
Biodiversity and Ecology 
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs) 
26.37 The Surrey  Nature Partnership is the Local Nature Partnership recognised by central 
government for our county. The Partnership works with all Surrey districts' and boroughs to set out 
an approach to conserving and enhancing the biodiversity at a landscape-scale. This approach 
identifies Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs): areas that are the most important for wildlife 
conservation and that include a variety of habitats, providing for an ecosystem approach to nature 
conservation across the District. 
26.38 The aim  of BOAs is to establish a strategic framework for conserving and enhancing 
biodiversity at a landscape-scale, making our wildlife more robust to changing climate and 
socio-economic pressures. BOAs are those areas where targeted maintenance, restoration and 
creation of priority habitats (Natural Environment & Rural Communities (NERC) Act ‘Habitats of 
Principal Importance’) will have the greatest benefit towards achieving this aim. By working with larger, 
more dynamic ecosystems, it will be possible to create a wider range of habitats and their variants. 
In turn this will increase the ability of the landscape to support the largest variety of species, and 
BOAs provide an opportunity for contributing to focus net gains to maximise biodiversity 
provision benefits and  contribute to the achievement of national Biodiversity 2020  targets. 
26.39 As part of their work on BOAs, the Surrey Nature Partnership has prepared corresponding 
Policy Statements for each identified landscape-scaled area to assist those considering land in BOAs, 
be that for development or environmental conservation purposes. 
26.40 The recognition  of BOAs in Our Local Plan accords with the NPPF, and contributes to 
international commitments for halting the overall decline in biodiversity by establishing coherent 
ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future pressures (paragraph 109). By formally 
recognising the BOAs in our area through Our Local Plan, we also fulfil NPPF requirements to plan 
for biodiversity at a landscape-scale across local authority boundaries and to identify and map 
components of the local ecological networks (paragraph 117). 
208 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
26.41 Net gains in biodiversity can be achieved through a variety of mechanisms including, but not 
limited to, habitat creation and/or enhancement. These mechanisms could be integrated into the 
design of any proposal through: the provision of new wildlife habitats; enhancement of green networks 
and measures on building structures; green roofs that add to the visual interest of an area and assist 
in adapting to a changing climate by providing passive cooling, as well as providing opportunities for 
plants and wildlife; and habitats for vulnerable species. 
26.42 Where adequate  biodiversity gains cannot be included within a development site, off-site 
provision may be considered. The net gains should be appropriate and proportionate for the 
development. 
26.43 BOAs in Tandridge are indicated on the pPolicies mMap, and  a great deal of the District is 
designated as such. 
Sites of Nature Special Conservation Interest Importance and  Potential Sites of Special Nature 
Conservation
 Interest Importance (p/SNCI)  
26.44 SNCIs are  sites identified for their substantive nature conservation value and are selected 
by the Surrey Local Sites Partnership (SLSP - formerly known as the Surrey Nature Conservation 
Liaison Group or SNCLG). Selection is based on evidence collected in the field and tested against 
a set of locally agreed criteria (currently Gibbs (2008); Guidelines for the selection of SNCIs in Surrey, 
Surrey Wildlife Trust) and based on national guidance produced by Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). 
26.45 The majority  of SNCIs in Surrey were originally identified in the mid-1990s including those 
in Tandridge District. Some 274 sites in Tandridge were surveyed between 1996 and 1997 as part 
of a District-wide review carried out by the Surrey Wildlife Trust on behalf of the District Council and 
Surrey County Council. A total of 90 SNCIs were initially identified across the District, demonstrating 
the richness of habitats we have. 
26.46 As part of the process, a long list of other candidate sites were also identified as having the 
potential to become SNCI's. However, despite every attempt being made to secure permission to 
access the site and carry out a survey to determine the status of a site, not everyone responded or 
gave consent. Where permission to survey an area was not obtained the site remained a potential 
SNCI (pSNCI), but could not be recommended further. 
26.47 While not  all Surrey authorities have chosen to recognise pSNCI's, Tandridge, taking a 
precautionary approach, has historically done so and pSNCI's have been recognised by earlier 
planning policies, which we are continuing to do in Our Local Plan. Sites identified as pSNCIs will 
retain this designation until such time as a full assessment of the nature conservation interest of the 
site is possible. Such an assessment will either enable the SLSP to select the site as a full SNCI or 
to remove or revise the pSNCI status. 
26.48 Over the  course of 2015 and 2016 and in preparing Our Local Plan the Council has liaised 
with Surrey Wildlife Trust (SWT) to carry out a review of a number of pSNCIs considered to be under 
the most pressure of development. Once again, despite every effort being made to identify and obtain 
appropriate permissions to carry out the required surveys, permission to survey was only granted for 
five sites, of which four were selected as full SNCIs. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 209 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
26.49 Given the importance of the biodiversity and habitats both from a local perspective and that 
of national policy, Our Local Plan will continue to recognise all of our SNCIs and to apply a 
precautionary principle to the remaining pSNCIs. The assessment of any planning application affected 
by a pSNCI will be treated with the same status as a SNCI until recommended otherwise by SLSP. 
26.50 Going forward,  the Council will continue to work with the SWT to carry out the remaining 
assessments as their resources allow. 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) 
26.51 SSSIs have  been identified for many decades now to provide statutory protection to the best 
examples of the UK's flora, fauna, or geological or physiographical features. There are 8 SSSI's 
located within the dDistrict, including  Woldingham and Ooxted Downs,  near W oldingham, Blindley 
Heath
 and Staffhurst Wood, the lake at SSSI and  Hedgecourt, near  Felbridge. 
26.52 LNRs are  areas of local or community importance for either wildlife, geology, education or 
passive recreational enjoyment (without disturbing  wildlife). LNRs are usually areas of natural green 
space, but other types of land such as commons, historic cemeteries and orchards can be designated 
as an LNR. 
26.53 In accordance  with the NPPF, Our Local Plan will consider any potential adverse impact on 
SSSIs and LNRs resulting from proposals within or adjacent to land of these designations. We will 
expect proposals to take appropriate measures to conserve or enhance the features of these 
designations, and limit any detrimental impact. 
Environmental Initiative:  Downlands Partnership 
26.54 The Surrey  County Council - supported Downlands Partnership provides an established 
urban fringe countryside management service, enhancing the local environment for people and wildlife 
is active in Tandridge. 
26.55 The aims  of the Partnership encompass the whole range of countryside management activities 
relating to access, landscape, biodiversity, sustainability, information and community involvement. 
The Partnership area contains a variety of habitats and features, but is dominated by the rare chalk 
downland habitat found on the scarp and dip slopes of the North Downs. Its area of operation covers 
countryside sites, many being LNRs and/or SSSIs in North East Surrey and adjoining parts of the 
London Boroughs of Croydon and Sutton. The rolling chalk hills and associated valleys give rise to 
stunning scenery. The sites are managed in partnership with local authorities and private land owners. 
26.56 The Council  continue s to recognise the value of the Downlands Partnership and the benefits 
it brings. 
TLP35: Biodiversity, Ecology and Habitats 
Proposals for development Development proposals  should protect  biodiversity, geodiversity and 
natural habitats and contribute to the wider Green and Blue Infrastructure network in accordance 
with TLP30. 
210 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
Proposals for Ddevelopment at  any given site should ensure there is no a net loss gain in 
biodiversity. Schemes should provide for the maintenance, enhancement , restoration and, if 
possible, expansion of such important assets,  by aiming to restore or create appropriate priority 
wildlife suitable semi-natural  habitats and  ecological networks to sustain and recover biodiversity . 
wildlife. 
Schemes should  also ensure that Priority Habitats  and natural features  are protected by 
incorporation within the Green and Blue Infrastructure network, including sufficient buffering. 
Biodiversity Opportunity  Areas (BOAs) 
The Council  will conserve and enhance biodiversity and seek opportunities for Priority habitat 
creation and restoration particularly within and adjacent to Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs). 
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas are identified on the accompanying Policies Map. 
Proposals for  development must demonstrate how they will deliver appropriate net gains in 
biodiversity where possible. Where proposals fall within or adjacent to a BOA, biodiversity 
measures should support that BOA’s objectives as set out in the BOA-specific Policy Statements 
prepared by the Surrey Nature Partnership and the policies of Our Local  the development  Pplan. 
Other Nationally  and Locally Designated Sites 
Proposals within  or outside an SSSI, LNR, SNCI or pSNCI which would be likely to adversely 
affect the designated site (either individually or in combination with other developments) will not 
be permitted unless the benefits of the development clearly outweigh both the adverse impacts 
on the designated site and any adverse impacts on the wider biodiversity network. 
Where adverse  impacts are unavoidable they must be adequately and proportionately mitigated. 
If full mitigation cannot be provided, compensation will be required as a last resort. 
pSNCI's will  continue to be treated commensurately to  in the same manner as those sites with 
full SNCI status, until such time as an updated assessment takes place and a decision is made 
by the Surrey Local Sites Partnership. 
All Nationally  and Locally designated sites are identified on the accompanying Policies Map. 
Environmental Initiatives  
The Council will  continue to support the work of the Downlands Partnership and the role it plays 
in protecting and enhancing habitats of the North Downs and the access to the countryside it 
facilitates. 
Further detail  regarding biodiversity, geodiversity and other elements of the natural environment 
will be set out in the Green and Blue Infrastructure Supplementary Planning Document. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 211 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Nature Partnership Biodiversity Opportunity Areas: the basis for realising Surrey's 
ecological network, December 2015 
Site Based Ecology Assessments (2016, 2017 and 2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net number of gains and/or losses of permissions granted on SSSI, SNCI, LNR, pSNCI, 
BOA sites 
Net gains in biodiversity. 
European Sites 
26.57 There are  two areas of international sites of particular relevance to the Local Plan and which 
are protected for their contribution to wildlife and biodiversity. The Ashdown Forest and Mole Gap to 
Reigate Escarpment are both designated Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and the Ashdown 
Forest is also designated a Special Protection Area (SPA). Both sites are located in neighbouring 
local authority areas but remain relevant to Tandridge which sits within the wider area of influence 
for both locations. 
Mole Gap  to Reigate Escarpment Strategic Area of Conservation (SAC) 
26.58 The Mole  Gap to Reigate Escarpment SAC is located within neighbouring Reigate and 
Banstead Borough Council and stretches beyond to the area of Mole Valley. It is 890ha in size, 
approximately 8 miles long and around 3km from the Tandridge District boundary at its nearest eastern 
tip. It is the only area of stable box scrub in the UK and supports calcareous grassland types, Yew 
woodlands, European dry heaths and beech woodlands and is particularly important for rare vascular 
plants including orchids. 
26.59 The supporting  Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) process has looked at potential 
impact pathways from the Local Plan, in combination with the Plans of other local authorities with 
particular regard to possible recreational disturbance, air quality and hydrology. 
26.60 The HRA  considered how all impacts can be screened out, avoided and/or mitigated and 
noted that there are no residential allocations being made by Our Local Plan, within 7km of the SAC. 
212 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
26.61 It was also identified that relevant policies of the Local Plan, including sustainable transport 
and air quality, would have a positive effect in respect of recreational pressures on the Mole Gap to 
Reigate Escarpment SAC. The potential for Green Infrastructure alongside the South Godstone 
Garden Community, would also provide positive opportunities and will be explored further in the 
preparation of an Area Action Plan. 
Ashdown Forest  Special Protection Area (SPA) and Strategic Area of Conservation (SAC) 
26.62 Ashdown Forest  is located south-east of the District, around 5km away at its nearest point, 
in Wealden, East Sussex. The SAC is 2,729ha in size and the SPA slightly larger at 3,207ha. The 
SAC is one of the largest single continuous blocks of lowland heath in south-east England, with both 
European dry heaths and, in a larger proportion, wet heath. The Forest qualifies as an SPA by 
supporting populations of European importance of Dartford Warbler and Nightjar. 
26.63 The supporting  and statutory HRA process has looked at potential impact pathways from 
the Local Plan, in combination with the Plans of other local authorities. The main impacts that were 
identified were recreational disturbance and air quality. Much work has been done in partnership 
with other Local Authorities affected by the Ashdown Forest, to explore 'in combination' impacts 
further and any mitigation requirements and mechanisms, if needed. 
26.64 Modelling undertaken  by Aecom (2017/18), on behalf of the Council, concludes there is no 
basis to indicate an likely significant  adverse air quality effect on integrity of Ashdown Forest SAC 
over the Plan period, even in combination with other plans and projects. Since no net adverse effect 
on integrity is forecast, no mitigation as such would be required. 
26.65 Nonetheless, as  supporting evidence notes, this conclusion is not intended to suggest that 
no active attempt should be made to reduce background NOx concentrations and nitrogen deposition 
around Ashdown Forest as a matter of general good stewardship. A partnership forum with other 
relevant local authorities has agreed a ‘Statement of Common Ground’ in relation to the air quality 
impacts on the Forest. The forum will also be important in monitoring long-term trends in roadside 
air quality within Ashdown Forest SAC at regular (e.g. five-year) intervals, in order to track the forecast 
improvements. If necessary, the forum will provide a further safeguard to ensure changes in traffic 
flows and vehicular emissions stemming from development do not result in adverse effects upon the 
integrity of Ashdown Forest SAC in isolation or in combination. 
26.66 Many of our policies and strategies in the Local Plan have beneficial effects and avoid  impacts, 
including
 TLP46: Pollution and Air Quality, TLP50: Sustainable Transport and Travel; and a number 
of others. as well as focusing development in sustainable communities (TLP01, TLP06, TLP07) and 
minimising the need to travel to essential services and employment (TLP20, TLP24, TLP26). In 
addition, our policies support the recommendations of the Local Transport Plan and Surrey Air Alliance 
and continue to be involved with them. 
26.67 In relation  to recreation, the 2016 Ashdown Forest Visitor Survey, together with our 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA), suggest a need to mitigate visitor pressure from within 7km of the 
Ashdown Forest. 
26.68 The HRA  noted that Our Local Plan makes no residential allocations within 7km of the SAC. 
Nonetheless the elements of Policy TLP36: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area are necessary 
to mitigate effects in the event of development coming forward, essentially requiring contributions in 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 213 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
the form of Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) and Suitable Alternative Natural 
Green Space (SANG). For sites beyond the 7km zone of influence, an Appropriate Assessment may 
be required under the HRA, to determine whether there will be a likely impact on the integrity of the 
SPA and a further Statement of Common Ground is being prepared in relation to this strategic matter. 
26.69 A further  reassurance and safeguard in the Local Plan 2033, as set out in TLP30: Green 
and Blue Infrastructure and SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community, is the commitment to a 
large scale (100ha+) area of green infrastructure alongside the new Garden Community. This is 
primarily justified by the access deficit to strategic scale natural and semi-natural greenspace 
demonstrated by applying Natural England’s ANGSt ANGsT standard  in the Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Typologies and Standards Study (2017) background evidence paper. However, there are 
knock-on benefits to such provision – it will serve many of the functions of a SANG, being attractive 
to local residents and in turn providing them with the opportunity to stay local and negating their need 
to travel further afield to the more ecologically vulnerable international sites outside the District 
boundaries. 
26.70 The support  for improved links to the countryside from urban areas, and improvement of 
existing open spaces for recreation, will also be beneficial. 
TLP36: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area 
All residential development within 7km of the Special Protection Area boundary, will need to put 
in place adequate measures to avoid and mitigate potential effects on the Special Protection 
Area. These must be delivered prior to occupation and in perpetuity. To meet these requirements 
developments will need to: 
Make a financial contribution towards the Strategic Access Management and Monitoring 
(SAMM) for the Special Protection Area. 
Contribute to  Suitable Alternative Natural Green Space (SANG) provision at a standard of 
8 hectares per 1,000 residents (minimum after any discounting) and designed to replicate 
the quality of the international sites visitor experience as far as possible; or the provision 
of bespoke mitigation. 
SANG should  incorporate a round walk of at least 2.5km. The priority hierarchy for SANG delivery 
will be as follows: 
I. Provided in  the vicinity of the development. 
II. Make appropriate  contributions to a SANG on a similar impact pathway (i.e. located in the 
intervening spatial area between the site and the SPA), prioritised according to road distance 
from the site 
214 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
III. Contribute to SANG standard green infrastructure located alongside the new garden 
settlement, or elsewhere within Tandridge District, subject to the agreement of Natural 
England 
IV. Offset contributions  towards another SANG anywhere within 7km of the Ashdown Forest. 
For sites  beyond the 7km zone of influence, the Council will take a precautionary approach 
where an Appropriate Assessment may be required under the Habitats Regulations Assessment 
to determine whether there will be a likely impact on the integrity of the Special Protection Area. 
Where bespoke  mitigation is provided, these measures will need to be in place before occupation 
of development and must be managed and maintained in perpetuity. The effectiveness of such 
mitigation will need to be demonstrated prior to approval of the development. Bespoke mitigation 
will need to be discussed and agreed by the Council as the competent authority following advice 
from Natural England. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) 
Sustainability Appraisal 
Ashdown Forest Visitor Survey (2016) 
Ashdown Forest SPA Monitoring Strategy (2018) 
Ashdown Forest: Statement of Common Ground 
Ashdown Forest: Inter Authority Agreement 
Tandridge Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space, Sport 
and Recreation Typologies and Standards (2017) 
Tandridge Local Plan: Ashdown Forest Air Quality Impact Assessment (2018) 
Tandridge Local Plan: Mole Gap to Reigate Escarpment SAC Air Quality Impact Assessment 
(2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of applications that have contributions to SAMM 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 215 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
Trees and Soft Landscaping 
26.71 Trees, hedgerows  and other vegetation are natural capital assets that complement our 
District, add maturity to new development and deliver a variety of environmental, social, economic, 
cultural, education, health, and recreation benefits. 
26.72 Consultation has  shown us that trees are highly valued by our community. While the way 
they are dealt with has historically been a detailed matter for the application process; we feel that 
trees and many elements of soft landscaping also have a strategic importance to the District. For 
example, as well as being attractive landscape amenity features, trees and hedgerows also improve 
air quality, absorb carbon dioxide and help to regulate urban temperatures. Vegetated areas reduce 
surface water run-off and help to prevent flooding, are vital to the life cycle of bees and other pollinating 
insects, and provide appropriate habitat. for birds,  bats and fungi. Individual trees,  groups of trees 
and woodlands can be affected by an individual development, but entire tree populations within our 
landscapes can also be badly affected by piecemeal tree removal on development sites if it occurs 
on an ongoing basis without control. As such trees and soft landscaping should be a key strategic 
consideration from the outset, not just factors to be considered on a case by case basis. 
26.73 We have  always taken a robust position on matters relating to trees and soft landscaping. 
Early indications from bodies such as the Woodland Trust, Natural England and draft government 
policies appear to be encouraging local authorities to go further in their protection of trees particularly 
Ancient Woodland and Veteran Trees and providing access to woodlands. Our Local Plan is supportive 
of this. 
26.74 Tree Preservation  Orders (TPOs) are used by the Council to legally protect specific trees, 
groups of trees or woodlands that provide public amenity. The Council and has adopted procedures 
for how TPOs  are administered within the  dDistrict. The Council  and also  administers the Hedgerow 
Regulations 1997, which protects countryside hedgerows. The Council is under a duty to ensure, 
whenever it is appropriate, that in granting planning permission for any development adequate 
provision is made for the preservation or planting of trees, and to make TPOs where necessary in 
connection with the grant of planning permission. The cutting, lopping, uprooting, damage or removal 
of any part of a tree subject to a TPO, other than the removal of deadwood, requires the Council’s 
prior consent. 
26.75 Trees are  also protected when they are growing within a conservation area and outside of 
the planning process anybody wishing to undertake works to trees located within a conservation area 
must give the Council six weeks’ notice of their intentions. This notice period allows the Council to 
make a TPO if it is expedient to do so. Where a planning application relates to trees in conservation 
areas, the Council will pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character 
of that area. 
26.76 In order to assist applicants in preparing successful proposals, in November 2017 we adopted 
a Trees and Soft Landscaping Supplementary Planning Document. This sets out the Council’s 
approach to the integration of new and existing trees and soft landscaping into new development. 
Our Local Plan will not supersede this, but instead will continue to support that document and we 
216 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 26 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 
fully anticipate it to remain relevant. Further, where it is beneficial and relevant to do so, guidance 
may be drawn from the Woodland Trust Access Standards(28) and the Woodland Trust practical 
guidance document 'Residential Developments and Trees' (2015). 
TLP37: Trees and Soft Landscaping 
Trees and soft landscaping represent a fundamental part of the landscape of the District and its 
natural capital. Trees and soft landscaping also have an important role in limiting the impact of 
rainfall and increasing temperatures and they enhance leisure experiences. To ensure this 
remains the case, we will: 
I. Resist the loss of trees, woodlands, hedgerows and vegetation of significant amenity, 
historic, cultural or ecological value, including proposals which have the potential to threaten 
the continued wellbeing of such trees and vegetation; 
II. Require existing trees, hedgerows and vegetation to be positively integrated into the site 
layout and protected in accordance with BS5837:2012 and any subsequent update, allowing 
for the future growth of trees and avoiding conflict with structures, hard surfaces and resident 
amenity; 
III. Require comprehensive replacement planting to be provided where trees have been removed 
prior to planning permission being granted, unless the Council considers there is an 
overriding reason not to do so. Evidence of any such justification must be submitted within 
the application details before any deviation from the requirement to replant will be considered. 
Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect or damage to trees or woodland assets the 
deteriorated state of the asset will not be taken into account in any decision. 
IV. Expect new development to positively integrate space for additional trees, hedgerows and 
vegetation wherever possible within layout design allowing for the future growth of trees 
both above and below ground and avoiding conflict with structures, hard surfaces and 
resident amenity; 
V. Seek opportunities to improve links between green spaces to improve access for recreation 
and corridors which allow species to move between habitats. 
Planning permission will be refused for development resulting in the loss or deterioration of 
ancient woodland and the loss of aged or veteran trees found outside ancient woodland (including 
from indirect impacts such as increased visitor pressure), unless the need for, and benefits of, 
the development in that location clearly outweigh the loss and a suitable compensation strategy 
exists. 
28 Woodland Trust (2010) Space for people. Woodland Trust Research Report 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 217 Green and Blue Infrastructure, Landscape and the Natural Environment 26 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Trees and Soft Landscaping Supplementary Planning Document (2017) 
Woodland Trust: Space for people. Woodland Trust Research Report (2010) 
Woodland Trust: Residential Developments and Trees (2015) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of applications resulting in a loss of a TPO 
Proposals where important trees are to be removed/have already been removed, but 
replacement planting can mitigate 
Proposals where important trees are to be removed/have already been removed, but there 
is insufficient space for replacement planting 
Proposals where there is net gain and/or loss in soft landscaping 
Proposals which require the loss or deterioration of ancient woodland, or ancient or veteran 
trees. 
218 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 
27 Play and Open Space 
27 Play and Open Space 
27.1 Access to  high quality open spaces and opportunities for sport and recreation make an 
important contribution to the health and wellbeing of communities. 
27.2 Open space  for community benefit exists in many forms, including sporting facilities - both 
indoor and outdoor-children's play spaces, parks, natural and semi-natural green spaces, allotments 
and even churchyards, to name just a few. The different types of open spaces are not just beneficial 
to our communities and visitors, but also an important element of our wider Green Infrastructure 
network and we value the multifunctional role they play for habitat creation, biodiversity and in setting 
the aesthetic and physical character of our area. 
27.3 The National  Planning Policy Framework requires local planning authorities to set out policies 
to help enable communities to access high quality open spaces and opportunities for sport and 
recreation. These policies must be based on a thorough understanding of the local needs for such 
facilities and opportunities available for new provision. 
27.4 In preparing  Our Local Plan the Council commissioned the undertaking of the Open Space,  
Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment (2017/18) Open Space  Study (2017) which examines 
existing and projected needs for open space, sport and recreation  provision, using a variety of data 
sources, together with independent investigation, stakeholder and community consultation and 
surveys. Analysis of the data gathered and the reporting of findings has followed appropriate national 
guidance and informed the standards in Policy TLP38. 
27.5 The primary  aims of the wider Open Space Assessment were to: 
understand how the existing open spaces in the District performed and the levels already provided; 
determine whether there were any deficiencies or surpluses of open space, if so what type, 
where and how much; 
determine the most appropriate standards and determine how much open space should be 
provided by new development to secure balance in provision; and 
identify any opportunities for using existing open spaces better by upgrading spaces to become 
more multifunctional, for example. 
27.6 The current  planning policy for the District is set through the Detailed Policies Development 
Plan Document (2014). However, the Council recognised that the evidence and approach upon which 
policy DP18: Community, Sports & Recreational Facilities is based is outdated and does not respond 
to the spatial strategy of Our Local Plan: 2033, and a new policy is needed. 
27.7 Following the  completion of the assessment of local needs and the audit of provision, new 
standards of provision for open space, sport and recreation facilities have been established. Our 
Local Plan identifies what we will require of development to ensure sufficient open space provision 
is secured for the future. 
27.8 The local  provision standards have been set embracing three key components: quantity of 
open space, accessibility of open space and the quality of open space. Developer contributions may 
be sought on-site or off-site in order to facilitate the achievement of the standards. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 219 Play and Open Space 27 
TLP38: Play and Open Space 
All open spaces, including those depicted on the Policies Map, will be protected from loss to 
alternative use, unless replaced in a suitable location elsewhere, or deemed surplus to 
requirements in accordance with most up-to-date standards. Requirements for formal open space 
should be in addition to green/blue infrastructure (Policy TLP30) and Trees and Soft Landscaping 
(Policy TLP32). 
All applications  for development should accord with the Council's most up to date Open Space 
Assessment and Corporate Open Space Strategy. 
The following  standards will be used in relation to green space and play provision in the District 
to ensure all residents have access to sufficient, high quality, accessible green spaces and play 
areas. All proposals  subject to the requirements of this policy should also reflect the mMore 
detailed
 information and quality standards are set out in the Council's most up-to-date oOpen 
sSpace aAssessment.  
These standards  represent what will be required: 
Access Standard (Maximum)Quantity Standard 
(Minimum)Typology 
720 metres (15 minutes straight-line 
walk time) 0.20ha/1,000 population Allotments 
480 metres (10 minutes straight-line 
walk time) 0.5 ha/1,000 population Amenity Green Space -
existing provision 
480 metres (10 minutes straight-line 
walk time) 1.0 ha/1,000 population (to 
include natural green space) Amenity Green Space -
new provision 
480 metres (10 minutes straight-line 
walk time) 
1.0ha/1,000 population Parks and Recreation 
Grounds 10 minutes drive time for a larger 
multifunctional facility 
480 metres (10 minutes straight-
line walk time) 0.03 ha/1,000 population Play space - Children 
600 metres (12-13 minutes 
straight-line walk time) 0.02 ha/1,000 population Play space - Youth 
ANGSt 1.0ha/1,000 population to 
include natural and amenity 
green space Natural Green Space 
220 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 27 Play and Open Space 
In areas with populations under 1,000 people, a pro-rata approach will be used and the role of 
larger neighbouring settlements should be identified and accessibility improved where practical. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Community and 
Stakeholder Consultation (2017) 
Tandridge Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space Study 
(October 2017) (updates the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Typologies and Standards 
- August 2017) 
Tandridge District  Wellbeing Space Strategy (2015) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities. 
27.9 In addition to open spaces, the role played by formal playing pitches and facilities is also 
essential to our leisure provision in the District. They accommodate and support sporting engagements 
and in turn, health and wellbeing. 
27.10 Policy TLP39  below is informed by a Playing Pitch Strategy (PPS) which provides a clear, 
strategic framework for the maintenance and improvement of existing playing pitches and 
accompanying ancillary facilities up to 2033, in line with the Plan period. 
27.11 The PPS  recommends a number of priority projects for Tandridge, which should be realised 
over the Local Plan period. It provides a framework for improvement which gives guidance and is 
used to inform: 
The Infrastructure  Delivery Plan; 
Policies which  set requirements for pitch provision; 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 221 
Play and Open Space 27 
Bids for external funding; and 
The Council's emerging Open Space Strategy. 
27.12 Partner organisations  have a vested interest in ensuring that existing playing fields, pitches 
and ancillary facilities are protected and enhanced. As such, many of the objectives and actions within 
the PPS will be delivered outside of the requirements of the Local Plan and implemented by a wide 
range of bodies such as National Governing Bodies of Sport (NGBs), sports organisations, education 
establishments and parish/town councils. In the case of parish and village councils this is particularly 
relevant where Neighbourhood Plans are being prepared so needs and requirements for maintenance 
can be planned for at the most local level. 
27.13 The PPS  is also very relevant and a consideration for the preparation of the South Godstone 
Garden Community Area Action Plan and the requirements of that development. These will be further 
explored as the AAP is prepared and in the context of the most up-to-date evidence. 
TLP39: Providing Playing Pitches and Built Leisure Facilities 
Existing Facilities 
All existing  playing pitches including those on the Policies Map, and built leisure facilities as 
depicted
 on the Policies Maps, will be protected for their current use unless they are appropriately 
replaced in a suitable location, or where demonstrated they are surplus to requirement. All 
applications for development must be in accordance with the Council's most up-to-date Playing 
Pitch Strategy. 
New Facilities  
Proposals for  development which make provision for new or enhanced pitch and leisure facilities, 
will be supported where they contribute positively to the well-being and social cohesion of local 
communities, particularly in locations of identified deficiencies and areas of known deprivation. 
Proposals which  support and deliver three new 3G pitches, including one that is World Rugby 
compliant, will be viewed positively. In addition, the Council will work actively with Sport England 
and relevant partners to facilitate the delivery. 
Regard will  be had to the District's evidence base for requirements in relation to playing pitch 
and indoor sports provision. for local recommended standards of open space,when considering 
the provision of all relevant typologies of leisure and recreation facilities in accordance with the 
Council's most up to date assessment of Playing Pitch Strategy. 
Outdoor sport  facilities within the Green Belt will be supported where development does not have 
a significant detrimental  harmful impact  on the openness character of the Green Belt and does 
not conflict with the purposes of including land within it, in accordance with TLP03: Green Belt and 
national policy. 
222 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 27 Play and Open Space 
The Council will, in the first instance first and foremost seek to secure the physical delivery of 
pitch provision/upgrades and assurance of its management for the long-term. Where this does 
not happen for justified reasons, the Council will require financial developer contributions to make 
provision for the long-term management and maintenance of the facilities. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge District Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space 
Study (October 2017) 
Tandridge Open Space Strategy, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Assessing 
Needs and Opportunities for Indoor Sports Facilities in Tandridge (October 2017) 
Playing Pitch Strategy (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing; 
SO8 - Design; 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment; 
SO17 - Infrastructure. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net gains and/or losses of open spaces, allotments, parks and recreation grounds, play 
space 
Proposals for new indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities. 
Burial Space and Cemeteries 
27.14 With a growing and ageing population there will be a need for cemetery provision and burial 
space within the District, where loved ones can easily visit memorials to those who have died. 
27.15 Neither the  NPPF, nor the accompanying PPG offer guidance on the provision of burial or 
cemetery space, other than in the context of Green Belt. Yet the provision of burial space remains a 
very real need to all communities. While most open space studies would not set standards for this 
type of provision, in Tandridge there is a particular need to understand existing provision and to take 
a strategic view as to the future requirements for burial land and ensure that we plan for that need 
as far as is practicably possible. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 223 
Play and Open Space 27 
27.16 Earlier government policies of Planning Policy Guidance 17 (PPG17): Planning for Open 
Space and Recreation , stated that 'every individual cemetery has a finite capacity and therefore there 
is steady need for more of them. Indeed, many areas face a shortage of ground for burials. The need 
for graves, for all religious faiths, can be calculated from population estimates, coupled with details 
of the average proportion of deaths which result in a burial, and converted into a quantitative 
population-based provision standard .' The Council believe that whilst PPG17 has been revoked and 
replaced with a much less detailed NPPF, the content of that document remains sound and relevant 
in many aspects surrounding open space, including cemeteries and burial space. 
27.17 When we  consider how the application of PPG17 translates locally, it identifies that in 2015 
the age-standardised mortality rate (ASMR) for the UK was 1,010 deaths per 100,000 population 
(10.1 deaths per  1,000 population). Tandridge District average mortality rate is marginally lower at 
9.2 deaths per  1,000 population. 
27.18 Current average  levels of provision of churchyards and cemeteries across the District is 
0.33ha/1,000 population and this level of provision has largely met burial needs over the last 200 
years. That said consultation which took place on both the preparation of Our Local Plan and the 
Open Space Assessment, highlights that burial grounds are approaching full capacity and that available 
plots for burial are few. It is assessed that 191 new graves are required per annum to meet existing 
demand across the District on reflection of current population statistics and once levels of cremation 
are factored in. 
27.19 In addition  to the space required to accommodate a burial plot in a cemetery, additional 
space is required for roads, paths, trees and buildings, and also space between plots. These factors 
have been taken into account when setting the local standards for burial provision for the Plan period. 
27.20 We recognise  that successful burial spaces should be those that invite more quiet 
contemplation and as such accept that the provision of new or expanded burial space will be better 
suited to edge of settlement or rural areas. In conflict with that is availability of suitable land given 
our high proportion of Green Belt land. The policies of the NPPF consider cemeteries inappropriate 
development in the Green Belt and while it is anticipated government policy could change, this plan 
must accord with the current iteration of the NPPF. 
27.21 Whilst the  South Godstone Garden Community presents a real opportunity for the provision 
of new burial space as is deemed appropriate, this does not satisfy requirements in the shorter term. 
27.22 Our Local  Plan balances the nature and need to provide cemetery space with Green Belt 
policy and sets the overall need for additional land anticipated for the pPlan period based on population 
increase. This approach is considered to be more achievable given that application of a quantity 
standard of 0.0011ha/1,000 population is difficult to implement given that there are no access standards 
for burial space. 
27.23 Our Local  Plan provides a criteria-based policy to help determine whether very special 
circumstances could exist and that can be applied to applications for either new or expanded facilities. 
The requirements for burial space set out in Our Local Plan are not faith specific and could include 
natural burial, where appropriate. 
224 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 27 Play and Open Space 
TLP40: Burial Space 
The Council will support the provision of at least 1.82ha of new burial space over the Plan period. 
Space could be delivered via new or extended cemeteries. 
Proposals will  be considered positively in a sequential manner with priority given to those sites 
in non-Green Belt areas where the opportunity arises. 
Where applications  for burial provision relate to Green Belt, the following considerations will be 
essential in determining whether the very special circumstances for development in the Green 
Belt can be met: 
I. The proposal  must demonstrate how it fullfils fulfils a District need for burial plots; and 
II. The proposal  must demonstrate that non-Green Belt site options have been fully explored 
and rejected for sound reasons; and 
III. The proposal  must demonstrate that the travel to and from the cemetery will not place undue 
pressure on existing road and transport networks or create unsustainable travel patterns; 
and 
IV. Any proposal  must comply with other relevant policies in the development plan. 
In the event that the Council's need for burial space is met the above criteria will still remain 
relevant. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge District Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities Assessment: Open Space 
Study (2017) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO13 - Landscape & Natural Environment 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of hectares of land gained for burial space allocation. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 225 
Tourism 28 
28 Tourism 
28.1 Within our  District there are a number of much-valued leisure, historical and natural features 
and which serve to attract visitors, including: Godstone Farm Park, Priory Farm Nature Trail, Lingfield 
Park Racecourse and spa and events venue, National Trust assets, Titsey Place House and Gardens 
and The British Wildlife Centre. A number of our rural villages are of historic value and attractive to 
visitors. There are also numerous golf courses, fishing lakes, country pubs and extensive walking 
routes through our beautiful countryside and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty. A limited number 
of other special and seasonal events further enhance the District as an attractive place for tourism, 
including the Cow Pie Festival at Blindley Heath, Godstone Point to Point Races, Oxted and Edenbridge 
Agricultural Show at Ardenrun Showground and the Oxted Beer Festival at Master Park, Oxted. 
28.2 Tourism is  a very diverse industry and when properly managed and encouraged offers a 
number of benefits to the District. Tourism in Tandridge forms an important contribution to the local 
and rural economy, creates employment opportunities and assists in investment. Over 1,500 jobs in 
the District are directly related to the visitor economy, and tourism-based businesses' total annual 
turnover is near to £90 million(29). While some may argue that tourism can lead to drawbacks - traffic 
and parking congestion, commercialisation of the historic environment - and can generate conflicts 
of use in the countryside, the benefits still often outweigh difficulties, which can usually be mitigated. 
With this in mind the Council's approach is to encourage the established and growing tourism offer 
in Tandridge, while safeguarding the environment and quality of life for local residents. This is done 
particularly through policies relating to landscape, the historic environment, place-making and wider 
infrastructure provision. 
28.3 Our Local  Plan formally allocates some of our most successful tourist attractions to both 
recognise their importance, and support their operations, which could include carrying out works to 
enhance their offer, i.e. new gift shops/ticket offices, and enclosures. By setting appropriate tourism 
policies, we can help make the planning process a smoother one for our tourism assets which, by 
association, will support the wider economy and make Tandridge a more attractive place to visitors. 
TLP41: Tourism 
Tourism assets, as including those  depicted on the Policies Map will be protected and loss to 
alternative uses will be resisted. 
Proposals relating  to tourism assets will be considered in accordance with the Council's most 
up-to-date Economic Proposition and the East Surrey Rural Tourism Co-operation Project (2018) 
and any update to them. 
Any proposals  for new and extended visitor attractions, associated ancillary works and facilities 
within the boundaries of the asset will be supported where very special circumstances exist, in 
accordance with the following criteria: 
I. The development  can help to support the local economy, businesses, community services 
and facilities; and 
29 Tandridge DMP Extract Report 2018 for East Surrey Rural Tourism Co-operation Project 2018 
226 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 28 Tourism 
II. It is of an appropriate design and scale which minimises impact and assimilates well with 
the character of the surrounding area; and 
III. Is sympathetically designed and in conformity with the policies of the development plan. 
Tourism initiatives relating to and impacting upon either the Surrey Hills or High Weald Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty should also accord with the relevant and most up to date AONB 
Management Plans and Policy TLP33. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
East Surrey Rural Tourism Co-operation Project (2018) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) - Rural Statement (2016) 
Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014 - 2019 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO2 - Economy 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Permissions proposing expansion/intensification of tourism assets 
Number of additional hotel and/or guest house bedrooms 
Percentage of employment and unemployment 
Gain/loss of community services floorspace (Class D1 and D2). 
Tourist Accommodation 
28.4 Inherently linked  with tourism and our ability to secure success, are hotels and short-stay 
accommodation. There is a lack of visitor accommodation in the District, with no self-catering stock. 
The three largest hotels in Tandridge are: the Copthorne Effingham Park Hotel and the Lingfield Park 
Marriot Hotel in the south, in proximity to Gatwick, and Nutfield Priory Hotel and Spa, which is located 
more centrally on the A25, between Nutfield and Redhill. All three of these hotels are in the upper 
price bracket. Lower price tourism accommodations are not well-located for the District and is primarily 
located around Gatwick Airport, with a Premier Inn at the border with Mid-Sussex District Council, in 
East Grinstead. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 227 Tourism 28 
28.5 Despite our established and growing tourism offer, only a limited number of visitors stay 
overnight in Tandridge according to the East Surrey Rural Tourism Co-operation Project (2018). In 
2016, 1.4 million day trips were made compared to 110,000 overnight stays – the majority of these 
were made by domestic visitors. The overwhelming majority of our overnight accommodation is found 
in rural areas, including three caravan and camping parks accounting for 17% of total bed-spaces. 
Nearly one third of all overnight stays by overseas visitors in Tandridge were people arriving via 
Gatwick Airport, whose value (expenditure) is greater than domestic visitors. 
28.6 The Surrey  Hotel Futures Study (2015) highlights 'significant potential and need for hotel 
development in all Surrey Districts and Boroughs and clearly demonstrates that further hotel 
development is vital to support the future growth of the county's economy and capitalise on the 
potential for leisure and conference tourism growth'. With specific regard to Tandridge, market demand 
is demonstrated for both budget hotels in more built-up areas, particularly Caterham, as well as luxury 
county / golf hotels to support the growing leisure and corporate economy. 
28.7 With much  of Tandridge's tourism offer built on the wealth of rural attractions and designated 
landscapes such as AONB, other types of tourist accommodations fitting for these assets, such as 
glamping, lodges, country houses and gastro-pubs, are acceptable and supported, where appropriate. 
28.8 The District's  location in proximity to Gatwick should be recognised as an advantage and the 
opportunities realised. In future, it may be necessary to respond to the potential expansion of Gatwick 
Airport and the demand for overnight accommodation, specifically to the south and west of the District 
for both domestic and overnight visitors. 
28.9 Despite taking  a proactive view to increasing both our commitments to tourism and tourist 
accommodation, we will remain resistant to applications for airport parking not associated with hotels 
or accommodations. 
TLP42: Hotels and Tourist Accommodation 
Improvements to existing accommodations 
The existing  level of hotel provision should be maintained and loss will be resisted unless suitably 
replaced, where necessary. 
Any applications  for enhancements and expansions, including supporting uses and facilities for 
the accommodation such as spa facilities, will be viewed positively where they clearly set out 
the relationship and benefit to the existing facility and the local economy. Proposals will be 
required to accord with other relevant policies in the Development Plan. 
Any additional  pressure placed on infrastructure and services, such as traffic due to visitor 
numbers, will need to be mitigated in line with policy requirements in the most up-to-date 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
228 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 28 Tourism 
New Accommodations 
Applications for appropriately-located hotels and other types of tourist accommodations will be 
supported where they can demonstrate that they would satisfy local demand and meet all other 
relevant policy requirements, including TLP18: Place-making and TLP03: Green Belt. 
Proposals which  respond to market demand for the following types of tourist accommodation 
will be positively considered in accordance with the findings of the Surrey Hotel Futures Study 
(2015), or subsequent update: 
Budget hotels, and / or possibly upper-tier budget / limited service 3 star hotels; and 
Luxury country house and / or golf hotels. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Hotel Futures Study (2015) 
Economic Proposition (2017) 
East Surrey Rural Tourism Co-operation Project (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO2 - Tourism 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of additional hotel and/or guest house bedrooms. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 229 Historic Environment, Heritage and Conservation 29 
29 Historic Environment, Heritage and Conservation 
29.1 Our District  has a variety of historic assets which are recognised for their heritage and tourism 
value including conservation areas, commons, sites of archaeological potential, listed buildings, 
scheduled monuments and ancient woodlands. With over 600 records on the National Heritage List(30), 
the contribution that our historic assets makes to the wider character, cultural identity and 
distinctiveness of the District must be protected and enhanced. Therefore, the demolition of, or 
construction relating to our historic assets will be resisted, as outlined in Policy TLP43. 
29.2 Our conservation  areas play a vital role in protecting the settings of our much-valued historic 
natural environment and built-form. These designations will require a review and associated 
management plans in order to ensure they continue to protect relevant areas in an appropriate way. 
These reviews will take place in co-ordination with Surrey County Council Conservation Team and 
Historic England. As of 2018, our conservation areas are: 
Bletchingley : historic village - former market town, 
Brewer Street and Place Farm, Bletchingley : historic hamlet, 
Broadham Green and Spring Broadham Green and Spring Lane, Oxted: containing the 
hamlet of Broadham Green and other features at Oxted Mill, 
Burstow : small historic village, 
Caterham Barracks: former 19th century army barracks, 
Chaldon : historic village centre, 
Fickleshole : small hamlet, 
Godstone, Church Town: historic centre, 
Godstone, the Green, Great Farleigh Green: small settlement, 
Kenley Aerodrome : relating to a Battle of Britain Airfield, straddling the borders of Tandridge 
and the London Borough of Croydon, 
Limpsfield : historic village centre, 
Lingfield : including Gun Pond, Church Town and High Street, 
Oxted: historic centre, now known as Old Oxted, 
Outwood : centred on Outwood Common and Mill, 
Pendell: small settlement, 
South Park: small, isolated settlements, 
Station Road West, Oxted: early 20th Century mock tudor buildings, and 
Woldingham Green: village centre and green. 
29.3 Historic England  have published a Historic Environment  Good Practice Advice note for local 
authorities preparing Local Plans, the purpose of which is to aid in implementing historic environment 
policy in the NPPF. The advice note states 'conservation is certainly not a stand-alone exercise'(31) 
and recommends that inter-relationships between the historic environment and other factors such as 
town centre viability, protection of Green Belt, good design and delivery of high quality homes, are 
considered. With this is mind, applications will be required to consider the wider impacts of any 
changes to the setting of our historic assets, not just immediate effects. 
30 https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the-list/ 
31
 Historic Environment Good Practice Advice (2015) page 3 
230 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 29 Historic Environment, Heritage and Conservation 
TLP43: Historic Environment 
To respect the varied historical character and appearance of the District, development proposals 
will conserve and enhance the character and appearance of designated and non-designated 
heritage assets, through high-quality sensitive design. These include important archaeology, 
historic buildings, conservation areas, monuments, street patterns, streetscapes, landscapes, 
commons, and their settings. 
Applicants should  make every effort to liaise with the Surrey County Council Conservation Team 
and Historic England when drawing up proposals at the earliest opportunity to limit the prospect 
of any objection, in accordance with policies of the wider development plan including DP20 and 
any updates. 
Listed Buildings  
Proposals involving  the demolition of Listed Buildings will not be permitted, unless in an 
exceptional case, where a clear and convincing justification is made in line with national policy. 
In cases  where demolition is being proposed, the Council will expect early engagement with 
Historic England and the Surrey County Council Conservation Team to have taken place. 
Conservation Areas  
Proposals for  the demolition of buildings or structures in a Conservation Area will not normally 
be permitted if the building makes a positive contribution to the character or appearance of a 
Conservation Area, or the setting of a Listed Building. Suitable detailed plans for any 
redevelopment or reuse will need to be submitted as part of any application for demolition. 
The Council  will carry out a review of all conservation areas to ensure the boundaries and 
consideration remain relevant and up to date. This will be prepared and published as Conservation 
Area Appraisal documents and Management Plans. Where Neighbourhood Plans which to 
undertake reviews as part of their plan-making, the Council will support this. 
Applicants should  make every effort to liaise with the Surrey County Council Conservation Team 
and Historic England when drawing up proposals at the earliest opportunity to limit the prospect 
of any objection. 
The Council  will support the inclusion of historic environment policies in Neighbourhood Plans, 
where they are justified. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Historic England -Good Practice Advice in Planning : 1 -The Historic Environment in Local 
Plans (2015) 
National Planning Policy Framework (2012) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 231 Historic Environment, Heritage and Conservation 29 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO14 - Historic Environment 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of permissions proposing a loss of statutory and locally listed buildings 
Permissions on Conservation Areas and listed buildings 
Number of Conservation Area appraisals submitted and Management Plans adopted 
Status of Neighbourhood Plans. 
232 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
30 Environmental Sustainability 
30.1 The planning  industry is well-placed to implement mechanisms which can help the built and 
natural environment respond to the threats and effects of climate change and environmental changes. 
30.2 The current  National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) contains ambitious policies on 
adapting and withstanding the effects of climate change, but progress is slow and a lack of consistent 
practical advice and support from central government, beyond policy, makes the challenge harder. 
But it is one we still need to rise to. 
30.3 The policies  of Our Local Plan seek to ensure that all aspects of environmental resilience from 
air quality, to waste, flooding and water consumption are integral to development in this District. A 
proactive, positive and where appropriate, innovative response to environmental threats from 
applicants, will be expected. 
Renewable Energy  Infrastructure 
30.4 There is an international agreement to reduce CO2 CO² emissions  globally by at least 50% 
by 2050. In the UK, this is being driven by the Climate Change Act 2008, which has committed the 
Government to reducing CO2 CO² emissions  by at least 80% by 2050 from 1990 levels. It is recognised 
that planning has a key role to play in achieving this target. 
30.5 Paragraph 17  of the NPPF sets out the core planning principles of the English planning system. 
These include the need to support the transition to a low carbon future in a changing climate, and 
encouraging the use of renewable resources. 
30.6 Paragraph 93  of the NPPF is clear that Local Plans should support the delivery of renewable 
and low carbon energy and associated infrastructure. Paragraph 97 of the NPPF sets out how local 
planning authorities should recognise the responsibility of all communities to contribute to energy 
generation from renewable or low carbon sources to help increase the use and supply. Positive 
strategies should be put in place to promote energy from renewable and low carbon energy 
development, identifying suitable areas where such development could occur. Policies should be 
designed to maximise renewable and low carbon energy development while ensuring that 
adverse impacts are addressed satisfactorily, including cumulative landscape and visual impacts. 
The PPG reaffirms that the need for renewable energy does not automatically override environmental 
protections and the planning concerns of local communities. 
30.7 The NPPF  is also clear that local planning authorities should not require applicants for energy 
development to demonstrate the overall need for renewable or low carbon energy. Furthermore they 
should also recognise that even small-scale projects provide a valuable contribution to cutting 
greenhouse gas emissions. Applications should be approved if their impacts are (or can be made) 
acceptable, unless material considerations indicate otherwise consistent with the presumption in 
favour of sustainable development as set out in policy TLP02. 
30.8 The Government's  Clean Growth  Strategy (2018) sets out that achieving clean growth, while 
ensuring an affordable energy supply for businesses and consumers, is at the heart of The UK's  
Industrial Strategy. T he Government believes that clean growth and more sustainable practices will 
increase our productivity, create good jobs, boost earning power for people right across the country, 
and help protect the climate and environment upon which we and future generations depend. Our 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 233 Environmental Sustainability 30 
Local Plan supports the Government's focus on cleaner and greener technologies and policies are 
set out to see that they are integrated into new development and optimise the benefit they can have 
for our communities in design practices. 
TLP44: Renewable Energy Infrastructure 
Proposals for renewable and low carbon energy schemes will be positively considered provided 
they are in an accessible location and do not result in demonstrable harm to local wildlife and 
their habitats, the operations of Gatwick Airport, or to residential amenity through pollution, 
including noise generation, dust or vibration. 
Renewable energy infrastructure must not be unacceptably visually prominent within their setting 
or the surrounding landscape, and must not cause harm to heritage assets, the community, or 
the openness or purpose of the Green Belt. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
UK Government's Clean Growth Strategy (2018) 
UK Government's Industrial Strategy (2017) 
Tandridge Air Quality Impact Assessment (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO10 - Design 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Local emissions from commercial and domestic resources 
Average energy consumption/carbon emissions per household 
Number of applications for renewable energy. 
Resilience to Environmental Change 
30.9 The NPPF  identifies climate change as a key challenge for the planning system to address 
and requires it to assist in the movement towards a low carbon economy. The South East of England 
is likely to face significant challenges from a changing climate and changing weather patterns, not to 
mention increasing populations and pressure on resources. 
234 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
30.10 As such, new buildings should be future proofed: suited to, and easily adaptable for, the 
range of climate conditions and weather patterns we are likely to see over the next century, and 
adaptable to new technologies. The buildings we build today are likely to be with us into the next 
century, so the benefits of building adaptable and energy- and resource-efficient developments will 
last a long time. 
30.11 The Council  is committed to reducing the environmental impact of development through 
carbon reduction measures and through the support of appropriately-designed and sited renewable 
energy, low and zero carbon development. 
TLP45: Energy Efficient and Low Carbon Development 
The Council will support new development of all types where, all reasonable steps have been 
taken to: 
I. integrate low and zero carbon mechanisms in the design and layout of the proposed 
development, and 
II. ensure the reduction of energy consumption by the end users; and 
III. avoid or mitigate any adverse impacts including, but not limited to, landscape, noise, visual 
and cumulative impacts; and 
IV. accord with other policies of Our Local Plan, with specific regard to TLP18: Place-Making. 
The impact of ancillary structures included as part of the proposed scheme will also be assessed. 
Innovative design in all developments and community-led renewable energy schemes for low 
and zero carbon developments which can demonstrate direct community benefit will be 
encouraged. 
The Council will prepare a Sustainable Design SPD to produce best practice guidance. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Tandridge Air Quality Impact Assessments (2018) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO10 - Design 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 235 Environmental Sustainability 30 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Local emissions from commercial and domestic resources 
Average energy consumption/carbon emissions per household 
Number of applications for renewable energy. 
Air Quality and Pollution 
30.12 Pollution can  be anything that affects the quality of land, air, soils or water which could lead 
to an adverse impact on human health, the natural environment or general amenity. Pollution can 
arise from a number of emissions including smoke, gases, dust, fumes, odour, steam, noise and light. 
30.13 Paragraph 109  of the NPPF details how the planning system should prevent both new and 
existing development from contributing to, or being put at unacceptable risk from, or being adversely 
affected by unacceptable levels of air, water or noise pollution. Paragraph 110 goes on to set out 
how, when preparing Local Plans to meet development needs, pollution and other adverse effects 
on the local and natural environment should be minimised. 
30.14 Paragraph 120  of the NPPF states that to prevent unacceptable risks from pollution, planning 
policies and decisions should ensure that new development is appropriate for its location. The effects 
(including cumulative effects) of pollution on health, the natural environment or general amenity, and 
the potential sensitivity of the area or proposed development to adverse effects from pollution, should 
be taken into account. 
30.15 Paragraph 124  expects planning policies to contribute towards EU limit values or national 
objectives for pollutants. It is therefore important to have regard to the legal requirements, objectives 
and targets set out in key pieces of European legislation including: 
The Air Quality Framework Directive 2008/50/EC which sets  limits for air quality related to the 
following pollutants: Sulphur Dioxide, Nitrogen Dioxide and other oxides of Nitrogen, Particulate 
Matter (PM10 and PM2.5), Lead, Benzene, and Carbon Monoxide. 
The W ater Framework Directive 2000/60/EC which requires  Member States to aim to reach 
good chemical and ecological status in inland and coastal waters by 2015 subject to certain 
limited exceptions. 
30.16 Paragraph 123  of the NPPF states that planning policies and decisions should aim to avoid 
noise giving rise to significant adverse impacts on health and quality of life as a result of new 
development as well as in the construction of development. Meanwhile, paragraph 125 deals with 
light pollution. It states that planning policies, by encouraging good design, can limit the impact of 
light pollution from artificial light on local amenity. 
30.17 The PPG  sets out detailed guidance on specific types of pollution including light, noise, air 
and water pollution, and how they should be considered when determining planning applications. 
236 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
Noise Pollution 
30.18 Noise can  constitute a statutory nuisance and is subject to the provisions of the Environmental 
Protection Act 1990 and other relevant law. There are no EU-monitored Noise Agglomerations in the 
District. However proximity to M25, M23 and Gatwick Airport is relevant to the dDistrict and  in preparing 
the pPlan and determining the most appropriate land allocations, the presence of noise contours 
were should be  taken into account in applications for development and are a consideration for design. 
Light pollution  
30.19 Light pollution  obscures the night sky and amenity around urban areas within England, and 
can also have a disruptive impact on wildlife and habitats. At a local level light nuisances exist where 
a source of artificial light significantly and unreasonably interferes with a person's use and enjoyment 
of their property, or is prejudicial to their health. When decisions are made consideration should be 
given to potential light spillage and its effect on both the local environment, including wildlife, and on 
nearby local residents and their health and well being. 
30.20 In our District, the areas most susceptible to light pollution are those with the largest amount 
of built form. As a predominantly rural area with extensive areas untouched by built form, light pollution 
is not considered to be a particular issue. That said, given incremental settlement growth, the delivery 
of a Garden Community and anticipated growth to road infrastructure, Our Local Plan is still mindful 
of potential threats. 
Residential amenity  
30.21 Residential amenity  may be harmed where different uses come into conflict with one another, 
for example employment and residential uses. It may also occur where a new residential development 
is poorly located, poorly designed, or constitutes over-development, resulting in a significant increase 
in disturbance to existing residents nearby. Individual development proposals should be considered 
in terms of their impact on residential amenity having regard to matters such as noise, light, heat, 
dust and vibrations. 
Air pollution  
30.22 There are  no Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) in the District. Air quality within the 
District is generally considered to be good. Industrial and residential land uses are largely separated 
thereby minimising potential instances of air quality conflicts. The main source of air pollution in the 
District is from traffic emissions, particularly along major routes and at key junctions. As the type and 
location of new development will influence traffic generation and the pattern and volume of vehicular 
movement, the Council will look to locate new development, particularly those expected to generate 
a large number of journeys, to the most accessible locations. It will also seek to mitigate the highway 
impacts of development by improving highway and junction capacity. This will help prevent congestion 
which can lead to cars remaining idle or queuing in peak periods. 
30.23 Risk to air quality can also be addressed through tree planting to ameliorate impacts from 
emissions, and by ensuring the design of new development adopts appropriate energy-efficient 
building techniques, contributing to a reduction of local greenhouse gas emissions and pollution 
levels. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 237 Environmental Sustainability 30 
30.24 The issue of air quality has been a considerable focus of both background evidence and 
duty to cooperate working. Tandridge participates in the Surrey Air Alliance, a county-wide group for 
Environmental Health officers, the source of a number of planning-related initiatives and 
recommendations for a joint approach to air quality. 
30.25 Background evidence  in the form of an Air Quality Impact Assessment (AQIA) has been 
conducted by Aecom to assess the Local Plan and potential impacts of Garden Community scenarios 
upon human health in light of National and European legislation and policy. This work was in addition 
to two other background evidence studies which have examined the air quality matters in relation to 
the protected international sites at Ashdown Forest and Reigate to Mole Gap Escarpment. 
30.26 We are aware that some concern was raised about the air quality status on the A22, however, 
the evidence did not identify there to be any breaches of emissions. Air quality will, however, continue 
to be monitored annually by Environmental Health. 
30.27 The AQIA  concluded that the preferred strategy for Our Local Plan is considered acceptable 
in terms of its impact on air quality and recommended that the actions and policies as enacted by the 
Surrey Local Transport Plan and Surrey Air Alliance, are taken through to consideration during the 
implementation of the Local Plan. This includes adhering to what are, at time of writing, draft Low 
Emissions Strategies, Electric Vehicle Charging policy and Air Quality Planning Conditions. 
30.28 Our Local  Plan recognises that air quality and other forms of pollution are important 
considerations when making decisions with regard to future developments, transport and pollution 
control issues. Other policies within the Plan also have a role in negating air quality impacts, including 
the provision of green infrastructure, and commitments to sustainable transport and development in 
support of accessible services. 
TLP46: Pollution and Air Quality 
Pollution 
All development  proposals must be located and designed in such a not to have to not cause a 
significant adverse effect upon the environment, the health of residents or residential amenity 
by reason of pollution to land, air or water, or as a result of any form of disturbance including, 
but not limited to noise, light, odour, heat, dust, vibrations and littering. 
New residential  development located near to existing uses that generate pollutant, noise, odour 
or light will be expected to demonstrate that the proposal is compatible, and will not result in 
unacceptable living standards. 
Planning conditions  may be used to manage and mitigate the effects of pollution and/or 
disturbance arising from development. Where required, conditions limiting hours of construction, 
opening hours and placing requirements on applicants to submit further proposal details will be 
implemented in order to ensure impacts on the environment and residential amenity are kept 
within acceptable limits and where possible reduced. 
238 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Air Quality Impact Assessments (2018) 
Surrey Local Transport Plan 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO10 - Design 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Monitored through the Air Quality Annual Review document 
Change in status of neighbouring AQMA's 
Monitored through assessments by Surrey Air Alliance and Local Transport Plan. Air Quality 
Development will be supported where it would not result in the national Air Quality 
Objectives(32)being exceeded; and it would not lead to a significant deterioration in local air 
quality resulting in unacceptable effects on human health, local amenity or the natural environment. 
Proposals for  new development should be prepared  to reflect the  requirements of the Council's 
Air Quality Impact Assessments (2018) and any subsequent update, as well as air quality 
conditions developed by Surrey Air Alliance. Proposals should also be in accordance with the 
Local Transport Plan and its supporting, Air Quality Strategy, Low Emissions Transport and 
Electric Vehicle Strategies, and be cognisant of policy TLP36: Ashdown Forest SPA, where 
relevant. 
Flood Management  and Mitigation 
30.29 Flooding is  highlighted as a major concern for our residents and this is demonstrated through 
each of the consultations we have undertaken in preparing Our Local Plan. The Council share the 
concern of its residents and are engaged with a number of parties, including the Environment Agency, 
Surrey County Council as the Local Lead Flood Authority and geographically-specific flood groups 
in both Smallfield and Caterham, where flooding is often felt most acutely. 
32 The air quality objectives for England are defined in the Air Quality (England) Regulations 2000 and the Air Quality (England) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2002 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 239 Environmental Sustainability 30 
30.30 In preparing Our Local Plan we have been careful to consider flooding of all types when 
determining land allocations and when considering infrastructure and opportunities for flood mitigation 
where possible. 
30.31 The National  Planning Policy Framework states that inappropriate development in areas at 
risk of flooding should be avoided by directing development away from areas at highest risk, but 
where development is necessary, making it safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere. 
30.32 It also states that Local Plans should be supported by a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA). The Council commissioned a joint Level 1 SFRA with Reigate and Banstead Borough Council 
and Mole Valley District Council, which was published in 2017. This updates the information contained 
in earlier versions of the SFRA and looks at flooding across districts and boroughs, not just for 
Tandridge. The SFRA assesses all sources of flooding across the District, identifying areas with 
recognised issues of flooding e.g. Caterham, Whyteleafe, Lingfield and Smallfield, as well as taking 
into account the impact of climate change. 
30.33 A further  SFRA Level 2 has been undertaken, which looks more closely at site allocations 
and determines if and where flood mitigation is needed and what type. This information has been 
valuable to the infrastructure requirements set out in the site allocations policies and the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan. 
Sustainable Drainage  Systems 
30.34 Sustainable (urban)  Drainage Systems, or SuDS, seek to mimic the natural processes of 
greenfield surface water drainage, encouraging water to flow along natural routes and thereby reducing 
the run-off rates and volume of surface water, particularly during storm events. They are designed 
to drain surface water in a more sustainable manner than conventional techniques but can also offer 
additional benefits. For example, they can enhance ecological and amenity value. SuDs are a high 
priority in the Drainage Hierarchy, further details are set out in: 'Water. People. Places.', which has 
been prepared by Surrey County Council in partnership with other Lead Local Flood Authorities in 
the south-east. The document also serves as a tool to set out SuDs solutions appropriate to scheme. 
30.35 The Council  is aware that surface water flooding has been the source of, or a contributing 
factor, in recent flooding incidents, particularly within the northern part of the District around Caterham 
and Chaldon. The evidence for this is found in the investigations carried out by, or on behalf of, Surrey 
County Council and the London Borough of Croydon following these flooding incidents. These local 
authority investigations are required to be carried out by Surrey County Council as the Lead Local 
Flood Authorities (LLFA), in accordance with Section 19 of the Flood and Water Management Act 
2010. 
30.36 Since April  2015, legislation has required major planning applications to make provision for 
sustainable drainage systems. This is subject to consultation with Surrey County Council as the Lead 
Local Flood Authority. However , there is currently no requirement in legislation to include SuDS on 
smaller schemes  nor can it be secured on development built under permitted development 
rights. Although it  is not mandatory for smaller schemes under current legislation, the Council will 
encourage SuDs on all development, where possible. 
240 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
30.37 The Council’s Level 1 SFRA provides guidance on SuDS for developers. It also recommends 
planning policies should focus on ensuring all development even minor ones, build SuDS into their 
design and we support this for the benefit of our environment and our residents quality of life. Our 
policy has been prepared in discussion with the Environment Agency and goes further to require that 
flooding impacts are also considered and where needed, mitigated in commercial development too. 
30.38 This approach  is also supported by Objective 6 of Surrey’s Local Flood Risk Management 
Strategy, which states that they 'will reduce the risk of flooding to and from development through local 
planning policy and processes'. 
30.39 At the time of writing Our Local Plan, the District Council has initiated discussion with the 
Environment Agency and Surrey County Council on the potential to designate Critical Drainage Areas 
which, if successful, may lead to stricter controls in those localities most at risk of flooding. If and 
when this occurs, even though it doesn't appear directly in our Local Plan policy, it will be a material 
consideration in assessing applications. 
TLP47: Sustainable Urban Drainage and  Reducing Flood Risk 
We will ensure that development in the District reduces flood risk and minimises the impact of 
flooding by: 
I. Steering development  to the areas with a lower risk of flooding; 
II. Applying the  Sequential Test and Exception Test to site selection informed by existing 
evidence, where applicable; in accordance with the Tandridge Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment; 
III. Taking account  of all sources of flooding from fluvial, surface water, groundwater, sewers, 
reservoirs and ordinary watercourses; 
IV. Applying the  sequential approach to site layout by locating the most vulnerable uses in parts 
of the site at the lowest risk of flooding; 
V. Assessing the  cumulative impacts of development on flood risk; 
VI. Accounting for  the impacts of future climate change. 
In areas at risk of flooding, development should be safe for the lifetime of development including 
an allowance for climate change and should incorporate flood resilience and resistant measures 
into the design, layout and form of buildings to reduce the level of flood risk both on site and 
elsewhere. 
Sustainable drainage  systems are required in all residential development and major non-residential 
schemes, unless proved  to be impractical, and should:  
a. Ensure surface  run-off is managed as close to the source as possible and does not increase 
flood risk elsewhere; 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 241 Environmental Sustainability 30 
b. Accord with the Buildings Regs Part H3; 
c. In circumstances  where it has been proved that SuDs is impractical, discharge of surface 
water to watercourse/sewer shall not exceed the following peak rates: 
at pre-development greenfield runoff rates on all new development; 
as close as reasonably practicable to greenfield run off rates from all other brownfield sites; 
at pre-development greenfield runoff rates in areas susceptible to surface water flooding 
(Burstow Parish, Caterham on the Hill Parish, Caterham Valley Parish, Chaldon Parish and 
Whyteleafe) 
e. Be designed  to be multi-functional and incorporate sustainable drainage into landscaping 
and public realm, including maximising opportunities to establish surface water ponding 
areas, urban watercourse buffer areas and multi-use flood storage areas in locations of 
high surface water flood risk and critical drainage areas to improve flood resilience, amenity 
and biodiversity; 
f. Achieve improvements  in water quality through a sustainable drainage system management 
train; 
g. Be designed  with consideration of future maintenance and climate change; and 
h. Make improvements  in accordance with the Council's most up to date Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment - Level 1 (2017) 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment - Level 2 (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Water. People. Places (2013) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO15 - Flooding 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Monitor schemes proposing SuDS and flood mitigation 
Net number of new dwellings in flood zones. 
242 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
Water Consumption 
30.40 The NPPF  expects local planning authorities to adopt proactive strategies to take full account 
of water supply and demand considerations, including whether the application of a tighter water 
efficiency requirement for new homes is justified to help manage demand. 
30.41 All new homes already have to meet the mandatory national standard set out in the Building 
Regulations of 125 litres per person, per day. However, where there is a clear local need, local 
planning authorities can set out a Local Plan policy which requires new dwellings to meet the tighter 
Building Regulations optional water efficiency requirement of 110 litres per person per day. 
30.42 Water provision  in Tandridge is primarily under the jurisdiction of Sutton and East Surrey 
Water (SES), with limited areas under Thames Water. Ongoing liaison with the water companies has 
been key to understanding water consumption and its impact in the District. 
30.43 The South  East is identified as an area of 'water stress' through the Environment Agency 
report 'Water Stressed Areas: Final Classification' (2013) which bases its findings upon both current 
and future water usage whilst factoring in climate change scenarios. 
30.44 For the benefit of the environment, to ensure sustainable design and construction and on 
the basis of evidence and our discussions with key bodies, Our Local Plan requires a tighter water 
efficiency requirement of 110 litres per person per day in the construction of all new dwellings for the 
remaining Plan period. 
30.45 To further  support water efficiency, mechanisms which allow for the storage and use of 
rainwater in new developments (greywater recyclingrainwater harvesting )  as well as the re-use of 
water for non-potable uses e.g. for toilet flushing (greywater recycling) are is also encouraged  and 
would further reduce the need to draw upon limited resources. 
TLP48: Water Consumption and Waste Water 
All new homes are required to meet the water efficiency standard of 110 litres/person/day, to be 
achieved through a local standard for Building Regulations and development that can reduce 
water consumption rates further below this standard are encouraged. 
Creative design which integrates rainwater harvesting and/or re-purposing and grey water 
recycling will be viewed positively. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Water Stressed Areas: Final Classification (2013) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 243 Environmental Sustainability 30 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO17 - Infrastructure 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Permissions compliant with the local water efficiency standards of 110 litres per person per 
day. 
Waste 
30.46 Surrey W aste Planning Authority County Council  as the statutory body who deal with strategic 
waste matters in Tandridge, waste authority  currently use  their adopted Surrey W aste Plan (2008) 
to determine  planning applications in relation to waste matters, but are in the process updating it. 
The new Surrey Waste Local Plan will cover the period 2018-2033. Tandridge District Council is 
required to make planning decisions and prepare policies that accord with the Waste Local Plan as 
far as is practicably possible, as it forms part of the overall development plan. 
30.47 The W aste Local Plan sets out the planning framework for the development of waste 
management facilities in Surrey and should show how and where the facilities and the infrastructure 
are needed to manage Surrey's waste. When managed well, waste can be a resource for making 
new products and producing energy, but if managed badly it can impact negatively on communities 
and the environment. 
30.48 In terms of sustainability, waste is an important consideration and Our Local Plan makes it 
clear that we continue to support the objective of waste minimisation and national waste hierarchy 
(2011) to sequentially: prevent waste, re-use waste, recycle waste, use waste for energy recovery 
and finally and least desired, dispose of waste. 
30.49 The Surrey  Waste Partnership (SWP) sets out a plan for managing Surrey’s waste for the 
next ten years, up until 2024/25 through its Joint Municipal Waste Strategy. The SWP is made up of 
Surrey County Council and the 11 district and borough councils in Surrey. It aims to manage Surrey's 
waste in the most efficient, effective, economical and sustainable manner. 
30.50 Surrey is  already a high-performing county when it comes to recycling and waste management, 
but can and must continue to improve in order to succeed against the challenges of resource efficiency 
and increasing budget pressures on waste collection services. 
30.51 Our Local  Plan seeks to support more efficient ways to collect and deal with waste, including 
through recycling. The Plan anticipate s that the impact of all waste from new development, should 
be considered from the outset and across the lifecycle of a development from construction through 
to the household waste generated by those that live in new homes and work in business premises. 
We will also expect town centre and open space design to integrate kerbside bins which encourage 
recycling. 
244 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 30 Environmental Sustainability 
TLP49: Waste 
Construction Waste 
Applications for development will need to demonstrate how the construction process and disposal 
of construction waste will follow the Government's Waste hierarchy with the emphasis on reusing 
materials, for hardcore or in the design of the development. 
Where construction waste is to be disposed of, applicants will be required to identify how, where 
and why this is to be done, including details of any on-site processing. 
New methods of construction which limit construction waste and its need to be transported 
off-site, will be supported, where appropriate. 
Residential Waste 
All new residential development will be required to incorporate safe and accessible space to 
store and then present waste for collection in accordance with the waste collection authority’s 
requirements. 
Commercial Waste 
Commercial and other development that generate refuse will be required to incorporate safe and 
accessible space to store and then present waste for collection. 
Other Waste 
Development or changes of use in town centres or within open space that provide for food or 
drink to be consumed off the premises will provide compartmentalised recycling and residual 
waste receptacles. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Surrey Waste Plan (2008) 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO17 - Infrastructure 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of permissions that incorporate plans to store and aid the collection of waste 
Number of permissions that incorporate separate storage and collection for recycling. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 245 
Sustainable Transport and Travel 31 
31 Sustainable Transport and Travel 
31.1 Transport is  a means to an end. It is the way in which people move between locations either 
for work, education, leisure or business. Very few journeys are made for no purpose, and most people 
want to travel efficiently and safely to their destination. As a society we have become predominantly 
dependent upon the private car and our environment, infrastructure and health are suffering as a 
result. We want to, as far as is practicably possible, support a modal shift towards more sustainable 
ways to travel. 
31.2 As a rural dDistrict, it  would be unrealistic to assume that a notable shift-change to non-car 
based travel, such as cycling and walking, will take place rapidly and road transportation will continue 
to be necessary for community and business life in Tandridge. That said, it is important that we make 
the opportunities for other modes of travel, more available and inviting - be that for work or leisure, 
to reduce congestion, reduce car-based emissions and increase methods of travel which help people 
lead healthier lifestyles. 
31.3 Land allocations  and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan deal with the physical road network and 
mitigation for its use, in more detail. The policy set out here addresses walking, cycling and other low 
emission transport methods and how we can best encourage development to be more sustainable. 
31.4 In order to support this aspiration for our people and place, the District Council will, in future, 
look to seek out opportunities to carry out a Cycle Strategy in partnership with neighbouring authorities, 
to provide guiding key principles that encourage active travel and set out the standards for infrastructure 
improvements. 
31.5 All applicants  will be expected to be mindful of the Surrey Local Transport Plan and proactively 
engage with relevant Highways Authorities from the earliest stage and prior to formally submitting an 
application. 
TLP50: Sustainable Transport and Travel 
The Council is committed to developing well-integrated communities with sustainable transport 
which connects people to jobs, services and community facilities, while recognising that Tandridge 
is a rural dDistrict. This  will be achieved by taking the following steps: 
Proposals will  need to demonstrate how they will ensure that the principle objectives and 
overall vision of the Surrey Local Transport Plan are met, particularly in relation to active 
travel and air quality. 
Locating most  new development in the Tier 1 and 2 settlements close to services, served 
by a range of sustainable travel options, such as public transport, walking and cycling, to 
minimise the need to travel and distance travelled. 
Ensuring development  proposals provide appropriate infrastructure measures to mitigate 
the adverse effects of traffic and other environmental and safety impacts (direct or 
cumulative). 
246 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 31 Sustainable Transport and Travel 
Transport Assessments will be required for development proposals, where relevant, to fully 
assess the impacts of development and identify appropriate mitigation measures. 
Cycling and Walking 
The Council  will support development that includes integrated comprehensive cycle and walking 
routes. Development proposals shall demonstrate how safe and accessible pedestrian access 
and cycle routes will be delivered and how they will connect to the wider travel network. 
Opportunities should be proactively taken to connect with and enhance Public Rights of Way 
whenever possible, encouraging journeys on foot and active travel. 
Developments will  provide cycle parking in accordance with the Parking Standards set out in the 
Surrey Local Transport Plan or updated guidance. Planning applications must include full details 
of the proposed cycle parking. 
Electric V ehicles 
The provision  of charging points for electric vehicles on all developments that result in additional 
units, both residential and business, will be required in line with the Surrey Local Transport Plan. 
Developers will be strongly encouraged to go further in order to help the District transition towards 
the Government’s target year of 2040. The installation of electric vehicle charging points at public 
car parks, supermarket car parks, petrol filling stations and Clacket Lane Services will be 
supported where it is safe to do so and the visual impact is appropriately mitigated for. 
Public T ransport The Council,
  in liaison with Surrey County Council, will seek enhancements to the local bus 
network in order to meet the additional demands created by new development as it comes 
forward. These enhancements cshould include  the delivery of bus priority measures, the provision 
of a new service or the alteration/expansion of an existing service, contributions towards 
bus-related infrastructure and operational subsidy for the service in the first 10 years of occupation 
of the development. 
Strategic Considerations  
Where Ss106 contributions  are sought, their scale and timing shall be agreed by the District and 
County Council following consultation with relevant bus operators, rail-related parties and adjoining 
authorities where this is appropriate prior to the granting of planning permission. 
The Council  will seek the implementation of highway and other strategic schemes that will remove 
serious impediments to growth and/or secure important environmental benefits. These include 
an upgraded motorway junction (Junction 6), while acknowledging its location within the Surrey 
Hills AONB, and improvements and measures to improve key junctions along the A22 and the 
A25. The Council will keep its Infrastructure Delivery Plan up-to-date to reflect infrastructure 
needs and funding opportunities. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 247 Sustainable Transport and Travel 31 
Developments that would generate significant traffic movements must be well-related to the 
primary and secondary road network and this should have adequate capacity to accommodate 
the development. New accesses and intensified use of existing accesses onto the primary or 
secondary road network will not be permitted if a clear risk of road traffic accidents or significant 
traffic delays would be likely to result. 
Proposals which would generate levels and types of traffic movements, including heavy goods 
vehicle traffic, beyond that which the rural roads could reasonably accommodate in terms of 
capacity and road safety will not be permitted. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Tandridge Air Quality Impact Assessments (2018) 
Surrey Local Transport Plan 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO7 - Health & Wellbeing 
SO8 - Design 
SO16 - Infrastructure 
SO17 - Infrastructure 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Net number of new dwellings in each of our settlements and parishes 
Monitored through the Air Quality Annual Review document 
Monitored through assessments by Surrey Air Alliance and Local Transport Plan 
Number of applications including provision of cycle spaces 
Number of electrical charging points. 
248 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 32 Airport Parking 
32 Airport Parking 
Airport Parking 
32.1 It is the responsibility of the Gatwick airport operator to ensure that access to the airport for 
passengers, businesses and related activities, is managed and controlled. That said, affected 
authorities within proximity of Gatwick have experienced applications and unauthorised developments 
of off-airport car parking, many of which increase issues on the road network, do not always provide 
positive neighbouring uses and that are located in unsustainable locations. 
32.2 As such,  it is determined that a specific policy which responds to airport related parking is 
included in Our Local Plan: 2033. The approach taken is consistent with that taken by the neighbouring 
authorities of Reigate and Banstead Borough Council and Crawley Borough Council. A shared 
approach will ensure that Local Planning Authorities can support the most sustainable options for 
airport related parking which will act to ensure that all airport related car parking is within the airport 
boundary, none of which is within the Tandridge District boundaries. This also directly supports the 
airport in trying to encourage modal shift from a reliance on private transportation to and increase 
public transport user streams which is of importance to Gatwick Airport Limited in terms of achieving 
their sustainability targets. 
TLP51: Airport Related Parking 
Proposals for additional or replacement airport related parking, including long and short term 
parking for passenger vehicles, will not be permitted. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
Gatwick Surface Access Strategy 2012-2030 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
SO12 - Green Belt 
SO16 - Infrastructure 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Number of applications received for Airport Parking; 
Number of applications for airport parking, granted on appeal. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 249 Our Garden Community 33 
33 Our Garden Community 
33.1 A key element of the sSpatial sStrategy for Our Local Plan is the development of a Garden 
Community. The decision to pursue this option is evidence led, as is the decision to locate the 
development at South Godstone. 
33.2 The pursuit  and delivery of a Garden Community (formerly named Garden Village) was among 
the range of alternative options which have been considered by the Council in determining the most 
appropriate and sustainable way to meet our development needs, including homes, employment and 
infrastructure, for the future. 
33.3 The evidence  gathered makes it clear that the infrastructure constraints which exist across 
the District and in the majority of our settlements, means that relying on focused development in and 
around our most sustainable areas would not be effective or appropriate. 
33.4 Meeting much  of our need through a Garden Community, in addition to some edge-of-settlement 
development is considered the most deliverable and sustainable option and fundamentally, this is 
supported by the Sustainability Appraisal process. This approach is also the best option to secure 
balance between delivering development and protecting our natural environment and landscape. 
33.5 Our Garden  Community will generate a critical mass of development to achieve significant 
infrastructure improvements. These will include roads, schools, health services and other facilities 
that will not only benefit the new and existing residents of South Godstone, but the dDistrict as  a 
whole by relieving pressure from other settlements where schools are oversubscribed or GP patient 
lists are well over acceptable levels. 
33.6 Through the  preparation of an Area Action Plan (AAP) the development will be holistically 
planned and respond to local physical characteristics of the area, such as landscape and woodlands. 
It will also be underpinned by a series of interrelated principles which are based on the Town and 
Country Planning Association (TCPA) Garden City Principles, adapted for Tandridge. It will follow 
the vision and objectives that will continue to be refined through public consultation on the AAP. 
South Godstone  
Demographics 
33.7 South Godstone  is an existing community of around 570 homes, the vast majority of which 
(75.1%) are privately owned. The settlement has a population of approximately 1,500 residents. The 
majority of residents (58.3%) are of working age (18-64) and 74.8% of the population is economically 
active(33). Other than Lambs Business Park located on Tillburstow Hill Road, there is little local 
employment provision within the settlement which suggests that the majority of people currently 
commute elsewhere for work. 
Transport 33.8 Geographically, South
  Godstone is the most centrally-located settlement in our District: north 
of Blindley Heath and south west of Oxted. 
33 2011 Census Data and 2016 Population Estimates 
250 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 33 Our Garden Community 
33.9 The A22 runs centrally through the settlement giving access to the M25 via Junction 6 and 
the A25 both at Godstone. Development would need to fund and deliver upgrades to the road network 
as well as improve the capacity of Junction 6. Other transport improvements could include an 
internal relief spine road  to serve the development and take pressure off the A22 and minimise any 
need for access from the rural road network, including Tandridge Lane. 
33.10 The T onbridge to Redhill railway line follows the southern boundary of the existing settlement 
which includes Godstone Station. While it is recognised that the frequency of the service from Godstone 
Station is limited, development at the scale of a Garden Community presents opportunities to make 
better use of the line, upgrade the current station and ticket office and make it more viable for the rail 
provider to increase services, thus sustaining the station. Additional opportunities which could also 
contribute to line enhancements stem from Edenbridge where there are proposals for up to 1,000 
over 800  new homes, being considered. Conversations with Network Rail and other rail-related parties 
on this matter have already begun and will continue. 
33.11 Currently, over  50% of residents households have  more than one car and this may be more 
about choice than necessity. But increasing local employment provision and providing a broader 
range of transport options can help bring about a modal shift. Residents will have more travel options 
and there will be less need to travel for basic things, or to access services. 
33.12 Given that  the Garden Community is an infrastructure led development, a location specific 
update to the Infrastructure Delivery Plan will be prepared to accompany the AAP, in liaison with 
infrastructure providers and detail what, how much and where improvements and opportunities, exist. 
Landscape 
33.13 South Godstone  does not have any nationally-protected landscape areas, such as Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty, but it does have Ancient Woodland sporadically located in and around 
the settlement. The Council's current evidence indicates that the landscape could be sensitive to 
development in the far north of the settlement due to topography and further landscape assessments 
would be essential to the AAP process to ensure the development is planned in the context of the 
most sensitive areas. 
Green Belt  and Exceptional Circumstances 
33.14 The Metropolitan  Green Belt currently washes over the settlement and some land would 
need to be released from the designation, to accommodate the development. 
33.15 Paragraph 83  of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) is clear that Green Belt 
boundaries should only be altered and land released from the designation, in exceptional 
circumstances. There is no universal definition of what constitutes exceptional circumstances and it 
is for a local authority to determine this for themselves based on robust evidence. 
33.16 As already  stated in oOur Plan, the District has the highest percentage of land designated 
as Green Belt in the country. Despite fully considering the development capacity of our non-Green 
Belt areas, we do not have sufficient available land to allow our Green Belt to go untouched. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 251 Our Garden Community 33 
33.17 This Plan and the evidence make it clear, that the Council is pursuing the most sustainable 
sSpatial sStrategy , that infrastructure is struggling, that our landscapes matter and that we need 
homes, jobs and services for a growing population. 
33.18 Sustainable development  is at the heart of national policy and we cannot achieve this without 
meeting a level of development that can fund and support our District for the future. As such, we feel 
that the exceptional circumstances which will result in the loss of Green Belt to allow for the Garden 
Community, are established in principle. 
33.19 That said,  whilst Our Local Plan establishes the need for changes to Green Belt boundaries 
within the South Godstone Area of Search (see below), it does not make any formal adjustment to 
the Green Belt for the Garden Community at this time,. but does  identify a broad location within which 
the principle of development for the Garden Community is established. It will be for through the  further 
detailed work needed to inform of the preparation  of the AAP, that a new Green Belt boundary will 
be determined and once new settlement form, design, infrastructure and permanent boundaries can 
be better understood. 
South Godstone  Garden Community: Area Action Plan 
33.20 The role of Our Local Plan is to set strategic policies and the development framework which 
will guide development for the future. For the Garden Community, the details, design and delivery of 
the development is a complex matter and is one that should have the involvement and input of our 
communities, interested parties and the Council. As such, the Council will prepare an Area Action 
Plan (AAP) to set out the specific details of the Garden Community development, including: 
The design and layout of the new development including key infrastructure features such as the 
location of new schools, community hubs, main roads etc; 
The main policies to be adhered to, including those that set affordable housing thresholds, design 
standards and approaches to green space delivery etc; 
The level of employment to be provided and the mechanisms for delivering this; 
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan which will be specific to the Garden Community development 
and the types and level of infrastructure to be provided and the anticipated funding streams to 
facilitate delivery; 
Further details on stewardship and opportunities for community governance of the Garden 
Community; and 
The boundary and area of land to be released from the Green Belt to accommodate the new 
development. 
The preparation  of the AAP will be in accordance with the same procedural and legislative requirements 
as Our Local Plan has been. Formal public consultation will take place and will give the community 
and interested parties the opportunity to feed into the content of the AAP and help to shape the 
Garden Community itself. 
Area of Search 
33.21 As set out on the Policies Map which accompanies Our Local Plan, the broad location for 
the Garden Community is indicated with a shaded circle which identifies where the principle of 
development is established. 
252 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 33 Our Garden Community 
33.22 A large amount of land has been presented to the Council for our consideration as part of 
the Garden Community and further information on this is set out in the Housing and Economic Land 
Availability Assessment (HELAA) (2017/18). The map below summarises the broad extent of the land 
submitted but does not represent any formally allocated or established boundary, nor does it 
represent a new Green Belt boundary or alter it in any way. This is referred to as an 'area of 
search'. 
33.23 Not all of the land within the 'area of search', will be fundamental to the delivery of the Garden 
Community and in preparing the AAP it is likely that areas will be discounted from development due 
to, but not limited to: landscape impact, ecology or heritage reasons and even because the design 
of the development would not be served positively. As such, the boundary below merely represents 
the starting point for our evidence gathering process and assessment. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 253 South Godstone
© Crown copyright and database rights 2018 OS 100018265Settlement Area
GreenBelt Area
Area of Search
Area of Search changes
Addition
Deletion33 Our Garden Community 
33.24 For the purposes of clarity the Green  Belt will only be altered detailed amendments  to the 
Green Belt boundary will be made through the AAP. The boundaries will only be altered to the extent 
that it is necessary to accommodate where it is necessary to do so and to the extent that is appropriate 
and necessary to meet the requirements of the South Godstone  Garden Community successfully. 
Open spaces, parklands and other green infrastructure, will all be a significant part of the development 
and will be essential to offset and mitigate against the impact of development, but do not necessarily 
need to be released from the Green Belt. National policy accepts that open space, outdoor recreation 
facilities and even local road infrastructure, may not constitute inappropriate development in the 
Green Belt where it would not be harmful to the wider Green Belt or the purposes it serves. In fact, 
such elements of the development will be essential to 'framing' the development in the wider landscape, 
ensuring that the surrounding area becomes integral to a sympathetic design. 
33.25 Finally, neither  the identification of the broad location, nor the area of search alter the status 
of the land at South Godstone and Green Belt policies will continue to apply until such time as the 
AAP is adopted. Speculative applications which would undermine the comprehensive nature of the 
development will be strongly opposed  refused, and any housing development presented to the Council 
outside of the context of the AAP, and/or which constitutes piece-meal development, will be resisted. 
and Green  Belt policies will apply and until such time as new boundaries are formally determined. 
A V ision for South Godstone 
33.26 Section 9  of Our Local Plan sets out the overall vVision for the District to 2033; but due to 
the scale and nature of the South Godstone Garden Community and the fact that the development 
will be planned through the Area Action Plan process, there is an opportunity for the development to 
have its own vision. The setting of a development specific vVision not only makes it clear what the 
Council and residents will expect from the development, but can also be used to guide the project 
going forward and through the AAP process. 
33.27 The concept of  a vVision for a Garden Community was first introduced and formally consulted 
on through the Local Plan: Garden Village Consultation (Regulation 18), in 2017. The vVision presented 
here has been amended in response to consultation and more certainty regarding the location being 
pursued. Through the AAP, the vVision may be further refined, but and it is provided here to ensure 
that the strategic context of the South Godstone Garden Community is better understood and that 
potential developers and house builders are cognisant of what will be expected. 
33.28 In a similar manner to Our Local Plan, achievement of the Vision will be underpinned by 
purposeful Strategic Objectives against which policies of the AAP will need to accord. For the Garden 
Community , Principles of  development are also established to set a framework of considerations that 
will need to be followed throughout the design and implementation phases. 
A Vision for South Godstone Garden Community 
South Godstone Garden Community will be a desirable place for residents and visitors, alike. It 
will be well-designed and sustainable. The development will have been delivered making the 
most of innovation to create an energy efficient, attractive and well-served development for 
residents of all ages, physical ability and financial status. Residents will be healthy and happy 
with their settlement and enjoy living and working, there. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 255 Our Garden Community 33 
The Garden Community will have a comprehensive and effective infrastructure network which 
has been primarily provided and funded by house builders and land promoters who will have 
properly utilised land values and balanced their profits to make sure the development is delivered 
comprehensively and successfully. 
Infrastructure available to the community will include; schools, health services, retail, recreation, 
roads, rail, employment and a mix of market and affordable homes which provide comfort and 
security for all areas of the community. 
The new  areas of development will have been sensitively integrated into the original settlement 
and community who will be working together to shape their area through community stewardship. 
The Principles  and Objectives of the Garden Community 
33.29 In March  2017, the Council first announced its intention to pursue a preferred spatial strategy 
that included a Garden Community and that the development would accord with the Town and Country 
Planning Association's (TCPA) Garden City Principles. 
33.30 The TCP A principles are well established and considered, by the planning industry, to provide 
a best practice framework for development and delivery of strategic scale new community 
developments. The Principles set out below have slightly  amend wording from the TCPA version are 
adapted
 to better emphasise those things which we believe will provide the best framework upon 
which to make South Godstone Garden Community a success. 
33.31 Principles of  development are also established to set a framework of considerations that will 
need to be followed throughout the design and implementation phases .Again, the  Principles and will 
be subject to change refinement through  the AAP and associated public consultation process. 
Area Action Plan Principles underpinning Development 
The preparation of  the Area Action  Plan and the delivery of South Godstone Garden Community 
will follow a framework and set policy which will include  policies which seek to: 
Maximises on land value capture to ensure that the development funds and delivers a 
comprehensive
 network of infrastructure including services, transport networks and Green 
and Blue Infrastructure. 
Engender s community pride  by encouraging resident led committees set up to deliver  
development. Community stewardship 's and ownership  of land, assets and facilities will 
also be important to ensure management and maintenance of key community assets for 
the long-term. 
Delivers genuinely af fordable social and market lifetime homes that are mixed in size, type 
and tenure and built to ensure they can respond to the changing needs of residents over 
time (e.g. both for younger families and for the elderly). 
Provides local employment  opportunities that are within easy commuting distance of homes 
and which provide more choice for those who want to work locally, or work more frequently 
from home. 
256 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 33 Our Garden Community 
Benefits community health  and well-being through the provision of: multi-functional open 
spaces, opportunities for sport as well as secure and extensive cycle and walking networks. 
Secures a design and layout that responds sensitively to the surrounding landscape character 
and countryside. Connectivity across and throughout the site will not only be essential for 
people, but also wildlife, with through the  achievement of net gains  in biodiversity. 
Designs a self-sustaining  community which is resilient to changing climates and flooding. 
The design of the development will ensure homes and other buildings are designed to the 
highest aesthetic and efficient quality which embraces zero-carbon and energy efficient 
technologies. Opportunities which encourage food production via allotments and community 
farms will also be welcomed. 
Locates services, facilities,  retail and recreation assets within an easy and reasonable 
distance from homes and employment. This will be achieved through the delivery and design 
of integrated and accessible transport systems, with walking, cycling and public transport 
routes, designed to be attractive forms of transport not just for travel within the Garden 
Community, but also to and from outlying settlements. 
33.32 The following  Spatial Objectives have been identified and refined in response to the Local 
Plan: Garden Villages Consultation (Regulation 18) (2017) and evidence gathering and will be subject 
to further alterations through the preparation of the AAP. The AAP specific Spatial Objectives do not 
supersede those which have been set for the overall local development plan, but help contribute 
towards their achievement. For example, Our Local Plan: 2033 Strategic Objectives for housing (SO4 
and SO5), tie-in with Garden Community Objective 1. 
33.33 Each policy  within the AAP will relate to at least one Spatial Objective and form part of the 
wider monitoring framework for the AAP, once adopted. Future relevant monitoring indicators will 
feed into the overall Authorities Monitoring Report process, which will be published annually. 
Theme South Godstone Garden Community Objective Objective 
Reference 
Housing To deliver energy efficient, genuinely affordable and accessible 
homes. The provision of a mix of type, size and tenure will present 
opportunities for modern, sustainable and comfortable living for all SGC Objective 1 sections of the community including families, the young, 
and the 
elderly and gypsies and travellers . Accommodation that serves both 
independent living and assisted needs will contribute to the 
achievement of a thriving and mixed community. 
Employment Provide and facilitate local employment opportunities not just through 
the direct provision of new employment space, but through support 
given to home working, and/or 'hot desking' facilities. Super fast SGC Objective 2 broadband infrastructure will be secured to serve businesses and 
homes and contribute to making South Godstone for businesses to 
locate and prosper. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 257 Our Garden Community 33 
SGC 
Objective 3 Theme South Godstone Garden Community Objective Objective 
Reference 
SGC 
Objective 4 
SGC Objective 5 
SGC 
Objective
 
6 To facilitate  a community governance structure (e.g. Board of 
Trustees, Committee, Working Group etc) from the earliest 
opportunity to secure the involvement and leadership of residents, 
businesses and statutory bodies in guiding and supporting the 
community. Community led governance and stewardship will ensure 
management and ownership of land and/or community assets for 
the longer term and after the development has been completed. Governance 
Land Value 
Capture and 
Investment To ensure that the land values and developer profits are balanced 
in a way that ensure necessary infrastructure, services, affordable 
housing and facilities are delivered and provided, proportionately 
and at the right time. Other sources of investment such as Council 
funding and facilitation will also be utilised where the opportunity and 
need arises. 
Sustainable 
Design, 
Efficiency and 
Quality 
Landscape, 
Green and 
Blue 
Infrastructure Deliver a  Garden community that is proud of its identity and character. 
Homes, spaces and facilities will be delivered to the highest 
standards, embracing both traditional and more modern designs. 
The development will take advantage of its scale to be innovative in 
providing zero-carbon, energy efficient and high-quality buildings 
which accord with modern living habits and in response to 
environmental threats of flooding and changing climates. Renewable 
and zero-carbon sources will be prioritised for energy supply which 
will assist in protecting our environment and mitigating against rising 
energy costs. 
To limit the impact of the Garden Community in the wider environment 
and compliment the character of the surrounding landscape. The 
layout and design of the Garden Community will respond to and be 
guided by the wider features of the area, i.e. woodlands, land relief, 
open spaces, water courses and appropriate defensible boundaries 
etc. Opportunities for new habitat creations, community woodlands 
and other Green and Blue Infrastructure networks will flow through 
the development ensuring connectivity and permeability for wildlife, 
walkers and cyclists, encouraging access to the natural environment 
and supporting well-being. 
A Healthy and 
Social 
Community To deliver a Garden Community which facilitates and encourages 
community cohesion between existing and new residents to South 
Godstone and throughout the development. Community assets, SGC 
Objective 7 including village halls, health hub, play areas recreational spaces 
and sporting provision, public houses, allotments and/or community 
farms, places of worship, local shops, eateries etc. will allow the 
community, of all ages, to congregate and interact, whilst also 
supporting their health and well-being. Facilities and services will be 
258 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Theme South Godstone Garden Community Objective Objective 
Reference 
located throughout the Garden Community and within reasonable 
walking and cycling distance, of homes. Opportunities for community 
ownership and stewardship of community assets will be explored. 33 Our Garden Community 
To provide an integrated and effective network of roads and public 
transport which both benefit the residents living and working in South 
Godstone, but also to provide connectivity between other settlements 
within the District, and beyond. Rail users will benefit from improved 
services and station facilities which will be made more sustainable 
by the development and increase in footfall. Access to a wider and 
fit-for-purpose strategic road network (including the A22 and M25 
via J6) will need to be secured be available via to provide  appropriate 
off-site infrastructure to support efficient public transport as well as 
private car use. A comprehensive network of cycle paths, footpaths, 
bridleways and green corridors will increase connectivity within South 
Godstone and beyond. The Garden Community will also embrace 
modern transport technologies with charging points for electric cars. 
The roads and streets will be designed to be safe for pedestrians 
and road users, alike. 
To ensure  the the community is fully supported in their day-to-day 
needs, and that a comprehensive network of community infrastructure 
is funded and delivered, including health services, school provision, 
community and cultural facilities (e.g. village halls and places of 
worship), recreation and sporting facilities as well as provisions for 
retail and leisure (e.g. eateries and public houses). Such infrastructure 
will primarily serve the immediate population of South Godstone, but 
where necessary, will support residents from elsewhere where 
'catchment areas' apply i.e. secondary education and health care. SGC 
Objective 8 
SGC Objective 9 Sustainable 
T
ransport 
Community 
Infrastructure
 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 259 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 34 
34 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 
34.1 Fundamentally, the  South Godstone Garden Community: Area Action Plan will provide the 
detailed policies and implementation mechanisms to ensure the development is delivered to the 
highest standards, and alongside the right infrastructure. The AAP, once adopted, will sit alongside 
the wider development plan and will supersede existing policies where appropriate. 
34.2 The following  strategic policy has been prepared to provide overarching support and guidance 
for the AAP from the outset. The requirements of Policy SGC01, make the Council's expectations 
clear as to what will be expected from the wider development. 
34.3 Infrastructure requirements  set out within the policy stem from the evidence which has been 
gathered in preparing Our Local Plan and considered through the Viability Study (2018). and additional  
viability work carried out by GVA (2018). 
Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 
In order to contribute to meeting the needs for homes, jobs and infrastructure across the District, 
Our Local Plan allocates a broad location for a Garden Community at South Godstone. 
All specific  details regarding development boundary, extent of Green Belt release and design 
will be set out in an Area Action Plan which will sit alongside Our Local Plan, as part of the wider 
development plan for Tandridge District. 
The South  Godstone Garden Community will be a properly planned and provide high quality, 
mixed use development that attracts and creates a sense of community for all ages and 
backgrounds. The Garden Community will enhance the existing settlement of South Godstone, 
broadening the access to services and facilities that are already there and providing services 
within close distance to homes and employment, making the settlement more self-sufficient. 
Design and  delivery of the Garden Community will follow the Garden City principles set out by 
the Town and Country Planning Association as amended within Our Local Plan (See Section 
33). It will be further guided by both the Vision and Spatial Objectives of Our Local Plan and the 
South Godstone Garden Community Area Action Plan, when it is prepared and informed by the 
most up-to-date Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
All development  must be in conformity with national policies, the South Godstone Garden 
Community Area Action Plan, and the wider development plan. 
Homes 
The Garden  Community development will deliver 4,000 environmentally sustainable new homes 
built and designed to respond to changing life needs. A mix of homes will be delivered to provide 
a choice of property to suit needs and budget, including both market and socially affordable 
properties , as well as meeting the needs of Gypsies and Travellers. The appropriate level of 
affordable homes will be determined through the AAP. 
260 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 34 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 
The Council will help facilitate delivery of homes and infrastructure through both the building of 
Council housing and by working closely with bodies such as Homes England and infrastructure 
providers to ensure success for all residents of South Godstone and the wider dDistrict. 
Economy 
A mix of employment space including offices, start up space and 'hot-desking' facilities will be 
provided to ensure that local employment opportunities are woven across the community. Direct 
employment will be facilitated through the new community facilities, such as schools, care facilities, 
as well as from new retail, leisure and other local services. Additional jobs will be generated by 
the construction phase itself and for the wider benefit of the economy in the south east. 
Effective broadband  infrastructure will be required to serve all development and support new 
homes, business and other facilities which rely on a good connection; but also to support those 
who want to work from home and limit the need to commute. 
Roads &  and Infrastructure 
At least 2 new primary schools will be delivered as well as new secondary education provision 
and health hub. Integrated Neighbourhood Centres will provide space for local shops, community 
space such as community centre, parish hall, public house and a place for multi faith religious 
congregation etc. 
Early on in the development, necessary improvements and mitigation to junctions along the A22, 
from J6 of the M25 down to Felbridge, will be implemented where needed. The transportation 
impact of the development will be managed with a safe and effective network of residential roads, 
public transport, walking and cycling networks, connecting the neighbourhood centres, train 
station, schools and other community facilities. The provision and integration of an internal spine 
relief road to minimise the number of vehicles on the South Godstone stretch of the A22, should 
also be explored. 
Rail Network  
The community  will be benefited by an upgraded rail station and transport hub. An increase in 
service frequency and capacity will be sought, to provide regular and sustainable connections 
to London and other areas. 
Land value  capture 
The required  facilities, land and buildings will be provided by the developer in partnership with 
the relevant service providers through appropriate developer contributions and supported by 
relevant funding streams such as central government initiatives and Local Enterprise Partnership 
grants. Land capture  The uplift  in land values will should be  maximised to ensure infrastructure  
can be funded by the development in the first instance and developers will be required to work 
closely with the Council to discuss where other financial facilitation opportunities may be explored. 
Contributions will  be sought proportionately across the Garden Community. 
Full viability  assessments will take place as part of the Area Action Plan process. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 261 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 34 
Design 
All properties and facilities will be innovatively designed to high-quality, zero carbon standards. 
The opportunity and ability of this large scale development to integrate renewable energy 
technologies and community energy facilities from the outset, will be maximised where viable 
and should prioritise local energy and heat sources; such as from Lambs Business Park. 
Whilst the  focus for new development will be on land surrounding the current settlement of South 
Godstone, the current built form should be sensitively absorbed into the wider design principles 
and obvious design disparity between the new and the existing built form should be avoided to 
create an inclusive new community. Design codes and a design panel will be established to 
support this. 
Heritage 
The proposal  will seek to respect, reflect and enhance heritage assets (including Lagham Manor, 
the Park Pale and various areas of Ancient Woodland) and their setting. The design and layout 
should be suitably cognisant of heritage assets in accordance with relevant policies of the 
development plan, including TLP43, DP20 and any updates. 
Air Quality  
The development  should reflect the requirements of the Council’s Air Quality Impact Assessment, 
as well as air quality initiatives developed by the Surrey Air Alliance, the Local Transport Plan 
and it’s supporting strategies in accordance with TLP46. 
Green Space  & and the Natural Environment 
The South  Godstone Garden Community will incorporate integral Green Infrastructure and 
provide at least 100ha of Green Infrastructure to address existing access deficiencies across 
the south of the dDistrict, to  offset the impact of the development itself, to meet the aims and 
objectives of the adjacent Eden Biodiversity Opportunity area, to provide net gains in biodiversity 
and to improve and enhance biodiversity and habitat connectivity. Delivery will also assist in 
reducing the risk of recreational pressure on protected international sites. 
Green and  Blue Infrastructure should be recognised as a major design feature of the Garden 
Community, ensuring that the surrounding countryside can be brought into and compliment the 
settlement. Biodiversity corridors will also be provided and serve both residents and visitors 
whilst also limiting flood risk and responding to the effects of climate change. 
Play and  Open Space 
Play and  open spaces will be essential to the success of the new community and further ensuring 
the health, wellbeing and recreational opportunities for residents including provision of the right 
facilities to enable a mix of sports to be played. The development will provide recreational space 
and sports pitches including up to 3 x 3G pitches, play spaces and other typologies. 
Green Belt  and Development Boundaries 
262 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 34 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 
Our Local Plan does not alter the Green Belt boundary to accommodate the development of the 
Garden Community and this is a matter for the AAP. Sensitive areas of landscape will be avoided 
in determining development boundaries and the suf ficient separation from nearby settlements 
of Blindley Heath and Tandridge will be an important factor for consideration when establishing 
the extent of the development. 
Community Leadership  
Community governance  structures and stewardship will be embedded within the Garden 
Community and considered from the outset of planning phases to ensure there is an understanding 
of how assets (i.e. open spaces and community centres) generated by the development process 
will be managed in perpetuity and where additional management mechanisms and funding will 
be needed. 
Wider benefits  
The increase  in services and facilities at South Godstone will be for the benefit of residents both 
existing and new. Higher level provisions such as school provision, health services and road 
improvements will also benefit residents from across the District. 
Comprehensive Development  
The Council  will expect development to be proportionately delivered alongside relevant 
infrastructure. All phasing will be guided by an ‘infrastructure first’ perspective and only deviated 
from where viability or legitimate reasoning can be provided to support the contrary. 
The Council  will take a proactive role to delivery policy objectives for the Garden Community, 
including through the use of statutory powers if needed and where possible. 
Further, Any application  for no piecemeal development  will be supported refused and  a 
comprehensive approach to the wider Garden Community scheme will be strongly defended. 
Key Supporting Documents and Evidence 
All evidence-base documents are applicable, noting particularly: 
Tandridge District Preferred Strategy Topic Paper (2017) 
Local Plan: Sites Consultation (Regulation 18) (2016) 
Local Plan: Garden Villages Consultation (Regulation 18) (2017) 
Tandridge Draft Local Plan: Viability Assessment (2018) 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2018) 
Sustainability Appraisal (2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018) 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 263 Strategic Policy SGC01: South Godstone Garden Community 34 
Relevant Spatial Objective(s) 
All Strategic Objectives are relevant in this instance. 
Relevant Monitoring Indicator(s) 
Monitoring indicators to be established through the preparation of the AAP. Appropriate 
indicators relevant to the AAP will be set out in the document and monitored once adopted. 
264 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 35 Monitoring Framework 
35 Monitoring Framework 
35.1 Local authorities  have a duty to monitor the effectiveness of planning policies. Regulation 34 
of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 requires Local 
Planning Authorities to produce an Authority’s Monitoring Report (AMR). The Regulations prescribe 
what must be monitored and are summarised in Table below. 
Progress against the adopted Local Development Scheme (LDS) Regulation 34 (1) 
Specifically: 
the title of local plans or Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) in 
the LDS, for each: the timetable for preparation should be specified, the 
stage the document has reached in its preparation, and whether the 
documents are behind schedule, identifying why it is the case if relevant 
identifying Local Plan Documents or SPDs adopted, specifying the date 
of adoption/approval. 
Set out when a policy is not being implemented , stating the reasons why 
this is the case and identifying steps (if any) to implement. Regulation 34 (2) 
Progress against Housing delivery targets include data on the number of 
net additional dwellings and net additional affordable dwellings: Regulation 34 (3) 
(a) in the period in respect of which the report is made, and 
(b) since the policy was first published, adopted or approved. 
Neighbourhood planning Regulation 34 (4) 
Details to be provided where an authority has made a Neighbourhood 
Development Order or Neighbourhood Development Plan. 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulation 34 (5) 
Include information specified in rRegulation 62 (4) of the CIL Regulations 
2010. 
The report should include details of CIL receipts and CIL expenditure for the 
reported year and provide summary details of CIL expenditure. 
Duty to Co-operate Regulation 34 (6) 
Details to be provided of what action was taken during the period of the report 
in relation to the Duty to Cooperate, such as joint working, meetings, 
consultations. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 265 Monitoring Framework 35 
35.2 In addition to these mandatory requirements, the 2012 Regulations introduced greater flexibility 
for local authorities to decide what should be monitored. The need to produce one large document 
published on an annual basis was removed, however, for the sake of conciseness. To ensure the 
performance of Our Local Plan can be considered as a whole, the Council will continue to set out its 
monitoring through the preparation of an Authority's Monitoring Report. 
35.3 Monitoring and  review are key components of the planning system and the Local Development 
Plan as a whole needs to be continually reviewed, partly to be able to assess the performance and 
success of the wider development plan, but also to identify where and what components of the plan 
need to be updated to reflect changing circumstances nationally, regionally and locally. 
35.4 Our Development  Plan and supplementary planning documents/guidance (SPD/G) consists 
of the following and will already have monitoring indicators associated with them. These will continue 
to be monitored as part of the Councils wider process: 
Our Local Plan: 2033 (including the Infrastructure Delivery Plan) 
Detailed Policies Development Plan Document (2014) 
Community Infrastructure Levy (2014) 
Woldingham Neighbourhood Plan (2016) 
Caterham Town Centre Masterplan SPD  (2018) 
Trees and Soft Landscaping SPD (2017) 
Parking Standards SPD 
Bletchingley Conservation Area Appraisal SPG 
Harestone Design Guidance SPD 
Woldingham Design Guidance SPD 
Village Design Statement for Woldingham (Woldingham Village Design Statement) SPD 
Village Design Statement for Lingfield (and associated maps) SPG 
Marie Curie Urban Design Concept Statement SPD 
35.5 Once adopted,  the South Godstone Garden Community Area Action Plan (AAP) will become 
part of the Development Plan. Any future adopted Neighbourhood Plans will also become part of the 
Development Plan and and future SPD's  will form part of our suite of documents and will include 
monitoring indicators to measure their performance, where relevant. 
266 Our  Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 35 Monitoring Framework 
35.6 Implementation of the policies contained in Our Local Plan will require concerted action by a 
range of public, private and voluntary sector bodies working in partnership. The role of Our Local 
Plan is to provide a clear and robust framework for development in order that investment and action 
can be co-ordinated and geared to efficient and effective delivery. 
35.7 The Authority's  Monitoring Report will contain an assessment of progress in preparing the 
wider development plan against the milestones set out in the most up-to-date Local Development 
Scheme. It will also contain an assessment of the extent to which policies set out within the 
development plan are being achieved and targets being met. If as a result of monitoring, areas are 
identified where a policy is not working, key policy targets are not being met, or the context has 
changed (for example, the performance and nature of the economy), this may give rise to a review 
of all or part of the development plan. 
35.8 Where necessary  the Council will also prepare separate housing supply papers to accord with 
national policy, should housing supply fall below the targets of Our Local Plan. These will be produced 
independently of the AMR. 
Monitoring Indicators  
35.9 The monitoring  indicators set out below relate to the policies and spatial objectives of Our 
Local Plan. Indicators for the wider development plan are set out in the respective plan documents 
and will be cumulatively set out in each Authority's Monitoring Report. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 267 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective Monitoring Framework 35 
268 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) SO1, SO3 TLP01, TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP20, 
TLP21, TLP22, 
TLP24, TLP25, 
TLP26, TLP28, 
TLP29 SES01-04, 
IES01-07 
SO1, SO3 TLP01, TLP03, 
TLP20, TLP21, 
TLP22, SES01-04, 
IES01-07 
SO1, SO3  TLP01, TLP20 
SO1, SO3  TLP01, TLP20, 
TLP41 Net gains and/or losses of 
employment floorspace (B-Class and 
Sui Generis) 
Net number of permissions enabling 
intensification of employment spaces 
within SES01-SES04 and 
IES01-IES07
Percentage of  residents whose job 
and skill set is identified within 
occupation skill group 1-6 
Percentage of  employment and 
unemployment 15.3ha of B-Class 
employment space 
and associated Sui 
Generis over the 
Plan period. 
15.3ha of B-Class 
employment space 
and associated Sui 
Generis over the 
Plan period. 
Increase
Increase of  
employment rates. 
Decrease of  
unemployment
rates. Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Nomis, Surreyi  
Nomis
UK Competitive Index Increase in
Competitive
Ranking position. Competitive ranking TLP20 SO1, SO3 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Number of additional hotel/guest
house bedrooms TLP41, TLP42 SO2 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective
SO2
SO1
SO1, SO6  35 Monitoring Framework 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 269 Permissions proposing 
expansion/intensification of tourism 
assets
Number of gains and/or losses 
proposing agricultural, farming and 
other land-based rural businesses 
Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) 
due to Permitted Development Rights 
Number of  employment applications 
(B-Class) permitted under Permitted 
Development Rights Target not required. 
Net gain 
Minimise
Minimise Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data, 
Retail Health Check 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data, 
Retail Health Check TLP07, TLP22, 
TLP41
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP22
TLP24, TLP25  
TLP20, TLP21,  
TLP22, TLP24, 
TLP25, TLP28, 
TLP29 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data To meet identified
needs. The net number of permitted and
completed homes TLP01, TLP11,
TLP19 SO4 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Minimise Net number of C-Class uses permitted
to alternative uses TLP11, TLP14 SO4 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data To meet identified
needs Net number of new dwellings in each
of our settlements and parishes TLP01, TLP06,
TLP07, TLP08,
TLP13, TLP28,
TLP29, TLP50 SO4 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Maximise in
compliance with
TLP12 The number of new (gross) affordable
homes and proportion of all
completions within our settlements
and parishes TLP01, TLP06,
TLP07, TLP08,
TLP10, TLP12,
TLP13 SO4 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective Monitoring Framework 35 
270 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) SO4 TLP01, TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP10 
SO4 TLP01, TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP10, TLP14, 
TLP28, TLP29 
SO4 TLP10  
SO4 TLP01,  TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP09, TLP13 The number of new homes by size 
(number of bedrooms) 
Types of new homes
Number of  empty homes brought back 
into use
Number of  applications permitted for 
rural exception homes within each of 
our settlements and parishes Targets to be 
determined through 
Housing Strategy 
Targets to be 
determined through 
Housing Strategy 
Net increase  
1 in every 2 years Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Less than 10% Number of market homes approved
on Rural Exception Sites TLP01, TLP06,
TLP07, TLP08,
TLP09, TLP13 SO4 
Housing Strategy To be adopted Progress of the Housing Strategy TLP10, TLP11,
TLP12, TLP28,
TLP29 SO4 
Neighbourhood Plans To be made Status of Neighbourhood Plans TLP01, TLP06,
TLP07, TLP08,
TLP09, TLP10,
TLP17, TLP24,
TLP43 SO4 35 Monitoring Framework 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 271 Average density per annum within 
each of our settlements and parishes 
The number  of new traveller pitches 
The number  of new plots for travelling 
showpeople
Number of  temporary permissions for 
traveller pitches and plots for travelling 
showpeople
Permissions granted  for new housing 
on brownfield/previously-developed
land
Changes in  the net amount of retail 
floorspace (Class A1-A5) within each 
retail centre In compliance with 
average densities 
per
settlement/parish
Increase
Increase
Minimise
Net increase  per 
annum
Maximise in  
compliance with 
TLP27 Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
for new housing on Green Belt land Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data In compliance with 
national policy Net number of permissions granted TLP03, TLP19 SO4, SO11, 
SO12 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data, 
Retail Health Check SO4 TLP01, TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP09, TLP18, 
TLP19 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy SpatialAssociated
Objective
SO5 TLP15, TLP16 
SO5 TLP15, TLP16 
SO5 TLP15  
SO4, SO1 1, TLP01, TLP14, 
SO12 TLP19 
SO6 TLP01,  TLP06, 
TLP07, TLP08, 
TLP22, TLP24, 
TLP25, TLP26, 
TLP27, TLP28, 
TLP29 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data,
Retail Health Check Minimise Amount of vacant retail floorspace
(A1-A5) according to each retail centre TLP01, TLP06,
TLP07, TLP08,
TLP22, TLP24, SO6 Monitoring Framework 35 
272 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective 
TLP25, TLP26,
TLP27, TLP28,
TLP29 
SO6
SO6
SO6
SO7, SO8,  
SO13 TLP24, TLP25 
TLP11, TLP24, 
TLP25, TLP28, 
TLP29
TLP24, TLP25,  
TLP26, TLP27, 
TLP28, TLP29 
TLP06, TLP17,  
TLP18, TLP19, 
TLP30, TLP38, 
TLP39 Loss of retail floorspace (Class A1-A5) 
due to Permitted Development Rights 
Monitor progress of regeneration 
schemes: RegenOxted and Caterham 
Town Centre Masterplan 
Annual Health  Check 
Net gains  and/or losses of open 
spaces, allotments, parks and 
recreation grounds, play space Minimise
To be delivered 
Positive trend  
Net gains  Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data, 
Retail Health Checks 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Annual Health  Check through 
Town and Local Centre 
Review
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Proposals for new indoor and outdoor
sports and recreation facilities TLP06, TLP17,
TLP28, TLP29,
TLP38, TLP39 SO7, SO8,
SO17 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Maximise in
compliance with
TLP40 Number of hectares of land gained for
burial space allocation TLP40 SO13 
Surrey Police Minimise Number of anti-social behaviour
incidents TLP18 SO8 35 Monitoring Framework 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 273 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective 
DECC, Surreyi -CO2 Emission
Estimates Minimise Local emissions from commercial and
domestic resources TLP18, TLP44,
TLP45 SO10
SO10
SO10SO10
SO10 TLP18, TLP44, 
TLP45
TLP44, TLP45 
TLP46, TLP50 
TLP46 Average energy consumption/carbon 
emissions per household 
Number of applications for renewable 
energy
Monitored through  the Air Quality 
Annual Review 
Change in  status of neighbouring 
AQMA's Minimise
Increase where 
appropriate
Targets determined  
through Air Quality 
Annual Review 
Monitoring of  
cross-boundary
implications DECC, Surreyi - CO2
Emissions Estimates 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Environmental Health  
Environmental Health/  Surrey 
Air Alliance 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase in net
gains Net number of gains and/or losses on
SSSI, SNCI, LNR, pSNCI, BOA TLP30, TLP35 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data In compliance with
national policy Number and nature of applications
proposed within Surrey Hills and High
Weald AONB and AGLV TLP33, TLP34 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Net gains in biodiversity TLP09, TLP30,
TLP35 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data In compliance with
TLP32 Number and nature of applications
proposed within designated
Landscape Character Areas TLP32 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data In compliance with
TLP36 Number of applications that have
contributions to SAMM TLP36 SO13 Associated
SpatialObjective Associated Policy Indicator Target Source of data
Number of applications resulting in a 
loss of TPO 
Proposals where important trees are
to be removed/have already been 
removed, but replacement planting 
can mitigate
Proposals where  important trees are
to be removed/have already been 
approved, but there is insufficient 
space for replanting Minimise
In compliance  with 
TLP37
In compliance  with 
TLP37 Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase in net gain Proposals where there is a net gain
and/or loss in soft landscaping TLP37 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Zero Proposals which require the loss or
deterioration of ancient woodland, or 
ancient or veteran trees TLP37 SO13 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Zero Number of permissions proposing a 
loss of statutory and locally-listed
buildings TLP18, TLP43 SO14 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data In compliance with
TLP43 Permissions on Conservation Areas
and listed buildings TLP18, TLP43 SO14 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Number of Conservation Area
appraisals submitted and
management plans adopted TLP43 SO14 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Schemes proposing SuDS and flood
mitigation TLP30, TLP47 SO15SO13 TLP37 
SO13 TLP37 
SO13 TLP37 Monitoring Framework 35 
274 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective 35 Monitoring Framework 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 275 Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Decrease Net number of dwellings in flood zones TLP01, TLP47 SO15 
Net gains and/or losses to designated 
public rights of way 
Net number of gains and/or losses of 
community services floorspace (Class 
D1 and D2) 
Value of financial and CIL 
contributions secured and collected 
Spending of  financial contributions Increase in  net 
gains
Increase in  net 
gains
Increase
Monitored through  
the CIL committee Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
CIL and S106 data 
CIL and S106 data SO17, TLP31 
SO13
SO17, SO7, TLP06, TLP07 
SO8 TLP08, TLP22, 
TLP24, TLP25, 
TLP26, TLP28, 
TLP29, TLP39, 
TLP41 
SO17 TLP04,  TLP05, 
TLP18 
SO17 TLP04,  TLP05, 
TLP06, TLP07, 
TLP08, TLP09 TLP18 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Number of applications including
provision of cycle spaces TLP18, TLP50 SO17,
SO16 
Travel Smart Surrey. Planning
applications, appeals and
building control data Increase Number of electrical charging points TLP18, TLP50 SO17,SO16 
Surrey Air Alliance and Local
Transport Plan Target determined
through Surrey Air
Alliance and Local
Transport Plan Monitored through assessments by
Surrey Air Alliance and Local
Transport Plan TLP18, TLP46,
TLP50, SO16 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective Monitoring Framework 35 
276 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) SO16 TLP51 
SO17 TLP07,  TLP08, 
TLP22 
SO17 TLP48  Number of applications received for 
Airport Parking; Number of 
applications for airport parking, 
granted on appeal.
Quarterly update on Gainshare
Solution Deployment to promote 
home-working (updates on postcodes 
that now have been connected to the 
fibre network) 
Permissions compliant  with the local 
water efficiency standards of 110 litres 
per person per day Zero
To be updated 
Maximise in  
compliance with 
TLP48 Planning applications and 
appeal decisions 
Superfast Surrey 
Planning applications,  appeals 
and building control data 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Number of permissions that
incorporate separate storage and
collection for recycling TLP49 SO17 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase Number of permissions that
incorporate plans to store and aid the
collection of waste TLP49 SO17 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Increase in net
gains Gains and/or losses of schools and
educational facilities (Class D1 and
D2) TLP23 SO17 
Planning applications, appeals
and building control data Net gains Number of applications that propose
expansion of schools and other
associated facilities TLP23 SO17 Source of data Target Indicator Associated Policy Associated
SpatialObjective 35 Monitoring Framework 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 277 Increase Planning applications, appeals 
and building control data 
To meet identified 
needs
To meet identified 
needs
To meet identified 
needs SO17 TLP18, TLP19 
Housing Site 
Allocations
Employment Site 
Allocations
Garden Community  Number of approved planning 
applications following a pre-application 
submission
Annually monitor as part of the five 
year housing and land supply within 
the Authority's Monitoring Report 
Amount of  net gains and losses of 
employment floorspace (B-Class and 
Sui Generis). Number of permissions 
enabling intensification of employment 
spaces
Monitoring indicators  to be established 
through the preparation of the AAP. 
Appropriate indicators relevant to the 
AAP will be set out in the document 
and monitored once adopted Appendix 1: Indicative Housing Trajectory Appendix 1: Indicative Housing Trajectory 
 52 135 144 
115 160 461 
165 238 309 
249 299 339 439 
369 
249 376 384 
294 
256 
142 322 
228 332 
0100200300400500600
2013/14
2014/15
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
2020/21
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30
2030/31
2031/32
2032/33
YearNumber of Units  
Completions
Permissions
Other
278 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 279 Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
The Council currently has an adopted development plan which includes the documents set out below. The adoption of Our Local Plan 
will necessitate the replacement of a number of existing adopted policies to reflect the up to date position and to accord with Regulation 
8 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations (2012): 
The Core Strategy (Adopted 2008): sets out the strategic policies to steer and manage the approach to development. This will 
be fully replaced by the Local Plan 2033; and 
Local Plan Part 2 – Detailed Policies (Adopted 2014): Suite of Development Management policies to assist in the assessment 
of planning applications. This will be partially replaced by the Local Plan 2033. 
These alterations  are formally set out in the table below. The full or partial deletion of policies in both the current Core Strategy (20108) 
and
 the Detailed Policies (2014) document, will only take effect at the point of adopting Our Local Plan. 
Replaced Policies of the Local Development Plan 
Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 Associated
Planning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus
CSP1 Core Strategy (2008) TLP01, TLP03, TLP06, Spatial Strategy, Green Belt, Urban Settlements, 
TLP07, TLP08, TLP19 Semi-Rural Sevice Settlements, Rural 
Settlements, Housing Densities & the Best Use 
of Land 
CSP2 Core  Strategy (2008) TLP01, TLP11, Spatial Strategy, Retention and Supply, All 
HSG01-21 Housing Site Allocation Policies Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead 
Spatial Strategy TLP01 Core Strategy (2008) CSP3 CSP4 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP5 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP6 Core  Strategy (2008) 
CSP7 Core  Strategy (2008) TLP01, TLP10, TLP11, 
TLP12
TLP01, TLP08, TLP09, 
TLP13
TLP01, TLP08,  TLP09, 
TLP13TLP01, TLP1
 1, TLP14, 
TLP19 Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 Associated
Planning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus 
Spatial Strategy, Responsive Housing Strategy, 
Retention and Supply, Affordable Housing 
Requirement
Spatial Strategy, Rural Settlements, Limited & 
Unserviced Settlements, Rural Housing Exception 
Sites
Spatial Strategy , Rural Settlements, Limited & 
Unserviced Settlements, Rural Housing Exception 
SitesSpatial Strategy
 , Retention and Supply, Specialist 
Need Housing and Extra Care Housing Densities 
& the Best Use of Land 
Spatial Strategy , Retention and Supply, Specialist 
Need Housing and Extra Care, Housing Densities 
& the Best Use of Land TLP01, TLP11, TLP14, 
TLP19 Core Strategy (2008) CSP8 
Gypsy, Traveller and Showpeople Provision, 
Traveller Pitch/Site/Plot Design TLP15, TLP16 Core Strategy (2008) CSP9 Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead
Designing
Gypsy and 
Traveller Sites 
Good Practice 
Guidance Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
280 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 Associated
Planning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus
CSP10 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP11 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP13 Core  Strategy (2008) 
CSP14 Core  Strategy (2008) Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 281 TLP15, TLP16 
TLP04, TLP05, TLP23 
TLP17, TLP18,  TLP23, 
TLP31, TLP38, TLP39 
TLP18, TLP44,  TLP45 Gypsy, Traveller and Showpeople Provision, 
Traveller Pitch/Site/Plot Design 
Infrastructure Delivery and Financial 
Contributions, Development Viability, Protection, 
Provision and Enhancements of Schools 
Place-Making &  Design, Sustainable Transport 
and Travel 
Health and Wellbeing, Place-mMaking &  Design, 
Protection, Provision and Enhancements of 
Schools, Access to  Countryside, Public Rights  of 
Way, Play and Open Space, Providing Playing 
Pitches and Built Leisure Facilities TLP18, TLP50 Core Strategy (2008) CSP12 
Place-Making & Design, Renewable Energy 
Infrastructure, Energy Efficient & Low Carbon 
Development
Spatial Strategy, Specialist Need Housing and 
Extra Care, Place-mMaking &  Design, Housing 
Densities & the Best Use of Land, Supporting a 
Prosperous Economy, Green & Blue TLP01, TLP14, TLP18, 
TLP19, TLP20, TLP30, 
TLP47, TLP48 Core Strategy (2008) CSP15 Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead
Designing
Gypsy and
Traveller Sites
Good Practice
Guidance CSP18 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP19 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP20 Core  Strategy (2008) TLP02, TLP18, TLP19, 
TLP30, TLP35, TLP37 
TLP01, TLP06, TLP07, 
TLP08, TLP09, TLP11, 
TLP19, TLP28, TLP29 
TLP33, TLP34  Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 AssociatedPlanning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus 
Infrastructure, Sustainable Urban 
Drainage and
Reducing Flood Risk, Water Consumption and 
Waste Water
Airport Parking TLP51 Core Strategy (2008) CSP16 
Biodiversity, Ecology and Habitats TLP35 Core Strategy (2008) CSP17 
Spatial Strategy, Place-mMaking &  Design, 
Housing Densities & Best Use of Land, Green & 
Blue Infrastructure, Biodiversity, Ecology and 
Habitats, Trees and Soft Landscaping 
Spatial Strategy , Urban Settlements, Semi-Rural 
Sevice Settlements, Rural Settlements, Limited 
& Unserviced Settlements,Retention and Supply, 
Housing Densities & the Best Use of Land, 
Caterham Town Centre, Oxted Town Centre
Surrey Hills  and High Weald Areas of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty, Area of Greater Landscape Value 
and Area  of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
Candidate Areas 
Landscape Character TLP32 Core Strategy (2008) CSP21 NPPF
paragraph 14 Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
282 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 AssociatedPlanning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus
CSP22 Core Strategy (2008) 
CSP23 Core Strategy (2008) 
DP2 Detailed  Policies 
(2014) Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 283 TLP20, TLP21, TLP22, 
TLP24, TLP26, 
SES01-04, IES01-07 
TLP24, TLP25,TLP26, 
TLP27, TLP28, TLP29 
TLP24, TLP25,  TLP26, 
TLP27, TL28, TLP29 Supporting a Prosperous Economy, Employment 
Hierarchy, Rural Economy, Retail Hierarchy, 
Development within & outside Town and Local 
Centres, Sequential  testing and retail impact, All 
Employment Site Allocation Policies 
Retail Hierarchy , Retail Frontages, Development
within & outside Town and Local 
Centres, Sequential  testing and retail impact, 
Retail Provision, Caterham Town Centre, Oxted 
Town Centre
Retail Hierarchy , Retail Frontages, Development
within & outside Town and Local 
Centres, Sequential  testing and retail impact, 
Retail Provision, Caterham Town Centre, Oxted 
Town Centre NPPF
paragraph24-28
NPPFparagraph24-27
paragraph 14 Sustainable Development NPPF Spatial Strategy, Presumption in favour of TLP01, TLP02 Detailed Policies 
(2014) DP1 
NPPF
paragraph24-27
NPPF
paragraph24-27 Retail Hierarchy, Retail Frontages, Development
within & outside Town and Local 
Centres, Sequential testing and retail impact, 
Retail Provision TLP24, TLP25, TLP26,
TLP27 Detailed Policies
(2014) DP3 DP4
DP7 (Partial 
replacement)
DP10DP11 DP12DP14 Detailed Policies 
(2014)
Detailed Policies 
(2014)
Detailed Policies  
(2014)
Detailed Policies  
(2014)Detailed Policies
  
(2014)Detailed Policies
  
(2014) TLP20, TLP21, TLP22 
TLP37
TLP03
TLP07TLP07,
 TLP08 
TLP03 Supporting a Prosperous Economy, Employment NPPF 
Hierarchy, Rural Economy paragraph
24-28Planning
PolicyFrameworkwill be used 
instead Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan: Policy Reference in Associated Existing Policy of the 
National 2033 Our Local Plan: 2033 Planning Document DevelopmentPlan Policy & 
ReplacementStatus 
Spatial Strategy, Place-Making & Design, 
Landscape Character, Trees and Soft 
Landscaping, Historic Environment 
Green Belt 
Semi-Rural Service Settlements 
Semi-Rural Service Settlements, Rural 
Settlements
Green Belt 
Settlement Policies, Play and Open Space, 
Providing Playing Pitches and Built Leisure 
Facilities TLP06, TLP07, TLP08, Detailed Policies DP18 
TLP09, TLP38, TLP39 (2014) 
TLP30, TLP31, TLP35 Detailed Policies 
(2014) DP19 Green & Blue Infrastructure, Access to 
Countryside, Public Rights of Way, Biodiversity,
Ecology and Habitats Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 
284 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Policy of the
National
PlanningPolicyFrameworkwill be used
instead Replacement Policy Title in Our Local Plan:
2033 Policy Reference in
Our Local Plan: 2033 AssociatedPlanning Document ExistingDevelopmentPlan Policy &
ReplacementStatus 
Sustainable Urban 
Drainage and Reducing Flood
Risk, Water Consumption and Waster Water TLP47, TLP48 Detailed Policies
(2014) DP21 (Partial
Replacement) 
NPPFparagraph109 Pollution and Air Quality TLP46 Detailed Policies
(2014) DP22 (Partial
Replacement) 
285 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Appendix 2: Policies to be replaced or altered by Our Local Plan: 2033 Glossary 
Glossary 
Acronym 
Adoption 
Affordable Housing Word 
Ancient woodland 
AAP Area Action Plan Definition 
Area of Great 
Landscape Value AGLV 
AHAP Area of High 
Archaeological 
Potential 
AONB Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty 
Biodiversity 
Opportunity Area BOA The final stage of implementation of the Local Plan; this 
requires the local planning authority to agree the Local Plan 
and make it publicly available. 
The Department for Communities and Local Government 
defines Affordable Homes as 'social rented, affordable rented 
and intermediate housing, provided to specified eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the market.' 
A woodland that has existed continuously since 1600 or before 
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland (or 1750 in Scotland). 
Ancient woodland is formally defined on maps by Natural 
England and equivalent bodies. 
A Development Plan Document which provides a planning 
framework for a specific geographical area where change is 
anticipated. Area Action Plans focus on implementation and 
are a primary means of delivering planned growth areas. 
An area of land in England which is considered to have a 
particular scenic value, and is therefore afforded a degree of 
protection by local authorities. 
In the Surrey Historic Environment Record (HER) maintained 
by Surrey County Council, there are a number of areas of high 
archaeological potential within the District. Within these areas 
there is good reason to expect some archaeological finds 
during any disturbance of the ground, such as during 
development. Applicants seeking planning permission within 
areas of high archaeological potential are required to undertake 
a prior assessment of the possible archaeological significance 
of the site and the implications for their proposals. 
An area of countryside which has been nationally designated 
for conservation due to its significant landscape value and 
beauty. 
Extensive areas where improved habitat management, as well 
as efforts to restore and re-create Priority Habitats will be most 
effective in enhancing connectivity to benefit recovery of Priority 
Species in a fragmented landscape. 
286 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Glossary 
Acronym 
Broad Locations 
Built-Up Area 
Climate change 
Clinical CCG Definition Word 
A change in global or regional climate patterns, in particular a 
change apparent from the mid to late 20th century onwards 
and attributed largely to the increased levels of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide produced by the use of fossil fuels. 
Commissioning Group 
Community Facilities 
CIL 
Conservation Area A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds towards 
infrastructure from owners or developers of land undertaking 
new building projects in their area. Community 
Infrastructure Levy 
Consultation An opportunity for the public and stakeholders to make 
comments on any policies and content within the Local Plan, 
or what should be included in the Plan. All comments will then 
be taken into account when preparing each iteration of the 
Plan. The NPPF requires that local planning authorities should 
identify a supply of specific, developable sites or broad location 
for growth, for years 6-10 and, where possible for years 11-15. 
Broad locations therefore do not have set boundaries. 
The built-up area refers to the developed nature of a 
settlement. For Tandridge, our most built-up settlements are 
the Tier 1 (Urban) Settlements, including Oxted and Caterham. 
Whilst there is a built-up nature to all established settlements, 
including the smaller and more rural settlements, the term 
'built-up' is predominantly attributed to our largest (tier 1) 
settlements for Local Plan purposes. 
Clinical Commissioning Groups are clinically led membership 
groups of GP practices that plan, commission and 
performance-manage a range of local health services for their 
population. CCGs were formed after the Health and Social 
Care Act 2012 was passed, devolving a range of 
commissioning responsibilities to CCGs from primary care 
trusts (PCTs). 
Facilities or services for the community, including 
community/village halls or buildings, cultural facilities, places 
of worship and pubs. 
An area designated as being of special architectural or historic 
interest, the character or appearance of which it is desirable 
to preserve or enhance, designated by the local planning 
authority under the Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas 
Act 1990. 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 287 Glossary 
Definition Word Acronym 
Consultation Portal 
Core Strategy 
Conversion Method  
Statement 
DPD Development  Plan 
Document 
DtC Duty to Cooperate 
Examination 
FRA Flood Risk 
Assessment The Council's consultation portal is called Objective and not 
only enables you to register for notifications and updates, it 
also puts you in charge of ensuring that we have your most 
up-to-date contact details and allows you to submit your 
comments online during active consultations, or to opt out of 
future notifications. 
An old-style planning policy document which sets out key 
planning policies for the District. The latest Core Strategy for 
Tandridge will be superseded by the Local Plan. 
A Conversion  Method Statement sets out the specific 
programme of works to be undertaken in order to convert a 
building and should be submitted as part of a planning 
application for the conversion of a building. 
Policy documents  that are subject to formal procedures. 
Introduced in  the Localism Act (2011), the Duty to Cooperate 
is a legal test that requires cooperation between local planning 
authorities and other public bodies to ensure that Local Plans 
are created in a strategic way and cross boundary issues are 
recognised, and where possible, addressed. Cooperation must 
be constructive and take place on an ongoing basis. 
Once consultation  has been undertaken on the submission 
version of the pPlan, the local planning authority should submit 
the Local Plan and any proposed changes it considers along 
with supporting documents to the Planning Inspectorate for 
examination on behalf of the Secretary of State. The Inspector 
(on behalf of the Secretary of State) will investigate issues that 
have been raised through the consultation so that a solution / 
recommendation can be provided, where possible. 
An assessment  of the risk of flooding from all flooding 
mechanisms, the identification of flood mitigation measures 
and advice on actions to be taken before and during a flood. The ENA assesses the quantity, quality and viability of the 
District's employment land. It will inform the District's future 
approach to the provision, protection, release or enhancement 
of employment land and premises. Economic Needs 
Assessment ENA 
288 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Glossary 
Acronym 
Flood Risk Sequential 
Test 
FE Form Entry 
GC Garden  Community 
GV Garden Village 
Gatwick Safeguarding 
Zone 
GIS 
Green and Blue 
Infrastructure A computer-based system whereby mapping and information Geographic 
are linked for a variety of uses, such as capturing data justifying 
Local Development Documents. Information System 
Green Belt The Green Belt is a statutory designation that has the 
fundamental aim of preventing urban sprawl by keeping land 
permanently open. The NPPF states that the essential 
characteristic of the Green Belt is its openness and 
permanence. The Green Belt does not only constitute green 
spaces, but can also include roads, settlements and other built 
forms, such as industrial units. Definition Word 
Local Plans should apply a sequential, risk-based approach 
to the location of development to avoid where possible flood 
risk to people and property and manage any residual risk, 
taking account of the impacts of climate change. One of the 
mechanisms to achieve this is to carry out a Flood Risk 
Sequential Test to support the Local Plan. 
Essentially for each Form of Entry there will be up to 30 
children in a year group. So for a 2 Form Entry school there 
will be two classes accommodating up to 60 children for each 
year group. 
A new community designed and delivered to accord with the 
Town and Country Planning Association's 'Garden City 
Principles'. 
The Government's  Garden Village Prospectus (June 2016) 
defines garden villages as new discrete settlements that are 
local authority led and capable of accommodating between 
1,500 and 10,000 homes. 
To keep the operation of the airport safe and secure, Gatwick 
is legally obliged to have an active policy of aerodrome 
safeguarding. This is managed by the airport's aerodrome 
safeguarding team which is responsible for making sure that 
no developments within the 15km safeguarding zone (30km 
for wind turbines) have an adverse effect on the airport's 
operation. More information can be found on the Gatwick 
website. 
A living network of green spaces, water and other 
environmental features in both urban and rural areas. It is often 
used in an urban context to cover benefits provided by trees, 
parks, gardens, road verges, allotments, cemeteries, 
woodlands, rivers and wetlands. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 289 Glossary 
HRA 
HE 
HELAA 
IDP Definition Word Acronym 
Green Belt 
Assessment 
Habitats Regulations 
Assessment 
Highways England 
Housing and 
Economic Land  
Availability 
Assessment 
Impact Risk  Zone 
Infill Development Areas surrounding/nearby a designated SSSI, where potential 
changes could create significant damage. 
Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan 
Infrastructure The Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) identifies the key 
infrastructure required to support development within the 
District over the pPlan period and how it will be delivered. 
The basic physical and organisational structure and facilities 
(communication, transportation, and utilities) needed for the 
operation of society or enterprise. An assessment of the Green Belt to determine the strategic 
role of the Green Belt in the District, whether the Green Belt 
fulfils its purpose as set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework and the role the settlements in the Green Belt play. 
A step-by-step process which helps to identify any likely 
significant effects and (where appropriate) assess the adverse 
impacts on a site that is protected by European legalisation. 
Highways England  is the highway authority responsible for 
trunk roads and motorways (the strategic road network). 
The HELAA  is a technical study which is used to assist in the 
monitoring of whether there is an adequate supply of 
deliverable housing land. It informs planning process in terms 
of identifying land that is suitable, available and achievable for 
housing and economic development uses over the Plan period. 
It identifies sites and broad locations with potential for 
development, assesses their development potential and 
assesses their suitability for development and the likelihood 
of that development coming forward. 
Infill development  could include a new building or an extension 
to an existing building, and may include side garden plots or 
corner plots. It does not include the inappropriate sub-division 
of existing curtilages to a size below that prevailing in the area, 
nor does it include the development of more extensive areas 
such as backland areas or the replacement of existing 
dwellings with more intensive forms of residential development. A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified 
as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions because of its heritage interest. Heritage 
asset includes designated heritage assets and assets identified 
by the local planning authority (including local listing). Heritage Assets 
290 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Glossary 
Definition Word Acronym 
Land Value Capture 
Landscape 
Assessments An assessment of the distinct patterns or consistent 
combination of elements which make up the landscape of an 
area. 
Listed Buildings 
LDS Local Development  
Scheme Granting planning permission can increase the value of land. 
The increase in value can be 'captured' by the authority 
granting permission to pay for public infrastructure 
improvements. 
A building of special architectural or historic interest. Listed 
buildings are graded I, II* or II with grade I being the highest. 
Listing includes the interior as well as the exterior of the 
building, and any buildings or permanent structures (e.g. wells 
within its curtilage). 
The LDS  sets out the programme for producing the Local Plan 
which is the statutory development plan document for the area. 
It sets out what development plan documents the Council is 
intending to produce and when, and at what stage the 
community can get involved in the process. 
Non-statutory habitats Sites of local significance designated 
by local authorities where protection and public understanding 
of nature conservation is encouraged. Local Nature Reserve LNR 
One document within the Local Development Plan. The Local 
Plan is a planning policy document prepared by the Local 
Planning Authority that guides development for 20 years. The Local Plan 
Local Plan is subject to consultation and independent 
examination before the Local Planning Authority can adopt the 
document. 
Retail development; leisure, entertainment facilities, the more 
intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, 
restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and Main Town Centre 
Uses 
fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); 
offices; arts, culture and tourism development (including 
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and 
conference facilities); and other appropriate sui generis uses 
(such as laundrettes, taxi businesses, car showrooms/garages 
and nail/tanning salons). 
A material consideration is an issue that must be considered 
by the decision maker when determining a planning application. 
Material considerations can include, but are not exclusive to, Material Consideration 
policies, guidance notes, strategies and management plans. 
As well as issues relating to traffic, wildlife, economic impacts 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 291 Glossary 
Definition Word Acronym 
and the historical interest of the area. Material considerations 
often vary depending on the type of application being 
considered. 
An enclosed area, using a synthetic grass or hard surface for 
playing sports, for example five-a-side football or netball. Multi-Use Games Area MUGA 
Off-road routes, pathways etc which could and should 
accommodate all and/or a variety of non-engine based, 
vulnerable road users, including equestrians, cyclists, 
pedestrians and mobility buggy users. Multi-User Routes 
A document that sets out the Government’s planning policies 
for England and how these are expected to be applied. The 
Framework was published in March 2012. National Planning 
Policy Framework NPPF 
Natural Burial 
Neighbourhood Plans 
PDR 
Planning Inspector / 
Inspectorate Permission to carry out certain limited forms of development Permitted 
without the need to make an application to a local planning 
authority, as granted under the terms of the Town and Country 
Planning (General Permitted Development) Order. Development Rights 
PPG 
Preferred Strategy Planning Practice Guidance on best practice for implementing the Government’s 
planning policies set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework. Guidance The action or practice of burying an un-embalmed body is laid 
to rest in a biodegradable coffin. 
A pPlan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum 
for a particular neighbourhood area (made under the Planning 
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004). 
The Planning Inspectorate's work includes national 
infrastructure planning under the Planning Act 2008 process 
(as amended by the Localism Act 2011), processing planning 
and enforcement appeals and holding examinations into local 
plans and community infrastructure levy charging schedules. 
In March 2017, the Council agreed a Preferred Strategy to be 
pursued in preparing the Local Plan. Fundamental to that 
strategy is the identification and pursuit of a sustainable 
location which is capable of delivering a large-scale 
development which accords with the principles of a Garden 
Village. 
292 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Glossary 
Definition Word Acronym 
PDL Previously-Developed 
Land 
Reasonable 
Alternatives 
Scheduled Monuments 
SDC Sevenoaks
  District 
Council 
Shopping Frontages 
SNCI Primary frontages are likely to include a high proportion of retail 
uses which may include food, drinks, clothing and household 
goods. Secondary frontages provide greater opportunities for 
a diversity of uses such as restaurants, cinemas and 
businesses. 
Locally important sites of nature conservation adopted by local Site of Nature 
authorities for planning purposes. A non-statutory site, locally Conservation 
designated for its substantive nature/wildlife/biodiversity 
conservation value and protected by planning policy. Importance Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, 
including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should 
be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be 
developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. 
This excludes: 
land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry 
buildings; 
land that has been developed for minerals extraction or 
waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for 
restoration has been made through development control 
procedures; 
land in built-up areas such as private residential gardens, 
parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and 
land that was previously-developed but where the remains 
of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have 
blended into the landscape in the process of time. 
There is no presumption that land that is previously developed 
is necessarily suitable for housing development or that the 
whole of the curtilage should be developed. 
These are  options for the development of a garden village that 
are appropriate in terms of the vision, objectives and 
geographical scope of the Local Plan. This is a requirement 
of the SEA Directive. 
Nationally-important monuments,  usually archaeological 
remains, that enjoy greater protection against inappropriate 
development through the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979. 
The administrative  area, in Kent County, that borders Tandridge 
District to the east. 
Our Local  Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 293 Glossary 
Definition Word Acronym 
A site of national importance for nature conservation identified 
and protected by Natural England. Site of Special 
Scientific Interest SSSI 
Source Protection Zones are defined by the Environment 
Agency and are in place to protect sources of groundwater. (Groundwater) Source 
Protection Zone SPZ 
Zone 1 (Inner Zone)- Defined as the 50 day travel time from 
any point below the water table to the source. This zone has 
a minimum radius of 50 metres; 
Zone 2 (Outer Zone) - Defined by a 400 day travel time from 
a point below the water table. 
Zone 3 (Total Catchment) - Defined as the area around a 
source within which all groundwater recharge is presumed to 
be discharged at the source. In confined aquifers, the source 
catchment may be displaced some distance from the source. 
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) are strictly protected 
sites designated under the EC Habitats Directive. Article 3 of 
the Habitats Directive requires the establishment of a European Special Areas of 
Conservation SAC 
network of important high-quality conservation sites that will 
make a significant contribution to conserving the 189 habitat 
types and 788 species identified in Annexes I and II of the 
Directive (as amended). 
Areas which have been identified as being of international 
importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration 
of rare and vulnerable species of birds found within European 
Union countries. They are European designated sites, classified 
under the Birds Directive. Special Protection 
Area SPA 
A distinctive residential area which derives its particular 
character from a combination of topography and historic 
development. As a result, these areas benefit from a high level 
of residential amenity. Special Residential 
Area 
The SCI sets out standards to be achieved by the local 
planning authority in relation to involving the community in the 
preparation, alteration and continuing review of the Statement of 
Community 
Involvement SCI 
Development Plan and in developing the SCI control decisions. 
In respect of documents prepared under the Development Plan 
the local planning authority is required to produce a statement 
showing how it complies with the SCI. 
294 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) Glossary 
Acronym 
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment SFRA 
Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment 
(2015) SHMA 
Strengths, 
Weaknesses, Opportunities and 
Threats Analysis SWOT 
Substantially Developed Frontage 
Surrey County Council SCC Definition Word 
A study that provides information on the probability of flooding 
from all sources, such as that from rivers, surface water, 
groundwater and sewers. The SFRA is used to ensure that, 
in allocating land or determining applications, development is 
located in areas at lowest risk of flooding. 
An assessment to evaluate the strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats of a given project. 
The District Council defines a substantially developed frontage 
as an otherwise continuous and largely uninterrupted built 
frontage of several dwellings visible within the street scene. An assessment to define housing need, in terms of types of 
tenure, size and need, for the requirements in the future. 
The County Council administrative area within which Tandridge 
District falls. Surrey County Council (SCC) is the local highway 
authority for the area and is responsible for a number of other 
services, including education and social services. 
The process of assessing the impacts of policies and proposals 
against social, environmental and economic objectives. Sustainability 
Appraisal SA 
Development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their 
own needs. There are three dimensions to sustainable 
development: economic, social and environmental. Sustainable Development 
SuDS offer an alternative form of drainage in urban areas by 
mimicking natural drainage and filtration systems in order to 
prevent surface water flooding and pollutants reaching the 
water course. Sustainable Urban 
Drainage Systems SuDS 
A range of detailed, evidence-based documents produced to 
support the Garden Villages Consultation and wider Local Plan 
and its preparation. development. Technical Studies 
Area defined on the Policies Map predominantly occupied by 
main town centre uses. Town Centre 
A Tree Preservation Order is an order made by a local planning 
authority in England to protect specific trees, groups of trees 
or woodlands in the interests of amenity. Tree Preservation 
Order TPO 
Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission) 295 Definition Word Acronym 
An urban area relates to settlements with a notable density of 
human structures such as houses, commercial buildings, roads, 
railways, infrastructure and retail facilities. Although 'urban' is Urban 
often attributed to the description of towns and cities, it can 
also refer to suburbs and smaller settlements dependent on 
the size of the population, the geographical context of a 
settlement, as well as the function it serves. As set out in the 
Council's Settlement Hierarchy, whilst Tandridge District is a 
predominantly rural area, the application of the term 'urban' 
is applied to the Tier 1 settlements, as the largest and most 
built-up areas within the district and those which act to provide 
key services to residents and visitors. Also see Built-up 
An individual development is said to be viable if, after taking 
account of all costs, it provides a competitive return to the 
developer and generates a land value sufficient to persuade 
the landowner to sell the land for the development proposed. Viability Glossary 
296 Our Local Plan 2033 (Version for Submission)  Council Offices, 8 Station Road East, Oxted, Surrey RH8 0BT 
customerservices@tandridge.gov.uk  www.tandridge.gov.uk  Tel: 01883 722000 