1 
Tendring District Local Plan 2013-2033 and Beyond 
Section 1  
North Essex Authorities’ Shared 
Strategic Section 1 Plan  
Adopted January 2021  North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |In accordance with Regulations 26 and 35 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning)
(England) Regulations 2012 (as amended), Tendring District Council, by decision at the meeting of 
Full Council on Tuesday 26 January 2021, has formally adopted the Tendring District Local Plan 
2013-2033 and Beyond: North Essex Authorities ’ Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan (hereafter the 
‘Section 1 Plan).
The ‘Section 1 Plan’ was prepared jointly by Tendring District Council, Colchester Borough Council  
and Braintree District Council – the ‘local planning authorities ’ (LPAs) collectively known as the ‘North 
Essex Authorities ’ (NEAs) to form the first part of each of the authorities’ respective Local Plans.
Following examination by an independent Planning Inspector, a ‘Final Report on the Examination of 
the North Essex Authorities ’ Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan’ under section 21(9) of the Act, was 
received by Tendring District Council and the other NEAs on 10th December 2020. The 
above-mentioned report confirmed that, subject the Inspector’s recommended ‘main 
modifications ’ (pursuant to section 23(3) of the Act) (which have been agreed by the Council and 
incorporated into this document), the Section 1 Plan meets legal requirements of the national 
planning system and the ‘tests of soundness ’ contained within national planning policy – as 
necessary for it to proceed to formal adoption.
The formal adoption of the Section 1 Local P lan by Tendring District Council has the effect of replacing,  
in part, a number of the strategic policies contained within the Tendring District Local Plan 2007  
(adopted in December 2007). The Tendring District Local Plan 2007 will be replaced, in full, on the 
formal adoption of Section 2 of Local Plan which contains further specific local policies and proposals  
applicable to the Tendring District only.
| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 PlanNorth Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |6 1Introduction
6 The Need f or a Str ategic Approach
8 Spatial P ortrait
9 Key Strategic Issues:  Oppor tunities and Challenges
10 Vision f or the Str ategic Area
11 Strategic Objectiv es
12 Strategic Issues and P olicies
14 2Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le De velopment
18 3Spatial Conte xt
22 4Meeting the need f or Ne w Homes
26 5Providing f or Emplo yment
30 6Infrastructure and Connectivity
40 7Creating Quality Places
44 8Cross Boundar y Gar den Comm unity
54 9Deliver y, Implementation & Monitoring
60 11Appendices & Maps
14 Policy SP 1 Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le De velopment
15 Policy SP 2 Recreational disturbance A voidance and Mitigation Str ategy (RAMS)
19 Policy SP 3 Spatial Str ategy f or Nor th Esse x
23 Policy SP 4 Meeting Housing Needs
28 Policy SP 5 Emplo yment
35 Policy SP 6 Infr astructure & Connectivity
41 Policy SP 7 Place Shaping Pr inciples
46 Policy SP 8 De velopment & Deliv ery of a Ne w Garden Comm unity in Nor th Esse x
48 Policy SP 9 Tendring/Colchester Borders Garden Comm unity
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 PlanNorth Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |Introduction
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan51 Intr oduction
Shared Strategic Plan
1.1 North Esse x is a vibr ant and attr active place to liv e and w ork.It has a r ich archaeological, natur al
and b uilt her itage that contin ues to influence local char acter , which is distinguished b y its
extensiv e legacy of human habitation from P alaeolithic times onw ards.The area has e xperienced
significant population, housing and emplo yment g rowth in recent y ears and this is f orecast to
contin ue.The local author ities and their par tners wish to respond to this oppor tunity b y planning
positiv ely for the area as a whole .Working together to address some of the k ey strategic issues
in Nor th Esse x will get the best outcomes f or current and future comm unities . In par ticular , it
will deliv er sustainab le de velopment that respects local en vironments and pro vides ne w jobs
and essential infr astructure .
1.2 For these reasons Br aintree Distr ict Council, Colchester Borough Council and Tendring Distr ict
Council ha ve agreed to w ork together to address str ategic planning matters across their areas .
Collectiv ely the y are kno wn as the Nor th Esse x Author ities.
1.3 The Nor th Esse x local A uthor ities border a large n umber of other local author ities who will
contin ue to be engaged and in volved on an activ e and ongoing basis on str ategic cross border
issues .These author ities include Babergh, Chelmsf ord, Maldon, Mid Suff olk, West Suff olk,
South Cambr idgeshire , Uttlesf ord, and Suff olk and Cambr idgeshire County Councils .
1.4 Esse x County Council (ECC) is a k ey par tner in its str ategic role f or infr astructure and ser vice
provision and as the Highw ay Author ity, Lead Local Flood A uthor ity, Local Education A uthor ity
and Miner als and Waste Planning A uthor ity.
1.5 An initial outcome of this collabor ation is this str ategic planning chapter , which each of the local
planning author ities ha ve included in their Pub lication Local Plan. The Local Plans together
with the Esse x Miner als Local Plan and the Esse x and Southend-on-Sea Waste Local Plan
(prepared b y ECC) and an y Neighbourhood Plans , form the De velopment Plan f or the respectiv e
areas .
The Need f or a Strategic Appr oach
1.6 In Esse x, as else where , the influences of population and economic g rowth do not stop at
administr ative boundar ies. Settlement patter ns, mig ration flo ws, comm uting and str ategic
infrastructure needs all ha ve significant influences within and betw een local author ity areas .
1.7 Local Plans are the main v ehicle f or con veying an area’ s growth requirements and ho w these
will be accommodated.  However, individual local author ity boundar ies cannot encapsulate the
geog raphies of issues that tr anscend those boundar ies.Through activ e and on-going
collabor ation the author ities can jointly plan, manage and re view str ategic objectiv es and
requirements f or the eff ective implementation of sustainab le de velopment (including miner als
and w aste) and enhanced en vironments .
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |61.8 The geog raphic and functional relationship betw een the author ities’ areas is demonstr ated b y
the fact that, with Chelmsf ord City Council, the y form a single Housing Mar ket Area (HMA) f or
planning pur poses;  and the y are a major par t of the Ha ven Gate way, an estab lished economic
partnership .Within this conte xt, the f orecast le vels of future population g rowth together with
the geog raphy of Nor th Esse x means that consider ations f or future g rowth will include options
that ha ve clear cross-boundar y implications .These include both the e xpansion of e xisting to wns
and villages as w ell as possib le ne w comm unities .
1.9 Consequently , Braintree , Colchester and Tendring, together ref erred to in this plan as the Nor th
Esse x Author ities, have agreed to come together and prepare a common Section 1 Local Plan
because of their shared desire to promote a sustainab le growth str ategy f or the longer ter m;
and the par ticular need to ar ticulate the str ategic pr iorities within the wider area and ho w these
priorities will be addressed.  Centr al to this is the eff ective deliv ery of planned str ategic g rowth,
particular ly housing and emplo yment de velopment, with the necessar y suppor ting infr astructure .
1.10 Uttlesf ord Distr ict Council, Maldon Distr ict Council as w ell as other neighbour ing author ities, sit
within separ ate housing mar ket areas . However the author ities are activ ely and contin uously
engaged to ensure that cross-boundar y and str ategic issues are dealt with.
1.11 The Localism Act 2011 places a Duty to Co-oper ate on local planning author ities and other
public bodies .This requires them to engage constr uctively, activ ely and on an on-going basis
in the prepar ation of plans where this in volves str ategic matters .The National Planning P olicy
Framework (NPPF) adds to this statutor y duty as it e xpects local planning author ities to
demonstr ate e vidence of ha ving co-oper ated eff ectively to plan f or issues with cross-boundar y
impacts .
1.12 This str ategic Section 1 of the author ities’ Local Plans reflects the Duty to Co-oper ate as it
concer ns str ategic matters with cross-boundar y impacts in Nor th Esse x. Section 2 of each plan
contains policies and allocations addressing author ity-specific issues .
1.13 Against this bac kground, the main pur poses of this str ategic chapter of the Local Plan are to:
Articulate a spatial por trait of the area, including its main settlements and str ategic
infrastructure , as a fr amework for accommodating future planned g rowth;
Provide a str ategic vision f or ho w planned g rowth in Nor th Esse x will be realised;  set
strategic objectiv es and policies f or key growth topics;
Set out the n umbers of additional homes and jobs across the area that will be needed
covering the per iod to 2033. The choices made , par ticular ly in relation to the location of
garden comm unities , will also set the fr amework for de velopment w ell be yond the plan
period; and
Highlight the k ey strategic g rowth locations across the area and the necessar y new or
upgraded infr astructure to suppor t this g rowth.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan7Spatial P ortrait
1.14 Braintree , Colchester and Tendring distr icts are located to the nor th of Esse x betw een the east
coast por ts and London Stansted air port.The pr incipal to wns are Br aintree , Colchester and
Clacton-on-Sea and a n umber of secondar y settlements: Witham, Halstead, Wivenhoe , Tiptree ,
Brightlingsea, Manningtree , Harwich, Walton and F rinton. The K ey Diag ram at 10.1 identifies
the settlements that link with the main roads and/or r ail infr astructure .
1.15 Beyond these settlements m uch of the area has a r ural char acter .
1.16 The area co vered b y this str ategic planning approach compr ises a large par t of the Ha ven
Gate way, an estab lished par tnership area which is identified in a r ange of e xisting str ategy and
investment documents .The Ha ven Gate way includes the Esse x administr ative areas of Br aintree ,
Colchester , Maldon and Tendring Councils and e xtends nor thwards into par ts of Suff olk.
1.17 The area’ s strategic road and r ail netw ork is hea vily used, par ticular ly giv en the pro ximity to
and connectivity with London. The pr incipal roads are the A12 and A120, while the A130, A131,
A133 and A414 also f orm impor tant par ts of the str ategic road netw ork.
1.18 The Great Easter n Main Line pro vides r ail ser vices betw een London Liv erpool Street and the
East of England, including Witham, Chelmsf ord, Colchester and Clacton-on-Sea.  It also carr ies
freight tr affic to and from the Ha ven Ports including Harwich Inter national P ort, which handles
container ships and freight tr anspor t to and from the rest of the UK.  Harwich is also one of the
major UK por ts for ferry and cr uise depar tures .
1.19 Crossr ail is e xpected to star t oper ating in the first par t of this plan per iod with ser vices
commencing just south of Chelmsf ord in Shenfield. The oppor tunities that Crossr ail will br ing
in ter ms of additional capacity and quic ker jour neys to a wider choice of destinations will be a
contr ibutor to the contin ued attr activeness of nor th Esse x as a place to liv e and to do b usiness .
1.20 The g rowing demand f or the use of air ports, including London Stansted, will create additional
associated pressures on road and r ail infr astructure .The County Council, along with South
East Local Enter prise P artnership , local and national agencies and other organisations , will
also need to w ork collabor atively with the Local Planning A uthor ities to ensure infr astructure
meets demand f or enhanced economic g rowth.
1.21 Braintree and Colchester are the major centres of emplo yment within the str ategic area. While
there are high le vels of comm uting to London, man y residents w ork and liv e within the area
with significant comm uting across borough and distr ict boundar ies, reflecting a functional
economic geog raphy.
1.22 The area has a mix ed econom y focused on the ser vice sector , including wholesale and retail,
business ser vices , tour ism, health and education, alongside man ufactur ing, logistics and
constr uction.  Due to the e xtensiv e rural area outside urban settlements , agriculture and its
related industr ies pla y an impor tant par t in the o verall econom y.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |81.23 This r urality also means that there are large areas of open countr yside , including protected
natur al and histor ic landscapes . Areas of impor tance f or nature conser vation are to be f ound
particular ly along the coast and r iver estuar ies, while the villages and to wns include man y built
heritage assets .
1.24 A more detailed assessment of the char acter istics of each area is pro vided in the second par t
of this Local Plan.
Key Strategic Issues:  Oppor tunities and Challeng es
1.25 Due to its strong economic base , proximity to London and attr activeness as a place to liv e and
work, Nor th Esse x has seen significant g rowth o ver recent y ears.The area is w ell-placed and
connected to k ey growth points in the wider region including London, Cambr idge and Stansted
Airport and as a result is lik ely to contin ue to be a successful location f or growth.  In par ticular
Braintree and Colchester ha ve regular ly exceeded planned house b uilding targets and this is
expected to contin ue. Planning f or and managing future population g rowth requires an appropr iate
response from the local author ities to ensure that sufficient homes , emplo yment premises and
land, and suppor ting social and other infr astructure are pro vided in a sustainab le way.
1.26 Notwithstanding its strong economic base and steady g rowth, the Nor th Esse x area f aces a
range of challenges , notab ly the need to impro ve economic and social conditions across the
area and reduce health inequalities , poc kets of depr ivation, infr astructure deficits and lo w skills;
the need to ensure that the infr astructure needed to suppor t contin ued housing and jobs g rowth
is in place at the r ight time;  and the need to ensure that contin ued g rowth contin ues to conser ve
and where possib le enhance the histor ic and natur al en vironment including landscape and
habitat creation, and will also seek net en vironmental gains , possib ly making use of the Defr a
biodiv ersity accounting metr ic 2.0 to account f or possib le eff ects.
1.27 The education, health and other ser vice needs of a g rowing population m ust be addressed,
requir ing careful planning to assess future needs such as pupil n umbers and fur ther adult
education needs .The assessed need m ust in tur n be tr anslated into ne w or e xpanded education,
health and other f acilities which are a vailab le to meet the needs of ne w comm unities at the
appropr iate time .The ageing profile of residents also requires a proactiv e response to pro vide
the right type of homes , including independent living and suppor ting ser vices;  as w ell as sufficient
healthcare f acilities to suppor t both older residents and the population as a whole .
1.28 New de velopment should be located and designed so that da y-to-da y needs of residents can
be met locally and be accessib le by sustainab le forms of tr anspor t, including w alking and cycling,
and where ver possib le reduce the n umber of car based tr ips. Growth will create demand f or
additional road and r ail use with the associated need f or ne w and upg raded infr astructure .
Future planned g rowth pro vides the oppor tunity to address some of these infr astructure needs ,
although g rowth locations and sites need to be considered carefully with regard to the balance
of pro viding necessar y infr astructure and the viability and deliv erability of de velopment.
1.29 The NPPF e xpects local author ities to set out the str ategic pr iorities f or the area in the Local
Plan.  Of those listed in the F ramework and based on the abo ve key issues , this str ategic plan
chapter addresses:
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan9the homes and jobs needed in the area
the pro vision of infr astructure f or transpor t and telecomm unications
the pro vision of education, health, and comm unity infr astructure , and
conser vation and enhancement of the natur al and histor ic environment, including landscape .
Vision f or the Strategic Area
1.30 It is impor tant that addressing g rowth at an y spatial scale is f ounded on a clear vision of ho w
and where change should occur .The vision f or Nor th Esse x sets this out at a str ategic le vel
and pro vides a conte xt for the more detailed vision f or the g rowth of each individual author ity’s
area.The joint vision set out belo w should be read in conjunction with the vision f or each local
author ity set out in Section 2 of each Local Plan. The high housing need identified f or Nor th
Esse x, constr aints in man y existing urban areas and the desire to suppor t a sustainab le form
of de velopment in the long ter m, as par t of the str ategy f or the de velopment has led to the Local
Plans proposing standalone ne w settlements that f ollow the pr inciples of Garden Cities .
Vision f or Nor th Esse x
North Esse x will be an area of significant g rowth o ver the per iod to 2033 and be yond, embr acing
positiv ely the need to b uild w ell-designed ne w homes , create jobs and impro ve and de velop
infrastructure f or the benefit of e xisting and ne w comm unities .
It will contin ue to be an attr active and vibr ant area in which to liv e and w ork, making the most of
its rich her itage , town centres , natur al environment, coastal resor ts, excellent educational f acilities
and str ategic tr anspor t links which pro vide access to the por ts, Stansted Air port, London and
beyond. Rural and urban comm unities will be encour aged to thr ive and prosper and will be
suppor ted b y adequate comm unity infr astructure .
Sustainab le de velopment pr inciples will be at the core of the str ategic area’ s response to its
growth needs , balancing social, economic and en vironmental issues . Green and b lue infr astructure
and ne w and e xpanded education and health care f acilities enab ling health y and activ e lifestyles
 will be planned and pro vided along with other f acilities to suppor t the de velopment of substantial
new growth; while the unde veloped countr yside and the natur al and histor ic environment will be
 conser ved and enhanced.  Key to deliv ering sustainab le de velopment is that ne w de velopment
will address the requirement to protect and enhance  the histor ic en vironment and settlement
character .
At the hear t of our str ategic vision f or Nor th Esse x is a ne w garden comm unity, to be sensitiv ely
integ rated within the e xisting histor ic built and natur al en vironment, and based on Garden City
principles .
The garden comm unity pro vides an oppor tunity to create the r ight balance of jobs , housing and
infrastructure in the r ight locations and will attr act residents and b usinesses who v alue inno vation,
comm unity cohesion and a high quality en vironment, and who will be pro vided with oppor tunities
to tak e an activ e role in managing the garden comm unity to ensure its contin uing success .
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |10Residents will liv e in high quality , inno vatively designed, homes , accommodating a v ariety of
needs and aspir ations , located in w ell-designed neighbourhoods where the y can meet their
day-to-da y needs .There will be a netw ork of tree-lined streets and g reen spaces , incor porating
and enhancing e xisting landscape f eatures and also accommodating saf e and attr active routes
and space f or sustainab le drainage solutions;  and  leisure and recreation oppor tunities f or both
residents and visitors of the garden comm unity.
Suitab le models f or the long ter m ste wardship of comm unity assets will be estab lished and
funded to pro vide long ter m management and go vernance of assets . All Garden City pr inciples
as specified in the Nor th Esse x Garden Comm unities Char ter will be positiv ely embr aced including
where appropr iate, new approaches to deliv ery and par tnership w orking f or the benefit of the
new comm unity. Centr al to this will be the comprehensiv e planning and de velopment of the
garden comm unity, and the aligned deliv ery of homes and suppor ting infr astructure .
Strategic Objectives
1.31 The f ollowing str ategic objectiv es are designed to suppor t the vision f or the area and pro vide
a basis f or the de velopment of str ategic topic-based policies that will help in achie ving the vision.
1.32 Providing Sufficient Ne w Homes – to pro vide f or a le vel and quality of ne w homes to meet the
needs of a g rowing and ageing population in Nor th Esse x; to achie ve this b y ensur ing the
availability of de velopab le land in appropr iate locations and that the mar ket deliv ers a suitab le
mix of housing types and ten ures.
1.33 Foster ing Economic De velopment – to strengthen and div ersify local economies to pro vide
more jobs;  and to achie ve a better balance betw een the location of jobs and housing, which
will reduce the need to tr avel and promote sustainab le growth.
1.34 Providing Ne w and Impro ved Transpor t & Comm unication Infr astructure – to mak e efficient use
of existing tr anspor t infrastructure and to ensure sustainab le transpor t oppor tunities are promoted
to suppor t new and e xisting comm unities .Where additional capacity is required in the f orm of
new or upg raded tr anspor t infrastructure to suppor t new de velopment, ensur ing that this is
delivered in a phased & timely w ay to minimise the impact of ne w development. To ensure that
enab led comm unication  is pro vided as par t of ne w de velopments as enab led comm unication
is essential f or moder n living and broadband infr astructure and related ser vices will be essential
for business , education and residential proper ties.
1.35 Addressing Education and Healthcare Needs – to pro vide good quality educational oppor tunities
as par t of a sustainab le growth str ategy , including pr actical v ocational tr aining and
apprenticeships link ed to local job oppor tunities .To work with par tners in the NHS , Pub lic Health
and local health par tnerships to ensure adequate pro vision of healthcare f acilities to suppor t
new and g rowing comm unities .
1.36 Ensur ing High Quality Outcomes – to promote g reater ambition in planning and deliv ering
high-quality sustainab le new comm unities . Overall, ne w development m ust secure high standards
of urban design and g reen infr astructure which creates attr active and sustainab le places where
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan11people w ant to liv e and spend time . New development needs to be inf ormed b y an understanding
of the histor ic en vironment resource gained through the prepar ation of Histor ic Impact
Assessments , and to conser ve and enhance the significance of her itage assets including an y
contr ibution made to their significance b y their settings .
Strategic Issues and P olicies
1.37 This section includes the Councils’  response to the oppor tunities and challenges f acing the
wider area, in the f orm of str ategic policies that will help to deliv er the vision and objectiv es.
These policies only co ver those matters that are of str ategic rele vance to all three author ities.
Policies that address local matters are included in the f ollowing section of the plan. The Plan
as a whole , including both Sections 1 and 2, will supersede pre vious Local Plan P olicies and
allocations upon its adoption.  A list of the policies superseded b y Section 1 and Section 2 of
the Plan respectiv ely is included as an appendix to each section.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |12Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le De velopment
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan132 Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le
Development
Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le De velopment
2.1 The author ities will apply a presumption in f avour of sustainab le de velopment in accordance
with guidance in the National Planning P olicy F ramework.
Policy SP 1
Presumption in F avour of Sustainab le De velopment
When consider ing de velopment proposals the Local Planning A uthor ities will tak e a positiv e
approach that reflects the presumption in f avour of sustainab le de velopment contained in the
National Planning P olicy F ramework.They will alw ays work pro-activ ely with applicants to find
solutions which mean that proposals can be appro ved where ver possib le, and to secure
development that impro ves the economic , social and en vironmental conditions in the area.
Development that complies with the Plan will be appro ved without dela y, unless mater ial
consider ations indicate otherwise .
2.2 A Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) w as completed f or Section 1 of the Plan. The loss
of off-site habitat, w ater quality and increased recreational disturbance w ere identified as issues
with the potential to result in lik ely significant eff ects on European Sites , without mitigation to
address the eff ects.
2.3 The Appropr iate Assessment (AA) identified a n umber of a voidance and mitigation measures
to be implemented, to ensure that de velopment proposals in the Plan will not result in adv erse
effects on the integ rity of an y Special Area of Conser vation, Special Protection Area or Ramsar
site, and are HRA compliant.
2.4 To mitigate f or the loss of off-site habitat, the AA identified the need f or winter ing bird sur veys
for the Tendring/Colchester Borders Garden Comm unity as par t of an y project le vel development
proposals and master planning (see also par agraph 8.3 and P olicy SP8 par agraph F .20).
2.5 To protect w ater quality , the AA recommended the inclusion of policy saf eguards to ensure that
adequate w ater and w aste w ater treatment capacity or infr astructure upg rades are in place
prior to de velopment proceeding.
2.6 Recreation activities can potentially har m Habitats Sites .The AA identified disturbance of w ater
birds from people and dogs , and impacts from w ater spor ts/watercr aft as the k ey recreational
threats to Habitats Sites .
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |142.7 To mitigate f or an y increases in recreational disturbance at Habitats Sites , the AA identified the
need f or a mitigation str ategy . Natur al England’ s West Anglian Team identified the Esse x coast
as a pr iority for a str ategic and proactiv e planning approach as it is r ich and div erse ecologically ,
and man y of the coastal habitats are designated as Habitats Sites .  Consequently , 12 local
planning author ities in Esse x have prepared an Esse x Coast Recreational disturbance A voidance
and Mitigation Str ategy (RAMS).
2.8 The Esse x Coast RAMS sets out specific a voidance and mitigation measures b y which
disturbance from increased recreation can be a voided and mitigated thus enab ling the deliv ery
of growth without adv ersely aff ecting Habitats sites .These measures are deliv erable, realistic ,
under pinned b y rob ust up to date e vidence , precautionar y and pro vide cer tainty f or de velopers
around deliv erability and contr ibutions .The Esse x Coast RAMS Str ategy Document w as
completed in 2019 and is suppor ted b y a SPD .
Policy SP 2
Recreational disturbance A voidance and Mitigation Strategy (RAMS)
Contr ibutions will be secured from de velopment to wards mitigation measures in accordance with
the Esse x Coast Recreational disturbance A voidance and Mitigation Str ategy 2018-2038 (RAMS).
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan15North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |16Spatial Conte xt
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan173 Spatial Conte xt
3.1 Future g rowth will contr ibute to maintaining and enhancing a w ell-connected netw ork of
sustainab le settlements across Nor th Esse x. New homes , jobs , retail and leisure f acilities
serviced b y ne w and upg raded infr astructure will be accommodated as par t of e xisting
settlements according to their scale , sustainability and role , and b y the creation of a str ategic
scale ne w settlement embr acing the pr inciples in the Nor th Esse x Garden Comm unity
Char ter.The countr yside will be protected and enhanced.
3.2 For the major ity of settlements these issues are addressed in the second section of the Local
Plan dealing with each author ity’s area.  However, it is rele vant here to set out the spatial conte xt
of the Nor th Esse x Area as it relates to the main settlements and str ategic-scale ne w
development.
3.3 In Br aintree Distr ict the g rowth will be mainly addressed via a mixture of urban e xtensions and
new comm unities . Braintree to wn, as the largest ser vice centre in the Distr ict, will ha ve a number
of ne w urban e xtensions . Over 4,000 ne w homes will be allocated in this area. The other main
focus f or de velopment will be the A12 corr idor with the main to wn of Witham and ser vice villages
of Hatfield P everel, K elvedon and F eering with allocations of o ver 2,000 ne w homes . Other
parts of the Distr ict, including the to wn of Halstead, will ha ve smaller allocations to reflect a
more local need and mak e the best use of bro wnfield sites , recognising that these areas are
not as sustainab le.
3.4 In Colchester Borough, the urban area of Colchester will contin ue to be a f ocus f or growth due
to its pre-eminent role as a centre f or jobs , ser vices and tr anspor t, with 4,000 ne w homes
expected to be deliv ered o ver the Local Plan per iod.The urban area of Colchester , however,
has a limited and diminishing supply of a vailable bro wnfield sites , so a ne w comm unity is included
in the spatial hier archy as a sustainab le option f or fur ther g rowth of homes and jobs , to the east
of Colchester on the border with Tendring Distr ict. Appro ximately 1,050 ne w homes will be
allocated in the Rur al Distr ict Centres of Tiptree , West Mersea and Wivenhoe . Smaller sustainab le
settlements will receiv e limited allocations propor tionate to their role in the spatial hier archy.
3.5 In Tendring Distr ict the spatial hier archy promotes g rowth in settlements that are the most
accessib le to the str ategic road netw ork, pub lic transpor t and off er a r ange of ser vices . Clacton
and Harwich with Do vercour t are classified as str ategic urban settlements and will accommodate
around 5,000 ne w homes . A ne w cross-boundar y garden comm unity will be located in the w est
of the distr ict and to the east of Colchester .The smaller urban settlements of F rinton with Walton
and Kirb y Cross , Manningtree with La wford and Mistle y, Brightlingsea and Weeley will
accommodate betw een 1,500 and 2,500 ne w homes .The r ural ser vice centres and smaller
rural settlements will accommodate around 1,500 ne w homes including a windf all allo wance .
3.6 The ne w Garden Comm unity is identified as ne w a ne w settlement in Colchester and Tendring
Section 2 settlement hier archies .  Over time the Garden Comm unity will g row to influence the
area’ s spatial hier archy and will be included in the tiers under neath the sub-regional centre role
played b y Colchester .  Future re views of the plans will address this point, b ut the Garden
Comm unity will not g row to a siz e that will aff ect the spatial hier archy within the plan per iod to
2033.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |18Policy SP 3
Spatial Strategy f or Nor th Esse x
Existing settlements will be the pr incipal f ocus f or additional g rowth across the Nor th Esse x
Author ities area within the Local Plan per iod. Development will be accommodated within or
adjoining settlements according to their scale , sustainability and e xisting role both within each
individual distr ict and, where rele vant, across the wider str ategic area.
Future g rowth will be planned to ensure e xisting settlements maintain their distinctiv e char acter
and role , to a void coalescence betw een them and to conser ve their setting.  Re-use of pre viously
developed land within settlements is an impor tant objectiv e, although this will be assessed within
the broader conte xt of sustainab le development pr inciples , particular ly to ensure that de velopment
locations are accessib le by a choice of means of tr avel.
In Section 2 of its Local Plan each local planning author ity will identify a hier archy of settlements
where ne w de velopment will be accommodated according to the role of the settlement,
sustainability , its ph ysical capacity and local needs .
Beyond the main settlements the author ities will suppor t diversification of the r ural econom y and
conser vation and enhancement of the natur al en vironment.
As par t of the sustainab le str ategy f or growth, the Tendring / Colchester Borders Garden
Comm unity will be de veloped and deliv ered at the broad location sho wn on K ey Diag ram 10.2
and on the Colchester and Tendring Local Plans P olicies Maps .This ne w comm unity will pro vide
a str ategic location f or homes and emplo yment within the Plan per iod in Nor th Esse x.The
expectation is that substantial additional housing and emplo yment de velopment will be deliv ered
in the Garden Comm unity be yond the current Local Plan per iod.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan19North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |20Meeting the need f or Ne w Homes
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan214 Meeting the need f or Ne w Homes
4.1 Provision of sufficient housing is cr itical to meet the needs of a g rowing population and f or the
effective functioning of local economies .
4.2 The Nor th Esse x Author ities are committed to plan positiv ely for ne w homes and to significantly
boost the supply of housing to meet the needs of the area, including the need to pro vide a
workforce f or forecast jobs .To meet the requirements of national policy to estab lish the n umber
and type of ne w homes , the author ities commissioned P eter Brett Associates to produce an
Objectiv ely Assessed Housing Need Study b uilding on ear lier w ork.This w as first pub lished in
July 2015 and updated in No vember 2016.  It meets the requirements of the NPPF to prepare
a Str ategic Housing Mar ket Assessment (SHMA).
4.3 Detailed analysis in the repor t suggests that a Housing Mar ket Area compr ising Br aintree ,
Colchester , Chelmsf ord and Tendring Council areas f orms a sound basis f or assessing housing
need.
4.4 Demog raphic projections are the star ting point f or assessing ho w much housing will be required
across an area.  Based on 2014 national projections co vering the per iod 2013 to 2037, the
conclusion reached is that the objectiv ely assessed need across the Housing Mar ket Area is
2,999 ne w homes a y ear o ver the per iod 2013 – 2037. The total requirement across nor th
Esse x, excluding Chelmsf ord City Council’ s area, is 2,186 ne w homes per y ear.
4.5 This figure includes a figure of 550 ne w homes per y ear for Tendring. Calculation of housing
need in the Distr ict is complicated b y uncer tainty ar ising from unattr ibuted population change
(UPC).
4.6 Evidence on o verall levels of aff ordab le housing pro vision else where in the Distr icts  will be set
out in more detail within the individual Local Plans and will tak e account of identified needs .
The Tendring Colchester Garden Comm unity needs to be a mix ed and balanced comm unity
and will be e xpected to pro vide 30% aff ordab le housing.
4.7 The Garden Comm unity will be e xpected to pro vide suitab le sites f or Gypsies and Travellers .
Additional requirements f or sites to meet Distr ict wide needs will be set out in Section Two of
each Distr ict/Borough Local Plan.
4.8 The Nor th Esse x Author ities will identify and update ann ually a supply of specific deliv erable
sites sufficient to pro vide fiv e years’  worth of housing against their individual housing
requirements set out in P olicy SP4 belo w. Each author ity will incor porate an additional b uffer
as required b y national planning policy to ensure choice and competition f or land.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |22Policy SP 4
Meeting Housing Needs
The local planning author ities will identify sufficient deliv erable sites , developab le sites and/or
broad locations f or their respectiv e plan per iod, to meet the housing requirements in the tab le
below, and will incor porate additional pro vision to ensure fle xibility and choice and competition
for land.
Each author ity will maintain a sufficient supply of deliv erable sites to pro vide f or at least fiv e
years’  worth of housing, plus an appropr iate b uffer in accordance with national policy , and will
work proactiv ely with applicants to br ing forward sites that accord with the o verall spatial str ategy
and rele vant policies in the plan. The ann ual housing requirement figures set out belo w will be
used as the basis f or assessing each author ity’s five-year housing land supply , subject to an y
adjustments in Section 2 of each plan to address an y undersupply since 2013.
The author ities will re view their housing requirements regular ly in accordance with national policy
requirements , and in doing so will ha ve regard to the housing needs of the wider area.
Total minim um housing requirement f or the plan per iod
(2013 – 2033)Housing requirement
per ann umLocal
Author ity
14,320 716 Braintree
18,400 920 Colchester
11,000 550 Tendring
43,720 2,186 Total
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan23North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |24Providing f or Emplo yment
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan255 Providing f or Emplo yment
5.1 A key objectiv e for the area is to strengthen and div ersify local economies to pro vide more jobs
and to achie ve a better balance betw een the location of jobs and housing, which will reduce
the need to tr avel and promote sustainab le growth.
5.2 Braintree Distr ict’s emplo yment is relativ ely f ocused on industr ial-type sectors , including
constr uction and man ufactur ing. London Stansted air port, in neighbour ing Uttlesf ord, pla ys a
significant role in emplo ying residents of the Distr ict and through the indirect economic benefits
associated with pro ximity to such a large emplo yment hub .
5.3 Retail is the second largest sector b y emplo yment and pla ys an impor tant role in sustaining the
District’s three k ey town centres .The financial and insur ance sector , where Br aintree Distr ict
traditionally has a relativ ely small propor tion of emplo yment, has seen some strong g rowth in
recent y ears.This ma y be a g rowth sector in the future .
5.4 Colchester is the dominant urban centre within the Esse x Ha ven Gate way.The Borough has
developed a strong econom y, link ed to its “centr al place”  functions and to the to wn’s histor ic
character , cultur al activities and the univ ersity . Major retail and leisure ser vices are also located
both within and adjacent to Colchester to wn.
5.5 Health, education and retail each pro vide o ver 10% of emplo yee jobs and collectiv ely contr ibute
42% to the Borough’ s total emplo yment.   A fur ther six major Groups each account f or betw een
5 – 10% of total jobs:  Man ufactur ing; Constr uction;  Accommodation and F ood Ser vices;
Professional, Scientific & Technical;  Business Administr ation & Suppor t Ser vices;  and Ar ts,
enter tainment, recreation, etc.
5.6 Tendring Distr ict has a div erse econom y with local emplo yment across a r ange of activities .
Health, retail and education are the largest sectors in ter ms of the n umber of jobs and together
represent 45% of the Distr ict’s total emplo yment.
5.7 Within the w ester n par t of Tendring distr ict, the econom y and labour mar ket of Manningtree is
influenced b y its relativ e pro ximity to Colchester and good tr anspor t links to London. The inter ior
of the Distr ict is largely r ural and is char acter ised b y a high-quality en vironment, interspersed
with small settlements .
5.8 Oppor tunities ha ve been identified f or Tendring to de velop potential future strengths in offshore
wind and the care and assisted living sector .
5.9 As par t of the w ork to assess housing requirements , an analysis of economic f orecasts w as
under taken together with demog raphic projections to estab lish the inter-relationship betw een
population g rowth, f orecasts of ne w jobs and the n umber of ne w homes needed to accommodate
these le vels of g rowth. Emplo yment f orecasts ha ve been de veloped using tw o standard models
(East of England F orecasting Model (EEFM) and Exper ian 2016) which f orecast total job g rowth
for each of the local author ities based on past trends . Each local author ity has been advised
on the most appropr iate modelling figure to use in the conte xt of reconciling job and housing
demand. The f orecast g rowth figures f or the housing area f or the per iod 2013-2037 are as set
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |26out in P olicy SP5.  Emplo yment Land Needs Assessments ha ve been carr ied out b y each
author ity which set out the amount of emplo yment land that is required within the Plan per iod.
In ter ms of specific B use land pro vision, each local author ity has under taken work to estab lish
what quantum of emplo yment land w ould be required within the Plan per iod to meet the demand
identified belo w for additional B use emplo yment land. These B use emplo yment areas are
distributed betw een each local author ity area and based on achie ving a sustainab le balance
betw een jobs and the a vailab le labour f orce through population g rowth.  As noted abo ve,
calculations of emplo yment land required are aff ected b y a range of issues that lead to diff erent
emplo yment land por tfolios f or each local author ity area, resulting in a propor tionately g reater
quantum of ne w floorspace per job in Br aintree and Tendring than in Colchester .This is a
function of the prominence of higher density office requirements in Colchester and lo wer density
logistics and industr ial uses in Br aintree and Tendring.The tab le in P olicy SP5 belo w sets out
the three author ities’ emplo yment land (B Class uses) requirements f or the per iod 2016 – 33
for tw o plausib le scenar ios, baseline and higher g rowth  These tw o book ends pro vide fle xibility
to allo w for each author ity’s supply tr ajector y to reflect their diff ering requirements . Site specific
emplo yment allocations meeting the needs of diff erent sectors in each local author ity are set
out in Section 2 of their Local Plan.
5.10 Braintree , Colchester and Tendring commissioned w ork to e xplore the emplo yment oppor tunities
associated with the de velopment of inno vative Garden Comm unities based on the lik ely
demog raphic profile of these ne w comm unities and to de velop quantified scenar ios for future
emplo yment g rowth. The consultants concluded that assuming political commitment and
proactiv e deliv ery on the par t of local author ities, Garden Comm unities had the potential to
deliver one job per household, in line with the Garden Comm unities char ter, and to suppor t
emplo yment g rowth in surrounding areas .The Tendring Colchester Border Garden Comm unity
is considered to perf orm well in emplo yment ter ms giv en the oppor tunities pro vided b y its
location adjacent to the Univ ersity Esse x.
5.11 Emplo yment f orecasts f or the three author ities accordingly f actor in the longer-ter m aspir ations
for emplo yment g rowth ar ising from the positiv e spin-offs associated with Garden Comm unities .
It is impor tant to note , however, that while job n umbers can be  e xpected to g row at a consistent
rate, current trends point to o verall lower requirements f or additional B1 floorspace .This reflects
the g rowth of home w orking enab led b y enhanced digital connectivity;  the contin uing decline
of man ufactur ing with its need f or large floor areas;  and the pre valence of ‘hot desking’  leading
to lower requirements f or office floorspace .
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan27Policy SP 5
Emplo yment
A strong, sustainab le and div erse econom y will be promoted across Nor th Esse x with the local
planning author ities pursuing a fle xible approach to economic sectors sho wing g rowth potential
across the Plan per iod.
In order to meet the requirements f or  office , research & de velopment, industr ial, stor age and
distribution uses and to maintain appropr iate fle xibility in pro vision to meet the needs of diff erent
sectors , Section 2 of each plan will allocate emplo yment land to ensure that pro vision is made
within the r anges set out in the tab le belo w.
Hectares of  emplo yment land required for office , research & de velopment, industr ial, stor age
and distr ibution uses :
Higher Gr owth Scenario Baseline
43.3 20.9 Braintree
30 22.0 Colchester
20.0 12.0 Tendring
93.3 54.9 North Esse x
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |28Infrastructure and Connectivity
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan296 Infrastructure and Connectivity
6.1 A coordinated and integ rated approach to infr astructure planning and deliv ery is required to
implement the vision f or Nor th Esse x. Provision of appropr iate and timely infr astructure to
suppor t growth will be centr al to the area’ s contin uing prosper ity, attractiveness and sustainability .
Section 1 of the Local Plan highlights str ategic and cross-boundar y infr astructure , identifying
the str ategic tr anspor t infrastructure projects required to under pin deliv ery of the planned g rowth
in the area including the proposed Garden Comm unity, and sets pr iorities f or other infr astructure
requirements such as education, healthcare , digital connectivity , water supply and w astewater
infrastructure and treatment.  Section 2 of the Local Plan contains the infr astructure requirements
for allocations made in that section of the plan. The Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan (IDP) pro vides
the phasing and costing of infr astructure requirements f or the Garden Comm unities and the
Section 2 allocations required within the plan per iod.The infr astructure planning process will
include the identification of funding sources , and ma y include using appropr iate mechanisms
of shared pub lic sector deliv ery financing mechanisms and the implementation of a str ategic
infrastructure tar iff or other suitab le mechanisms to apply across Nor th Esse x.
A    Gar den Comm unity
6.2 The challenge in the Garden Comm unity will be to create a comm unity in which people mo ve
around in a diff erent w ay to most of the e xisting to wns in Nor th Esse x . Netw orks need to giv e
priority to people f or shor t everyday trips to link people to w ork, education, retail, leisure , creating
an independent saf e environment.
6.3 The ne w garden comm unity will seek to manage tr avel demand, pro viding retailing, jobs , services
and f acilities within the site to help reduce the need to tr avel, and integ rate and connect with
the rest of Nor th Esse x and be yond through tr anspor t infrastructure and measures that promote
sustainab le travel patter ns and reduce adv erse impacts on the highw ay netw ork.The Nor th
Esse x Garden Comm unities Char ter seeks to ensure that land use planning of the ne w
comm unity maximises the pro vision and use of sustainab le transpor t inter nally and connects
externally to k ey urban centres . Given the Char ter's commitment to the timely deliv ery of
infrastructure , policies SP8-9 will ensure that k ey transpor t projects align with housing and
emplo yment deliv ery.
6.4 To maximise the use of pub lic transpor t new forms of high quality r apid tr ansit netw orks will be
provided to ser ve existing urban centres such as Colchester ; key destinations such as the
University of Esse x; and k ey transpor t interchanges in Nor th Esse x.To achie ve the desired
step change in sustainab le transpor t, policy will require that this infr astructure will be funded
and its deliv ery phased to align with the de velopment phases .
BTranspor tation and Travel
6.5 North Esse x is w ell placed in the conte xt of connections b y road, r ail, air and sea to the wider
region and be yond, and these connections will need to be strengthened as par t of de veloping
sustainab le transpor t netw orks.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |306.6 The challenge is to pro vide Nor th Esse x with a sustainab le transpor t system that pro vides good
access to jobs and ser vices , to suppor t economic g rowth. Growth promoted through the ne w
Local Plans , particular ly via large scale ne w de velopments where deliv ery will e xtend be yond
the plan per iod, pro vides an oppor tunity to pr ioritise, facilitate and deliv er larger scale tr anspor t
infrastructure projects that can significantly impro ve connectivity across and within the area.  A
focus on sustainab le transpor t in and around urban areas and the Garden Comm unity
will positiv ely alter tr avel patter ns and beha viour to reduce reliance on the pr ivate car .
6.7 The Local Plans seek to impro ve transpor t infrastructure to enab le the efficient mo vement of
people , goods and ensure that ne w de velopment is accessib le by sustainab le forms of
transpor t.Measures designed to encour age people to mak e sustainab le travel choices such
as better pub lic transpor t provision, car clubs , electr ic vehicle charging points and pro vision of
cycle links and f oot w ays will also be required to achie ve such a change .  It will also help to
enhance air quality and impro ve health and w ell-being.
6.8 Braintree , Colchester and Tendring will contin ue to w ork closely with go vernment depar tments ,
Highw ays England, Esse x County Council, Netw ork Rail, r ail and b us oper ators , developers and
other par tners to better integ rate all f orms of tr anspor t and impro ve roads and pub lic transpor t
and to promote cycling and w alking.  Key projects dur ing the plan per iod will see impro vements
to the A12, A120, Great Easter n Main Line including r ail ser vices , and pro vision of r apid tr ansit
connections in the Garden Comm unity and the adjacent urban areas . An integ rated and
sustainab le transpor t system will be deliv ered that suppor ts economic g rowth and helps deliv er
the best quality of lif e.
The Inter -Urban Road Netw ork
6.9 The A12 is set to ha ve major impro vements as par t of the Go vernment’ s Roads In vestment
Strategy (RIS1 and RIS), with the aim of impro ving capacity and relie ving congestion. The A12
is being widened betw een junction 19 (Chelmsf ord) and junction 25 (A120 interchange) to
increase saf ety, impro ve jour ney time reliability , provide a benefit to the local road netw ork, and
in doing so suppor t long ter m sustainab le growth.Highw ays England (HE) has announced its
preferred route betw een junction 19 and 23 (October 2019) and betw een junction 23 and 25 in
August 2020. The A12 J19 to J25 widening scheme will go ahead as par t of the Road In vestment
Strategy 2 (RIS2) prog ramme , and is no w a fully funded scheme . It is e xpected the route will
be open f or traffic in 2027 – 2028.   RIS2 stated that the A12 scheme will need to tak e account
of the e volving proposals f or the A120 Br aintree to A12 impro vements , and an y potential future
road link to the impro vements f or the A120 will be incor porated into the A12 scheme .
6.10 The A120 is a k ey east-w est corr idor across Esse x pro viding access to London Stansted Air port
in the w est to the Harwich por ts in the east and ser ving the economies of Br aintree , Colchester
and Tendring, with links to Chelmsf ord via the A130.
6.11 Consultation on A120 route impro vement options betw een Br aintree and  the A12 ended in
March 2017.  ECC has identified a f avoured route which has been recommended to Highw ays
England and the Depar tment of Transpor t for inclusion in Road In vestment Str ategy 2 (RIS2),
which is the ne xt funding per iod for the str ategic road netw ork and will r un from 2020 to 2025.
In addition a ser ies of shor t term inter ventions will be deliv ered along the route to impro ve safety
and relie ve congestion. The A120 from the A12 to Harwich is subject to a Highw ays England
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan31Route Based Str ategy and impro vements to this section of road are e xpected o ver the plan
period.ECC and Highw ays England ha ve prog ressed w ork with regards a ne w and impro ved
A120 betw een Br aintree and the A12. The ne w A120 is necessar y to help address the v olume
of existing A120 mo vements which b y far exceeds the current standard of carr iageway pro vision.
The route will be instr umental in cater ing for growth in the corr idor and will pro vide a better route
for freight tr affic, impro ve saf ety and relie ve existing comm unities from a r ange of e xternalities
such as through tr affic, noise , severance and poor air quality .ECC has identified its f avoured
Route D which w ould join the A12 south of K elvedon.  In March 2020 the go vernment announced
its Road In vestment Str ategy (RIS2) which included a commitment to prog ressing fur ther
development w ork on the A120 dualling to prepare the scheme f or deliv ery.The A120 dualling
scheme will be considered f or inclusion in the RIS3 prog ramme (2025 – 2030), and is no w
considered a pipeline project to be prog ressed b y Highw ays England.
         Rail
6.12 The Anglia Route Study prepared b y Netw ork Rail (March 2016) sho ws that while capacity
varies along the Great Easter n Main Line ,capacity to accommodate g rowth is limited and is
particular ly constr ained in peak times from Chelmsf ord to London.  Impro vements are required
along the line to accommodate g rowth and pro vide a f aster more competitiv e ser vice across
the region.
6.13 The Study identifies a pac kage of impro vements necessar y to respond to the need f or increased
capacity , which are seen as pr iorities to enab le growth, impro ve ser vices and jour ney reliability .
6.14 A franchise w as a warded to Greater Anglia f or passenger ser vices in the region which
commenced in 2018 f ollowed by the replacement of the entire fleet of tr ains to add capacity .
         Pub lic Transpor t,Walking and Cyc ling
6.15 Alternativ e forms of tr anspor t to the pr ivate car (pub lic transpor t, walking, and cycling) to tr avel
to work and other tr ips are essential in managing congestion and to accommodate sustainab le
growth.The le vels of g rowth proposed in the Local Plans will require that the consequent need
to travel is managed. Travel planning and smar ter choices initiativ es will be promoted to ensure
that all residents ha ve good access to local jobs , services and f acilities , pref erably by either
walking or cycling.  For longer tr ips and in r ural areas where there are f ewer local ser vices and
emplo yment oppor tunities , pub lic transpor t will be promoted.
6.16 Esse x County Council pr ioritises passenger tr anspor t (bus, minib us, taxi and comm unity
transpor t) according to the ‘Getting Around in Esse x Strategy’. The County Council will w ork in
partnership with stak eholders to impro ve bus ser vices and their suppor ting infr astructure to
provide a real alter nativ e to the pr ivate car .This will be achie ved by identifying oppor tunities
for a better b us netw ork (routes , frequency , comm unity based ser vices);  integ rating school and
commercial b us netw orks; the implementation of tr avel planning (w ork, business , school and
health);  provision of digital inf ormation measures;  provision of par k and r ide; and suppor ting
the g rowth in k ey comm uter and inter urban routes . Con ventional local b us ser vices , and in
particular impro ving e xisting ser vices , will be an impor tant par t of promoting sustainab le travel
across Nor th Esse x, and will complement the ne w high quality r apid tr ansit netw ork.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |326.17 Through implementation of the Esse x Cycling Str ategy (2016), Cycling Action Plans ha ve
been prepared in all the NEAs to increase cycle le vels; identify saf ety issues;  identify gaps on
key routes;  identify w ays of closing gaps;  and create better cycle connectivity to k ey emplo yment
areas , development z ones and schools .The pro vision of contin uous cycle routes and a coherent
cycle netw ork will encour age people to mak e shor t trips b y bicycle r ather than b y car .
         P olicies and Deliver y Mec hanisms f or Sustainab le Transpor t
6.18 Creating de velopment that is accessib le by different modes of tr anspor t, especially w alking and
cycling and the use of pub lic transpor t is essential to promoting sustainab le de velopment as it
reduces car dependency . An impor tant policy tool to achie ve this is a people or ientated  tr anspor t
hierarchy i.e. prioritising w alking and pro viding access f or people with mobility impair ment;
cycling;  public transpor t; cars (f or occupiers on site and visitors);  powered tw o wheelers;  and
commercial v ehicles). The modal hier archy will be used to ensure that if not all modes can be
satisf actor ily accommodated, those to wards the top of the hier archy are considered first and
given greater pr iority.
6.19 Sustainab le transpor t management will be based on promoting modes which minimise
environmental impact and promote social inclusion.  It is impor tant that de velopments are w ell
located in relation to e xisting w alking, cycling and pub lic transpor t netw orks, and where
appropr iate pro vide enhanced f acilities , as this will ensure that there is the maxim um potential
to use these modes as attr active alter nativ es to cars .
C    Social Infrastructure
         Education
6.20 New de velopment m ust pro vide f or the educational needs of ne w comm unities and this is set
out in more detail within the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan. This will in volve the e xpansion of
existing schools where f easib le and the constr uction of ne w schools , together with pro vision
for special educational needs , ear ly years and childcare places . Education requirements will
need to be based on a strong understanding of future pupil n umbers , with co-oper ation betw een
county , distr ict and borough councils . A range of educational oppor tunities will need to be
addressed as par t of a sustainab le growth str ategy , including pr actical v ocational tr aining,
apprenticeships , and fur ther and higher education.
6.21 New schools are an impor tant place-making component of Garden Comm unities where ear ly
provision is usually cr itical in pro viding core social infr astructure to help a ne w comm unity thr ive,
impro ve social integ ration and suppor t the creation of sustainab le travel patter ns and a health y
environment.
         Healthcare
6.22 Local author ities ha ve a role in creating a health y comm unity.The Nor th Esse x Author ities will
work closely with rele vant stak eholders such as the NHS , Pub lic Health and local health
partnerships , developers and comm unities to ensure that future de velopment in Nor th Esse x
takes into account the need to impro ve health and w ellbeing of local residents (and w orkers)
including access to appropr iate health and care infr astructure to suppor t new and g rowing
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan33comm unities . Requirements are set out in more detail within the Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan.
This will be par ticular ly impor tant giv en the ageing profile of e xisting and future residents .There
is already a need f or more and better quality health care f acilities across Nor th Esse x with some
areas ha ving relativ ely poor access to health care f acilities .The Garden Comm unity will pro vide
the conditions f or a health y comm unity through the patter n of de velopment, good urban design,
good access to local ser vices and f acilities;  green open space and saf e places f or activ e pla y
and f ood g rowing, and which is accessib le by walking and cycling and pub lic transpor t.Suppor t
will be giv en to meet cross-boundar y need f or hospice f acilities .
D    Digital Connectivity
6.23 The NPPF indicates ho w high quality comm unications infr astructure is essential f or economic
growth and social w ell-being The a vailability of high speed and reliab le broadband, par ticular ly
in rural areas , is a k ey factor in unloc king ne w de velopment oppor tunities and ensur ing that
people can access ser vices online and w ork from home .The Go vernment is committed to
making gigabit-enab ling connectivity a vailab le to all premises in the UK b y 2025 and the Local
Plan can contr ibute to wards achie ving this goal b y requir ing de velopers to ensure such
technology is in place .
6.24 Fast broadband connections and telecomm unications are an increasingly impor tant requirement
to ser ve all de velopment.  New development should contr ibute to the creation of a comprehensiv e
and eff ective netw ork in both urban and r ural areas to promote economic competitiv eness and
to reduce the need to tr avel.The pr iority is to secure gigabit-enab ling connectivity  to all e xisting
and ne w de velopments . Developers are encour aged to engage with comm unication netw ork
providers at the ear liest oppor tunity .Where pro vision is possib le preference is indicated f or
open-access infr astructure , enab ling m ultiple ser vice pro viders access to end users .
E    Water Suppl y and Wastewater
6.25 The author ities will need to w ork with Anglian Water, Affinity Water, Environment Agency and
developers to ensure sufficient capacity and pro vision of an adequate w ater supply and f oul
drainage and w astewater treatment to suppor t growing comm unities as outlined in the Integ rated
Water Management Str ategy and Infr astructure Deliv ery Plan. This will be par ticular ly impor tant
as water supplies contin ue to be threatened b y climate change and pressures from contin uing
growth and de velopment. Water pro visions need to be protected and it is essential f or adequate
water and w astewater infr astructure to be in place to accommodate the demands of g rowth and
development in accordance with the Water F ramework Directiv e and the Habitats Directiv e.
The ne w Garden Comm unity has the oppor tunity to minimise demand and w astewater gener ation,
through e xplor ing oppor tunities at both the str ategic and local le vel.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |34Policy SP 6
Infrastructure & Connectivity
All de velopment m ust be suppor ted b y the pro vision of the infr astructure , services and f acilities
that are identified to ser ve the needs ar ising from the de velopment.
The requirements in section A of this policy apply only to the Tendring / Colchester Borders
Garden Comm unity, whilst the remaining sections B , C, D and E apply to all allocations and
development proposals in the Nor th Esse x Author ities area.
A.Tendring / Colc hester Bor ders Gar den Comm unity
1.The De velopment Plan Document (DPD) f or the Tendring / Colchester Borders Garden
Comm unity will include:
a) An infr astructure deliv ery strategy and phasing plan that sets out ho w infr astructure ,
services and f acilities will be pro vided.  Infrastructure deliv ery will align with each de velopment
phase and be suppor ted b y suitab le mechanisms to deliv er the infr astructure both on and
off-site;
b) Details of the design and deliv ery of Route 1 of the r apid tr ansit system, and a prog ramme
for the integ ration of the garden comm unity into the system. The route will be designed to
accommodate future route enhancements and technology impro vements;  and
c) Target modal shares f or each tr anspor t mode and details of sustainab le transpor t measures
to suppor t their achie vement.
2. Before an y planning appro val is g ranted f or de velopment f orming par t of the Tendring /
Colchester Borders Garden Comm unity, the f ollowing str ategic tr anspor t infr astructure m ust
have secured planning consent and funding appro val:
a) A120-A133 link road:  and
b) Route 1 of the rapid tr ansit system as defined in the Nor th Esse x Rapid Transit System:
From Vision to Plan document (J uly 2019).
3. Sustainab le transpor t measures will be pro vided from first occupation at the Tendring /
Colchester Borders Garden Comm unity to suppor t the achie vement of the target modal shares
as defined in the DPD f or the garden comm unity.
4. Other str ategic infr astructure requirements f or the Tendring / Colchester Borders Garden
Comm unity are set out in sections D , E and F of P olicy SP9, and will be fur ther defined in the
DPD f or the garden comm unity.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan35B.Transpor tation and Travel
The local planning author ities will w ork with go vernment depar tments , Highw ays England, Esse x
County Council, Netw ork Rail, r ail and b us oper ators , developers and other par tners to deliv er
the following;
Changes in tr avel beha viour b y applying the modal hier archy and increasing oppor tunities
for sustainab le modes of tr anspor t that can compete eff ectively with pr ivate v ehicles;
A comprehensiv e netw ork of seg regated w alking and cycling routes linking k ey centres of
activity;
Impro ved urban and inter-urban public transpor t, and new and inno vative ways of pro viding
public transpor t, including:
high quality r apid tr ansit netw orks and connections in and around urban areas with links
to the ne w garden comm unity;
maximising the use of the local r ail netw ork to ser ve existing comm unities and locations
for large-scale g rowth;
a bus netw ork providing a high-frequency , reliab le and efficient ser vice, integ rated with
other transpor t modes serving areas of ne w demand;
promoting wider use of comm unity tr anspor t schemes;
Increased r ail capacity , reliability and punctuality , and reduced o verall jour ney times b y rail;
New and  impro ved road infr astructure and str ategic highw ay connections to reduce
congestion and pro vide more reliab le jour ney times along the A12, A120 and
A133,  specifically:
Impro ved access to and capacity of  junctions on the A12 and other main roads;
A dualled A120 from Braintree to the A12.
Innovative strategies f or the management of pr ivate car use and par king including the
promotion of car clubs and car shar ing, and pro vision of  electr ic car charging points .
C. Social Infrastructure
The local planning author ities will w ork with rele vant pro viders and de velopers to f acilitate the
delivery of a wide r ange of social infr astructure required f or health y, activ e and inclusiv e
comm unities , minimising negativ e health and social impacts , both in a voidance and mitigation,
as far as is pr acticab le.
       Education
Sufficient school places will be pro vided  in the f orm of e xpanded or ne w primary and
secondar y schools together with ear ly years and childcare f acilities that are phased with
new development,  with larger de velopments setting aside land and/or contr ibuting to the
cost of deliv ering land f or ne w schools where required.
Practical v ocational tr aining, apprenticeships , and fur ther and higher education will be
provided and suppor ted.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |36       Health and Wellbeing
Healthcare infr astructure will be  provided as par t of ne w developments of appropr iate scale
in the f orm of e xpanded or ne w facilities including pr imary and acute care;  phar macies;
dental surger ies; opticians;  suppor ting comm unity ser vices including hospices , treatment
and counselling centres .
Require ne w development to maximise its positiv e contr ibution in creating health y
comm unities and minimise its negativ e health impacts , both in a voidance and mitigation,
as far as is pr acticab le.
The conditions f or a health y comm unity will be pro vided through the patter n of de velopment,
good urban design, access to local ser vices and f acilities;  green open space and saf e places
for activ e pla y and f ood g rowing, and which are all accessib le by walking, cycling and pub lic
transpor t.
D. Digital Connectivity
Comprehensiv e digital access to suppor t business and comm unity activity will be deliv ered
through the roll-out of ultrafast broadband across Nor th Esse x to secure the ear liest a vailability of
full fibre connections  for all e xisting and ne w developments (residential and non-residential). All
new proper ties will allow for the pro vision f or ultrafast broadband in order to allo w connection to
that netw ork as and when it is made a vailab le.
E.Water & Waste water
The local planning author ities will w ork with Anglian Water, Affinity Water, the En vironment
Agency and de velopers to ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the w ater supply and w aste
water infr astructure to ser ve ne w de velopment. Where necessar y, impro vements to w ater
infrastructure , waste w ater treatment and off-site dr ainage should be made ahead of the
occupation of dw ellings to ensure compliance with en vironmental legislation.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan37North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |38Creating Quality Places
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan397 Creating Quality Places
7.1 The Nor th Esse x area has a g reat v ariety of natur al en vironments , and w onderful to wns and
villages . It is cr itical that ne w de velopment m ust incor porate high standards of place-making
along with urban and architectur al design to respect the char acter of these en vironments . Major
new de velopments will be planned carefully with the use of master plans and design codes
where appropr iate.
7.2 Netw orks of g reen and b lue infr astructure should be pro vided across ne w developments , linking
new de velopments within e xisting netw orks of open space .These areas can be m ulti use ,
providing space f or natur al species and habitats as w ell as space f or inf ormal recreation, w alking,
cycling and equestr ian links .
7.3 This requirement f or high design standards will apply across all scales of ne w development as
well as to infr astructure projects . Enhancements to the pub lic realm, landscaping measures
and attention to architectur al detail will be impor tant f eatures that the author ities will wish to see
included in ne w de velopments . Strategic scale and more local g reen infr astructure can mak e
a vital contr ibution to quality of place , biodiv ersity gains , alle viating recreational pressure , and
health outcomes if proper ly integ rated into the design and deliv ery of ne w de velopment. The
Defra biodiv ersity accounting metr ic 2.0, or future iter ations of this , can be used to accur ately
assess habitat impacts .Sustainab le Drainage Systems (SuDS) pro vide ab undant oppor tunities
to introduce wildflo wer str ips and soft landscaping to a de velopment or urban area. This not
only br ings an attr active feature to the area f or people b ut acts as a wildlif e corr idor, connecting
the rivers, ditches , hedges , verges and gardens , allo wing mo vement of wildlif e throughout an
area, connecting to the wider en vironment and theref ore g reatly enhancing the biodiv ersity
value of the site .
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |40Policy SP 7
Place Shaping Principles
All ne w development m ust meet high standards of urban and architectur al design.  Development
frameworks, master plans , design codes , and other design guidance documents will be prepared
in consultation with stak eholders where the y are needed to suppor t this objectiv e.
All ne w development should reflect the f ollowing place shaping pr inciples , where applicab le:
Respond positiv ely to local char acter and conte xt to preser ve and enhance the quality of
existing places and their en virons;
Provide b uildings that e xhibit individual architectur al quality within w ell-considered pub lic
and pr ivate realms;
Protect and enhance assets of histor ical or natur al value;
Incor porate biodiv ersity creation and enhancement measures;
Create w ell-connected places that pr ioritise the needs of pedestr ians, cyclists and pub lic
transpor t services abo ve use of the pr ivate car ;
Provide a mix of land uses , services and densities with w ell-defined pub lic and pr ivate spaces
to create sustainab le well-designed neighbourhoods;
Enhance the pub lic realm through additional landscaping, street fur niture and other distinctiv e
features that help to create a sense of place;
Provide streets and spaces that are o verlooked and activ e and promote inclusiv e access;
Include par king f acilities that are w ell integ rated as par t of the o verall design and are
adaptab le if le vels of pr ivate car o wnership f all;
Provide an integ rated and connected netw ork of biodiv erse pub lic open space and g reen
and b lue infr astructure , thereb y helping to alle viate recreational pressure on designated
sites;
Include measures to promote en vironmental sustainability including addressing energy and
water efficiency , and pro vision of appropr iate water and  wastewater and flood mitigation
measures including the use of open space to pro vide flor a and f auna r ich sustainab le drainage
solutions;  and
Protect the amenity of e xisting and future residents and users with regard to noise , vibr ation,
smell, loss of light, o verbear ing and o verlooking.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan41North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |42Cross Boundar y Garden Comm unity
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan438 Cross Boundar y Gar den Comm unity
8.1 A key element of the spatial g rowth str ategy f or Nor th Esse x is the de velopment of a ne w
sustainab le garden comm unity.
8.2 Garden comm unities w ere amongst a r ange of options which w ere considered b y the local
author ities to deliv er their housing and emplo yment needs . A number of sites of sufficient scale
to accommodate a garden comm unity w ere identified through the Call f or Sites , the Str ategic
Land A vailability Assessment (SLAA) and wider e vidence gather ing processes b y each of the
local author ities. All these options w ere e valuated and the assessments can be seen as par t
of the Sustainability Appr aisal.
8.3 An Appropr iate Assessment  has also been completed to consider the eff ects of proposals in
Section 1 on the integ rity of the European sites either alone or in combination with other plans
and projects .  At the Screening Stage the lik ely significant eff ects on European Sites , either
alone or in combination with other plan and projects , were  loss of offsite habitat, recreational
impacts  and w ater quality .These issues w ere fur ther considered through the Appropr iate
Assessment.
Loss of off-site habitat - To mitigate f or the loss of off-site habitat, the Appropr iate
Assessment identified the need f or winter ing bird sur veys for the Tendring Colchester
Borders Garden Comm unity as par t of an y project le vel de velopment proposals and
master planning, to deter mine the sites individual impor tance f or golden plo ver and lapwing
and inf orm mitigation proposals .Depending on the findings of the winter ing bird sur veys,
development ma y need to be phased to tak e into account the cum ulativ e numbers of SP A
birds . In the unlik ely b ut possib le event that cum ulativ e numbers of SP A birds aff ected are
likely to e xceed the threshold of significance (i.e >1% of the associated European Site),
appropr iate mitigation in the f orm of habitat creation and management in per petuity , either
on-site or through pro vision of str ategic sites f or these species else where , will be required.
Where that mitigation requires the creation and management of suitab ly located habitat,
feeding productivity f or these SP A species should be maximised, and such mitigator y
habitat w ould need to be pro vided and fully functional pr ior to de velopment which w ould
affect significant n umbers of SP A birds .
Recreational Impacts - To mitigate f or an y increase in recreational pressures at the European
sites, the Appropr iate Assessment  recommended the production of Recreational disturbance
Avoidance and Mitigation Str ategies (RAMS) f or the Colne & Blac kwater, Stour and Orw ell
SPAs/Ramsar sites and Esse x Estuar ies SA C.
Water quality – To ensure that the w ater quality of the European Sites are not adv ersely
affected b y growth proposals in Section 1, the Appropr iate Assessment recommended the
inclusion of policy saf eguards to ensure that adequate w ater treatment capacity e xists pr ior
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |44to de velopments proceeding and a commitment that the phasing of de velopment w ould
not e xceed w ater and se wage infr astructure capacity and that the necessar y infr astructure
upgrades w ould be in place pr ior to de velopments coming f orward.
The three author ities are committed to implementing the recommendations in the Section
1  Appropr iate Assessment and these will be fur ther prog ressed through the Str ategic
Growth DPDs .
8.4 Due to the scale of de velopment proposed across Nor th Esse x and the infr astructure constr aints
which e xist in man y of the e xisting main settlements , new garden comm unities w ere considered
the most deliv erable and sustainab le option, pro viding a major long-ter m supply of ne w homes
if the y could be deliv ered to the r ight standards at the r ight time .
8.5 A new comm unity will address housing and emplo yment g rowth planned f or Nor th Esse x within
the plan per iod and be yond in a sustainab le way that meets the vision and str ategic objectiv es,
and pro vides a quality of de velopment and comm unity that w ould not occur in the absence of
a holistic approach to planning and deliv ery.  In the absence of commitment and a policy
framework that secures the pr inciples of garden comm unities de velopment in the identified
location w ould not be acceptab le. Other options f or meeting the g rowth w ould ha ve to be
considered.
8.6 The Tendring/Colchester Borders Garden Comm unity will be a planned ne w settlement that
responds directly to the regional, local and individual site conte xt and oppor tunities to create
development under pinned b y a ser ies of interrelated pr inciples which are based on the Town
and Countr y Planning Association (TCP A) Garden City Pr inciples , adapted f or the specific Nor th
Esse x conte xt as set out in the Nor th Esse x Garden Comm unities Char ter.
8.7 The Garden Comm unity is located within a Miner als Saf eguarding Area.  In line with the Esse x
Miner als Local Plan, the Miner al Planning A uthor ity requires a Miner als Resource Assessment
to be under taken to assess if the sites contain a miner als resource that w ould require e xtraction
prior to de velopment.  Should the viability of e xtraction be pro ven, the miner al shall be w orked
in accordance with the phased deliv ery of the non-miner al de velopment.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan45Policy SP 8
Development & Deliver y of a Ne w Gar den Comm unity in Nor th Esse x
The f ollowing ne w garden comm unity is  proposed at the broad location sho wn on Map 10.2.
Tendring/Colchester Borders , a ne w garden comm unity which will deliv er betw een 2,200 and
2,500 homes , 7 hectares of emplo yment land and pro vision f or Gypsies and Travellers within
the Plan per iod (as par t of an e xpected o verall total of betw een 7,000 and 9,000 homes and 25
hectares of emplo yment land to be deliv ered be yond 2033).
The garden comm unity will be holistically and comprehensiv ely planned with a distinct identity
that responds directly to its conte xt and is of sufficient scale to incor porate a r ange of homes ,
emplo yment, education & comm unity f acilities , green space and other uses to enab le residents
to meet the major ity of their da y-to-da y needs , reducing the need f or outw ard comm uting.  It will
be comprehensiv ely planned from the outset, with deliv ery phased to achie ve the whole
development, and will be under pinned b y a comprehensiv e pac kage of infr astructure .
A De velopment Plan Document (DPD) will be prepared f or the garden comm unity, containing
policies setting out ho w the ne w comm unity will be designed, de veloped and deliv ered in phases ,
in accordance with the pr inciples in par agraphs i-xiv belo w.  No planning consent f or de velopment
forming par t of the garden comm unity will be g ranted until the DPD has been adopted.   All
development f orming par t of the garden comm unity will comply with these pr inciples .
i.Comm unity and stak eholder par ticipation in the design and deliv ery of the garden comm unity
from the outset and a long-ter m comm unity engagement and activ ation str ategy .
ii.The pub lic sector w orking pro-activ ely and collabor atively with the pr ivate sector to design,
and br ing forward the garden comm unity, deplo ying ne w models of deliv ery where
appropr iate and ensur ing that the cost of achie ving the f ollowing is bor ne by lando wners
and those promoting the de velopments:  (a) secur ing a high-quality of place-making, (b)
ensur ing the timely deliv ery of both on-site and off-site infr astructure required to address
the impact of the ne w comm unity, and (c) pro viding and funding a mechanism f or future
stewardship , management, maintenance and rene wal of comm unity infr astructure and
assets .Where appropr iate, developers will be e xpected to contr ibute to wards pub licly-funded
infrastructure , including a contr ibution to wards the A120-A133 link road.  Given the scale of
and time per iod for de velopment of the ne w garden comm unity, the appropr iate model of
delivery will need to secure a comprehensiv e approach to deliv ery in order to achie ve the
outcomes outlined in points (a) - (c) in this par agraph, a void a piecemeal approach to
development, pro vide the funding and phasing of both de velopment and infr astructure , and
be sustainab le and accountab le in the long ter m.
iii.Promotion and e xecution of the highest quality of planning, design and management of the
built and pub lic realm so that the Garden Comm unity is char acter ised as a distinctiv e
place that capitalises on local assets , respects its conte xt,and estab lishes an en vironment that
promotes health, happiness and w ell-being.
iv.Sequencing of de velopment and infr astructure pro vision (both on-site and off-site) to ensure
that the latter is pro vided ahead of or in tandem with the de velopment it suppor ts to address
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |46the impacts of the ne w garden comm unity,  meet the needs of its residents and estab lish
sustainab le travel patter ns.To ensure ne w development does not ha ve an adv erse eff ect
on an y European Protected or nationally impor tant sites and complies with en vironmental
legislation (notab ly the Water F ramework Directiv e and the Habitats Directiv e), the required
waste w ater treatment capacity m ust be a vailab le ahead of the occupation of dw ellings .
v.Development that pro vides f or a tr uly balanced and inclusiv e comm unity and meets the
housing needs of local people including a mix of dw elling siz es, tenures and types , provision
for self- and custom-b uilt homes , provision f or the aging population;  and pro vision f or Gypsies
and Travellers;  and that meets the requirements of those most in need including the pro vision
of 30% aff ordab le housing in the garden comm unity.
vi.Provide and promote oppor tunities f or emplo yment within the ne w comm unity and within
sustainab le comm uting distance of it.
vii.Plan the ne w comm unity around a step change in integ rated and sustainab le transpor t
systems f or the Nor th Esse x area that put w alking, cycling and r apid pub lic transit netw orks
and connections at the hear t of g rowth in the area, encour aging and incentivising more
sustainab le activ e travel patter ns.
viii.Structure the ne w comm unity to create sociab le, vibr ant and w alkab le neighbourhoods with
equality of access f or all to a r ange of comm unity ser vices and f acilities including health,
education, retail, culture , comm unity meeting spaces , multi-functional open space , spor ts
and leisure f acilities .
ix.Develop specific garden comm unity par king approaches and standards that help promote
the use of sustainab le transpor t and mak e efficient use of land.
x.Create distinctiv e environments which are based on comprehensiv e assessments of the
surrounding en vironment and that celebr ate natur al and histor ic environments and systems ,
utilise a m ulti-functional g reen-g rid to create significant netw orks of ne w green infr astructure
including a ne w countr y par k at the garden comm unity, provide a high deg ree of connectivity
to existing corr idors and netw orks and enhance biodiv ersity .
xi.Secure a smar t and sustainab le approach that f osters climate resilience and a 21st centur y
environment in the design and constr uction of the garden comm unity to secure net gains in
local biodiv ersity , highest standards of energy efficiency and inno vation in technology to
reduce the impact of climate change , the incor poration of inno vative water efficiency/re-use
measures (with the aim of being w ater neutr al in areas of ser ious w ater stress), and
sustainab le waste and miner al management.
xii.Ensure that the costs and benefits of de veloping a garden comm unity are shared b y all
lando wners , with appropr iate measures being put in place to equalise the costs and land
contr ibutions .
xiii.Consider ation of potential on-site miner al resources through a Miner als Resource Assessment
as required b y the Miner als Planning A uthor ity.
xiv.Estab lishment at an ear ly stage in the de velopment of the garden comm unity, of appropr iate
and sustainab le long-ter m go vernance and ste wardship arr angements f or comm unity assets
including g reen space , pub lic realm areas and comm unity and other rele vant facilities;  such
arrangements to be funded b y the de velopment and include comm unity representation to
ensure residents ha ve a stak e in the long ter m de velopment, ste wardship and management
of their comm unity.
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan47Policy SP 9
Tendring/Colc hester Bor ders Gar den Comm unity
The De velopment Plan Document (DPD) required f or the Tendring / Colchester Borders Garden
Comm unity b y Policy SP8 will define the boundar y of the ne w comm unity and the amount of
development it will contain. The adoption of the DPD will be contingent on the completion of a
Heritage Impact Assessment carr ied out in accordance with Histor ic England guidance .The
Heritage Impact Assessment will assess the impact of proposed allocations upon the histor ic
environment, inf orm the appropr iate e xtent and capacity of the de velopment and estab lish an y
mitigation measures necessar y.The DPD will be produced in consultation with the local comm unity
and stak eholders and will include a concept plan sho wing the disposition and quantity of future
land-uses , and giv e a three dimensional indication of the urban design and landscape par ameters
which will be incor porated into an y future planning applications;  together with a phasing and
implementation str ategy which sets out ho w the r ate of de velopment will be link ed to the pro vision
of the necessar y social, ph ysical and en vironmental infr astructure to ensure that the respectiv e
phases of the de velopment do not come f orward until the necessar y infr astructure has been
secured. The DPD and an y application f or planning per mission f or de velopment f orming par t of
the garden comm unity m ust be consistent with the requirements set out in this policy .
For the Plan per iod up to 2033, housing deliv ery from the garden comm unity, irrespectiv e of its
actual location, will be distr ibuted equally betw een Colchester Borough Council and Tendring
District Council.  If, after taking into account its share of deliv ery from the garden comm unity,
either of those author ities has a shor tfall in deliv ery against the housing requirement f or its area,
it will need to mak e up the shor tfall within its o wn area.  It ma y not use the other author ity’s share
of deliv ery from the garden comm unity to mak e up the shor tfall.
The DPD and an y planning application will address the f ollowing pr inciples and requirements in
the design, de velopment and deliv ery of the ne w garden comm unity:
A.Place-Making and Design Quality
1.The de velopment of a ne w garden comm unity to high standards of design and la yout dr awing
on its conte xt and the consider able assets within its boundar ies such as w oodland, streams
and changes in topog raphy, as w ell as the oppor tunities aff orded b y the pro ximity of the
University of Esse x campus to create a ne w garden comm unity that is inno vative,
contempor ary and technologically enab led, set within a strong g reen fr amework with ne w
neighbourhood centres at its hear t. It will be designed and de veloped to ha ve its o wn identity
and be as self-sustaining as possib le recognising its location close to the edge of Colchester .
It will secure appropr iate integ ration with Colchester and the nearb y Univ ersity of Esse x
campus b y the pro vision of suitab le walking and cycling links and r apid pub lic transpor t
systems and connections to enab le residents of the ne w comm unity to ha ve con venient
access to to wn centre ser vices and f acilities in Colchester as w ell as Elmstead Mar ket. Clear
separ ation will be maintained betw een the ne w garden comm unity and the nearb y villages
of Elmstead Mar ket and Wivenhoe . Safeguarding the impor tant g reen edge to Colchester
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |48will be essential with a new country park provided along the Salary Brook corridor and
incorporating Churn Wood.
2. Detailed masterplans and design guidance, based on a robust assessment of historic and
natural environmental constraints and opportunities for enhancement, will be adopted to
inform and guide development proposals and planning applications for the garden community.
B. Housing
3.A mix of housing types and tenures including self- and custom-build and starter homes will
be provided on the site, including a minimum of 30% affordable housing. The affordable
housing will be phased through the development.
4. New residential development will seek to achieve appropriate densities which reflect both
context, place-making aspirations and opportunities for increased levels of development
around neighbourhood centres and transport hubs.
C. Employment and Jobs
5.The garden community will make provision for a wide range of jobs, skills and training  
opportunities.The DPD will allocate about 25 hectares of B use employment land within the 
garden community . This may include provision for office, research & development, light  
industrial and/or other employ ment generating uses towards the s outh of the site in proximity  
to the existing Univers ity of Essex and Knowledge Gateway and provision for  office, research  
& development, industrial, storage and distribution uses towards the north of the site close  
to the A120.
6.High speed and reliable broadband will be provided and homes will include specific spaces 
to enable working from home . 
D. Transportation
7.A package of measures will be introduced to encourage smarter transport choices to meet
the needs of the new community and to maximise the opportunities for sustainable
travel. Policy SP6 requires planning consent and full funding approval for the A120-A133
link road and Route 1 of the rapid transit system to have been secured before planning
approval is granted for any development at the garden community. Additional transport
priorities include the provision of a network of footpaths, cycleways and bridleways to enhance
permeability within the site and to access and to access the adjoining areas; park and ride
facilities and other  effective integrated measures to mitigate the transport impacts of the
proposed development on the strategic and local road network. Longer term transport
interventions will need to be carefully designed to minimise the impacts on the strategic and
local transport network and fully mitigate any environmental or traffic impacts arising from
the development.
8.Foot and cycle ways shall be provided throughout the development and connecting with the
surrounding urban areas  and countryside, including seamlessly linking key development
areas to the University of Essex, Hythe station and Colchester Town Centre.
| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan499.Primary vehicular access to the site will be provided off the A120 and A133. Any other road
improvements required to meet needs arising from the garden community will be set out in
the DPD and further defined as part of the masterplanning process.
10.Other specific transport-related infrastructure requirements identified through the Strategic
Growth Development Plan Document and masterplans for this garden community will be
delivered in a phased manner.
E. Community Infrastructure
11. District and neighbourhood centres of an appropriate scale will be provided to serve the
proposed development. The centres will be located where they will be easily accessible by
walking, cycling and public transit to the majority of residents in the garden community.
12. Community meeting places will be provided within the local centres.
13. Increased primary healthcare capacity will be provided to serve the new development as
appropriate. This may be by means of new infrastructure or improvement, reconfiguration,
extension or relocation of existing medical facilities.
14.A secondary school, primary schools and early-years facilities will be provided to serve the
new development.
15.A network of multi-functional green infrastructure will be provided within the garden community
incorporating key elements of the existing green assets within the site. It will include
community parks, allotments, a new country park, the provision of sports areas with
associated facilities; and play facilities.
16.Indoor leisure and sports facilities will be provided within the new community, or contributions
made to the improvement of off-site leisure facilities to serve the new development.
F. Other Requirements
17. The delivery of smart, innovative and sustainable water efficiency/re-use solutions that
fosters climate resilience and a 21st century approach towards water supply, water and
waste water treatment and flood risk management.Taking a strategic approach to flood risk
through the use of Strategic Flood Risk Assessments and the updated Climate Projections
2019 and identifying opportunities for Natural Flood Risk Management. Provision of
improvements to waste water treatment plant including an upgrade to the Colchester Waste
Water Treatment Plan and off-site drainage improvements aligned with the phasing of the
development within the plan period and that proposed post 2033. To ensure new
development does not have an adverse effect on any European Protected or nationally
important site and complies with environmental legislation (notably the Water Framework
Directive and the Habitats Directive), the required waste water treatment capacity must be
available ahead of the occupation of dwellings.
18.Landscape buffers between the site and existing development in Colchester, Wivenhoe and
Elmstead Market.
19.Conserve and where appropriate enhance the significance of heritage assets (including any
contribution made by their settings) both within and surrounding the site. Designated heritage
assets within the garden community area include Grade II listed Allen’ s Farmhouse, Ivy
Cottage, Lamberts, and three buildings at Hill farmhouse. Designated heritage assets nearby
include the grade I listed Church of St Anne and St Lawrence, grade II* listed Wivenhoe
North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |50House, Elmstead Hall and Spring Valley Mill and numerous grade II listed buildings as well
as the grade II listed Wivenhoe Registered Park and Garden. Harm to the significance of a
designated heritage asset should be avoided in the first instance.
20.Avoidance,protection and/or enhancement of biodiversity assets within and surrounding the 
site; including Bullock Wood SSSI, Ardleigh Gravel Pits SSSI, Wivenhoe Pits SSSI and  
Upper Colne Marshes SSSI and relevant European protected sites. Contributions will be  
secured towards mitigation measures in accordance with the Essex Coast Recreational  
disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy . Wintering bird surveys will be undertaken  
at the appropriate time of year as part of the DPD preparation to identify any offsite functional  
habitat. Should any be identified, development must firstly avoid impacts.  Where this is not 
possible, development must be phased to deliver habitat creation and management either  
on- or off-site to mitigate any significant impacts. Any such habitat must be provided and  
fully functional before any development takes place which would affect significant numbers  
of SPA birds.
21.Provision of appropriate buffers along strategic road and rail infrastructure to protect new  
development .
22.Provision of appropriate design and infrastructure that incorporates the highest standards  
of innovation in energy efficiency and technology to reduce impact of climate change, water 
efficiency (with the aim of being water neutral in areas of serious water stress), and  
sustainable waste / recycling management facilities.
23.Measures to support the development of the new community including provision of community  
development support workers (or other provision) for a minimum of ten years from initial  
occupation of the first homes and appropriate community governance structures .
24.Establishment at an early stage in the development of the garden community, of appropriate  
and s ustainable long-term governance and stewardship arrangements for community as sets 
including green space, public realm areas and community and other relevant facilities; such 
arrangements to be funded by the development and include community representation to  
ensure residents have a stake in the long term development, stewardship and management  
of their community.
25.Allocation of additional land within the garden community, to accommodate University  
expansion, which is at least equivalent in size to the allocation in the Colchester Local  
Development Framework Site Allocations document October 2010. 
| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan51North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |52Deliv ery, Implementation & Monitor ing
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan539 Deliver y, Implementation & Monitoring
9.1 The Nor th Esse x Author ities will w ork together to deliv er cross-author ity str ategic proposals
contained in section 1 of their plans , including the garden comm unity.This entails consider ation
of appropr iate models f or the go vernance , funding and comprehensiv e deliv ery of this inno vative
large scale and long ter m growth project in line with the pr inciples set out in policy SP8.  In vie w
of the scale and long ter m nature of the proposed garden comm unity, the author ities intend to
have a significant role in ho w the comm unity is phased and deliv ered and to ensure that the
infrastructure and other suppor ting measures to suppor t the residents of the ne w comm unity
are deliv ered in adv ance of or at the same time as ne w homes .This should also help ensure
delivery throughout diff erent economic cycles .
9.2 The Nor th Esse x Author ities will monitor these section 1 policies to ensure that the y are eff ective
and deliv ering the intended outcomes , including their collectiv e implications f or the area as a
whole .  Monitor ing of Section 1 objectiv es and outcomes as outlined in the tab le belo w will be
assessed regular ly by the author ities in their ann ual A uthor ity Monitor ing Repor ts (AMR), in
addition to the monitor ing of the individual Section 2 of each Local Plan.   It should be noted that
where there is an unacceptab le dela y in deliv ery of de velopment and/or infr astructure occurs ,
the local author ities will use mechanisms and po wers including estab lishing locally-led
Development Cor porations and the use of Compulsor y Purchase Orders , to inter vene.
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |549.3 Table 1: Monitoring Requirements for Section 1
Key Indicators in
Authority Monitoring
ReportsTargets Section One Policies Section One
Objectives
Record of planning
decisions including
appealsDelivery of new
development in
accordance with the
Development PlanSP1 Presumption in
favour of Sustainable
DevelopmentProviding sufficient new
homes
Fostering economic
development
Monitor levels of
mitigation contributions
receivedSecure contributions
from development
towards mitigation
measuresSP2 Recreational
disturbance Avoidance
and Mitigation StrategyProviding new and
improved infrastructure
Addressing education
and healthcare needs Local authority
agreement and delivery
of governance,Deliver a new Garden
Community as the most
sustainable options for
large scale, long term
growthSP3 Spatial Strategy
for North Essex
Ensuring high quality
outcomes community
involvement,
stewardship
arrangements and
funding arrangements
for the new Garden
Community
Market and affordable
housing completions
per annum (net)Deliver new housing in
line with spatial
strategy and
Objectively Assessed
Need targetsSP4 Meeting Housing
Needs
Amount of floorspace
development for
employment and
leisure by typeDeliver new
employment land in line
with spatial strategy
and evidence base
targetsSP5 Employment
| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan55
continued on next pageKey Indicators in
Authority Monitoring
ReportsTargets Section One Policies Section One
Objectives
Identify and monitor
progress of strategic
infrastructure projects
Monitor modal splits
and self-containment
via Census and
measure traffic levels
on key routesDelivery of identified
infrastructure schemes
including transport,
education, community,
healthcare, green/blue
infrastructure and
environmental
protection
Increase modal share
of non-motorised
transportSP6 Infrastructure and
Connectivity
Monitor availability of
DPDs and other
planning guidanceApproved DPDs,
masterplans & other
planning & designSP7 Place Shaping
Principles
relative to the guidance prior to the
submission & commencement of
determination of development of the
planning applications new Garden
for the development it Community. Deliver
relates to. Planning communities that are
permissions granted sensitively integrated
without objection from into the existing historic
built and natural
environmentrelevant statutory
consultees and local
authority specialist
advisors
Local authority
agreement and delivery
of governance,Development and
delivery of a new
Garden CommunitySP8 Development and
Delivery of a New
Garden Community in
North Essex community
involvement,
stewardship
arrangements and
funding arrangements
for new Garden
Community
North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |56
Table 1: Monitoring Requirements for Section 1 (continued)Key Indicator s in
Authority Monitoring
Repor tsTargets Section One P olicies Section One
Objectives
Deliv ery rates of all
development including
suppor tingDeliv er a sustainab le
new comm unity in
accordance with
guidance as adoptedSP9
Tendring/Colchester
Borders Garden
Comm unity infrastructure as
documented in housing
trajector ies and other
monitor ing data
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan57North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |58Appendices & Maps
| North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan5911 Appendices & Maps
Appendix A:  List of policies super seded b y Section 1 of the Plan
Policies super seded b y the Section 1 Local Plan P olicy Section 1 Local Plan P olicy
Tendring District
Council Adopted
2007 Local PlanColc hester
Borough Council
Adopted Core
Strategy 2014
Focused Re viewBraintree District
Council 2011
Core StrategyPolicy Title Policy
Number
- - - Presumption in F avour of
Sustainab le De velopmentSP1
- - - Recreational disturbance
Avoidance and Mitigation
Strategy (RAMS)SP2
QL1 H1 Spatial Str ategy f or Nor th
Esse xSP3
HG1 H1 Meeting Housing Needs SP4
QL4 CE1 CS4 Emplo yment SP5
- SD2 CS11 Infrastructure and
ConnectivitySP6
QL8 / QL9 / QL10
/ QL11 (in par t)- CS9 Place Shaping Pr inciples SP7
- - - Development and Deliv ery
of a Ne w Garden
Comm unity in Nor th Esse xSP8
- - - Tendring / Colchester
Borders Garden
Comm unitySP9
North Esse x Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |CS1 - 6010.1 Key Diagram
| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan6110.2 Tendring Colchester Borders Garden Community - Broad Location
North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan  |62| North Essex Authorities' Shared Strategic Section 1 Plan63