 
 
 
Thanet   District   Council  
Local   Plan     to    2031   
Local   Plan   as   modified   by   Inspectors’   report    and   additional  
modifications  
March   2020  
PLEASE   NOTE   that   this   is   a   draft   version,   and   is   subject   to   final  
checking   for   formatting   and   other   errors   before   final   publication  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1   
Strategy  
What   is   the   Local   Plan?  
1 The   Local   Plan   is   a   key   Council   document   that   is   required   to   guide   and   deliver   the  
Council’s   plans   and   aspirations   for   growth.   It   is   essential   to   shaping   change   in   a   form   which   is  
desired   by   the   Council   and   Thanet’s   communities,   and   for   the   delivery   of   development   projects  
and   infrastructure.  
 
2 The   Plan   must   be   prepared   with   the   objective   of   contributing   to   the   achievement   of  
sustainable   development,   and   be   in   accordance   with   national   planning   policy.  
 
3 The   Plan   should   be   aspirational   but   also   realistic   and   should   provide   sufficient   flexibility  
to   adapt   to   rapid   change.   The   Plan   must   be   based   upon   up-to-date,   sound   evidence.   We   have  
to   be   able   to   demonstrate   that   the   Plan   will   be   deliverable   and   therefore   the   proposals   included  
within   it   must   be   viable   and   realistic.   The   Plan   will   be   delivered   by   a   number   of   partners,  
including   the   private   sector.  
 
4 The   Plan   sets   out   policies   and   proposals   that   will   be   used   to   guide   decisions   and  
investment   on   development   and   regeneration   over   the   period   to   2031.   It   sets   out   how   and  
where   the   homes,   jobs,   community   facilities,   shops   and   infrastructure   will   be   delivered   and   the  
types   of   places   and   environments   we   want   to   create.   It   also   identifies   land   to   be   protected   from  
development,   such   as   open   space.   Once   adopted,   the   Plan   will   form   the   statutory   planning  
framework   for   determining   planning   applications   and   will   replace   the   “saved”   policies   from   the  
Thanet   Local   Plan   2006.   The   Cliftonville   Development   Plan   Document   (2010)   still   remains   in  
force.  
 
Why   is   the   Council   producing   a   Local   Plan?  
 
●The   Council   is   required   by   Government   to   produce   a   Local   Plan.  
●The   Council   also   wants   to   set   out   in   advance   how   it   wishes   to   see   the   district   develop.  
This   provides   certainty   to   developers,   businesses,   the   local   community   and   others.  
●The   Plan   provides   a   framework   to   help   deliver   the   Council’s   Economic   Growth   Strategy  
●The   Plan   will   ensure   that   decisions   on   planning   applications   are   made   in   accordance  
with   local   policy.   Without   a   Plan   the   Council   has   less   control   over   development   in   the  
area.  
 
How   has   the   Council   decided   what   the   Plan   should   contain?  
 
●The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   and   the   national   Planning   Practice   Guidance  
set   out   what   the   government   expects   local   plans   to   cover.  
●We   have   considered   the   specific   issues   and   opportunities   that   are   relevant   to   Thanet.  
●We   have   considered   key   elements   of   the   evidence   base,   and   carried   out   key  
work   in   relation   to   Local   Plan   viability,   Sustainability   Appraisal   and   infrastructure  
delivery  
●We   carried   out   consultation   on   the   Preferred   Options   for   the   Plan,   and   further  
Proposed   Revisions   to   that   Plan,   and   have   considered   the   comments   received.  
●We   have   assessed   the   merits   of   the   options   in   achieving   sustainable  
development,   including   through   the   Sustainability   Appraisal.  
●We   have   and   will   continue   to   co-operate   with   our   neighbouring   authorities   on  
cross-   boundary   strategic   issues.  
 
 
2   5 The   options   and   assessment   of   their   merits   are   documented   in   the   Issues   and   Options  
Consultation   Document,   the   Sustainability   Appraisal   and   in   Examination   statements,   which   can  
be   accessed   on   the   Planning   Policy   pages   of   the   Council's   website.  
 
 
How   is   the   Plan   structured?  
 
6 The   Plan   is   set   out   in   three   main   sections.  
 
Section   1   provides   the   introduction   and   sets   the   context   for   the   Plan.   It   sets   out   the   vision   for  
Thanet   that   the   Plan   is   seeking   to   achieve,   and   introduces   the   overall   strategy   behind   the   Plan,  
as   well   as   setting   out   the   strategic   priorities   and   objectives   which   need   to   be   achieved   in   order  
to   deliver   the   vision   and   strategy   of   the   Plan.  
 
7 Section   2   sets   out   the   strategic   issues   and   policies   of   the   Plan.   These   are   the  
overarching   policies   which   underpin   the   Plan's   strategy.   These   include   the   strategies   for  
delivering   sustainable   development   and   the   overall   levels   of   development   and   growth   which  
are   needed   in   Thanet,   and   the   strategies   for   the   economy,   town   centres,   housing,  
environment,   communities   and   transport,   including   strategic   housing   and   employment   site  
proposals.  
 
8 Section   3   sets   out   district   wide   development   management   policies.   These   are   detailed  
and   wide   ranging   policies   which   may   be   relevant   to   all   new   development   proposals   in   Thanet.  
The   section   is   set   out   in   topic   areas,   and   covers   issues   including   climate   change,   design   and  
heritage.  
 
Thanet's   Profile   and   Key   Issues  
9 In   order   to   inform   the   Plan   for   the   future,   we   must   have   a   good   understanding   of   the  
characteristics   of   Thanet   today,   and   the   opportunities   and   issues   that   it   presents.   These   are   set  
out   in   the   evidence   and   background   papers   supporting   this   document.  
 
10 The   draft   Local   Plan   seeks   to   maximize   the   opportunities   available   and   deliver   policy  
support   to   respond   to   the   issues   facing   the   area.  
 
11 Thanet   is   located   in   East   Kent,   in   close   proximity   to   continental   Europe.   It   has   three  
main   coastal   towns   of   Margate,   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs.   The   built   up   area   is   densely  
populated   and   forms   an   almost   continuous   urban   belt   around   the   north   east   coast.   This   is  
separated   by   areas   of   countryside   between   the   towns   and   providing   relief   in   the   built   area.  
There   are   also   attractive   coastal   and   rural   villages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3    
Map   1   -   Map   of   Thanet  
 
 
12 The   district   has   an   area   of   about   40   square   miles   (103,300ha)   and   a   resident   population  
of   about   140,000.   About   30%   of   the   district   is   urban   with   95%   of   the   population   living   in   the  
main   urban   area   around   the   coast.   Thanet   is   the   fourth   most   populated   district   in   Kent,   and   has  
the   second   highest   population   density.   Thanet   is   a   popular   area   for   retired   people   to   live,   and  
has   the   highest   number   of   over   65   year   olds   in   the   county   whilst   having   a   lower   proportion   of  
16-64   year   olds   than   the   county   average.  
 
13 Thanet   is   a   unique   and   vibrant   coastal   area,   with   an   attractive   environment   and   a  
number   of   unique   features.   There   are   20   miles   of   coastline   with   attractive   chalk   cliffs   and  
beautiful   sandy   beaches   and   bays,   many   of   which   have   been   awarded   European   Blue   Flag  
status.   Much   of   the   coast   is   also   recognised   for   its   internationally   important   habitats,   including  
coastal   chalk   and   significant   populations   of   coastal   birds.   This   is   reflected   in   the   coast’s  
designation   under   international   and   national   legislation,   including   Sites   of   Special   Scientific  
Interest,   Special   Protection   Areas,   Special   Areas   of   Conservation,   and   a   Marine  
Conservation   Zone.   These   areas   are   protected   by   legislation   to   prevent   harm   to   them   from  
development   change   and   other   human   activity.   There   are   also   areas   of   Thanet   which   have   a  
functional   relationship   with   the   Special   Protection   Areas,   and   the   Council   recognises   the  
importance   of   protecting   that   relationship   in   the   longer   term.  
 
14 Thanet   is   also   rich   in   history.   This   is   recognised   today   in   the   identification   of   around   2,000  
listed   buildings   and   27   Conservation   Areas.   Its   historic   landscape   contains   many   archaeological  
sites   dating   back   to   pre-historic   times.  
 
15 Outside   of   the   urban   area,   much   of   the   land   is   high   quality   and   intensively   farmed  
agricultural   land.  
 
16 Thanet   has   some   areas   which   are   at   risk   from   flooding.   These   are   confined   to   the   low  
4   
lying   areas   of   the   countryside   to   the   south   west   of   the   district,   and   along   the   very   edges   of   the  
coast,   affecting   small   areas   of   Margate   and   Ramsgate.   It   accounts   for   approximately   11%   of  
the   district   area.  
 
17 In   2005,   a   new   town   centre   was   established   at   Westwood.   This   brought   many   retailers  
not   previously   represented   in   Thanet,   and   in   turn   has   significantly   reduced   the   leakage   of   retail  
spend   from   the   district.   The   centre   continues   to   attract   investment,   with   further   development  
planned   over   the   next   few   years.   The   area   does   however   suffer   from   traffic   congestion   and  
accessibility   around   the   centre,   particularly   on   foot,   is   not   convenient.  
 
18 The   district   benefits   from   excellent   road   access   to   and   from   the   M25   and   London   via   the  
M2   and   the   A299   Thanet   Way.   Access   to   Dover   and   beyond   is   via   the   A256,   with   the   East   Kent  
Access   Road   providing   dual   carriageway   for   the   majority   of   the   route.   Access   to   the   nearby  
cathedral   city   of   Canterbury   and   to   Ashford   is   via   the   single   carriageway   A28.   Thanet   has   regular  
rail   links   to   London,   Canterbury,   Dover   and   Ashford.   Since   2009   High   Speed   domestic   rail  
services   operate   from   Thanet   to   London   St   Pancras   using   HS1.  
 
19 Ramsgate   is   a   cross   channel   port   with   capacity   for   passenger   and   freight   services   to  
mainland   Europe.   It   has   also   recently   established   itself   as   a   base   for   servicing   offshore   wind  
farms.  
 
20 The   tourism   sector   has   grown   substantially   over   the   last   few   years,   compared   to   other  
parts   of   the   South   East   and   England,   and   there   has   also   been   significant   growth   in   the   creative  
sector.   However,   Thanet   also   has   some   economic   challenges   to   deal   with,   and   the   Council’s  
Economic   Growth   Strategy   is   one   step   in   responding   to   those   challenges.   For   example,  
Thanet’s   business   parks   have   taken   time   to   develop,   and   there   remains   a   significant   amount   of  
undeveloped   employment   land.   The   Council   is   part   of   a   partnership   with   KCC   (East   Kent  
Opportunities),   seeking   to   accelerate   the   delivery   of   key   sites.   More   recently,   that   area   has  
seen   growth   in   the   number   of   start-ups,   particularly   in   the   cultural   sector.  
 
21 Nationally,   “High   Streets”   face   a   range   of   challenges,   particularly   with   vacancy   rates.  
However,   following   a   completed   Townscape   Heritage   Initiative   and   alongside   the   opening   of   the  
Turner   Contemporary   Gallery   in   April   2011,   Margate’s   Old   Town   and   lower   High   Street   have  
seen   a   significant   number   of   new   businesses   opening.  
 
22 The   district   has   some   significant   difficulties.   Average   skills   levels   in   the   district   are  
lower   than   the   rest   of   Kent   and   England,   with   unemployment   levels   higher   than   the   Kent  
average   (KCC   Business   Intelligence   publications).   Wage   levels   are   also   lower   than   the  
national   and   regional   average.   However,   the   Council   and   a   range   of   other   organisations   have  
a   clear   strategy   to   encourage   both   local   business   growth   and   inward   investment   and   are  
working   with   industry   partners   to   achieve   this.  
 
23 The   overall   quality   of   life   of   Thanet’s   residents   is   varied.   Some   residents   enjoy   a   very   high  
quality   of   life,   including   living   in   high   quality   residential   environments.   However,   Thanet   also   has   a  
number   of   highly   deprived   wards   with   many   people   with   support   needs.   These   areas   are   also  
characterised   by   pockets   of   urban   decline   and   poor   housing   stock.   A   key   challenge   is   to   ensure  
that   everyone   has   the   same   opportunities   by   reducing   inequalities   in   the   area   and   improving  
quality   of   life   for   all.   The   Council   and   relevant   other   organisations   are   working   to   deal   with   these  
issues   through   different   initiatives.  
 
 
The   Vision:   the   Council's   aspirations   for   2031  
●Thanet   has   realised   its   growth   potential   as   a   location   for   business   investment.   Making  
5   the   most   of   its   close   proximity   to   Europe   and   easy   access   to   London,   Thanet   plays   an  
important   role   in   East   Kent.  
●It   has   benefited   from   sustained   investment   in   skills,   employment   and   infrastructure.  
Thanet   successfully   retains   and   attracts   skilled   people   to   live   and   work   in   the   area.  
●Health   and   educational   attainment   in   Thanet   are   comparable   with   the   county  
average,   driven   by   good   quality   education   and   training.  
●Thanet   has   a   sustainable,   balanced   economy   with   a   strong   focus   on   advanced  
manufacturing,   emerging   technologies,   tourism,   culture   and   leisure,   supported   by   the  
three   thriving   coastal   towns.  
●It   has   a   well-established   year   round   visitor   economy,   a   destination   of   choice,   having   high  
quality   accommodation   and   inviting   public   spaces.   Thanet   capitalises   on   its   natural  
assets,   the   coastline   and   beaches,   the   heritage   and   culture,   and   these   assets   are  
protected   and   positively   managed   for   the   longer   term.  
●The   coastal   town   centres   have   re-defined   their   roles,   maximising   their   unique  
characteristics,   with   diverse   commercial   offers   and   independent   places   to   shop,   eat  
and   stay.   New   and   restored   housing   has   been   regenerated   next   to   boutique   hotels  
and   art   studios.  
●Margate   is   a   contemporary   seaside   resort   based   on   its   unique   assets   of   a   sandy  
beach,   harbour   and   rich   townscape.   The   creative   industry,   niche   retail   and  
educational   sectors   have   diversified   the   economic   heart   of   the   town.  
●Ramsgate's   maritime   heritage,   the   commercial   function   of   the   port,   supporting  
renewable   technology,   its   Royal   Harbour,   marina,   beach   and   attractive   waterfront,  
provide   a   vibrant   mix   of   town   centre   uses,   with   a   strong   visitor   economy   and   café  
culture.  
●Broadstairs   is   a   charming   and   attractive   town   and   a   popular   location   for   visitors  
and   residents,   who   enjoy   the   flavour   of   its   historic   associations,   range   of   small  
shops   and   restaurants,   beach   and   picturesque   waterfront.  
●Westwood   has   strengthened   its   position   as   a   retail   destination,   as   well   as   being   firmly  
established   as   a   town   centre,   and   has   developed   as   an   integrated   community,   with  
housing,   business,   leisure,   sport   and   recreation,   and   education.   This   has   been  
supported   by   investment   in   transport   infrastructure   creating   a   safe   and   attractive  
pedestrian   environment   at   its   centre.  
●High   quality   new   homes,   as   well   as   the   regeneration   of   Thanet’s   high   quality   historic  
housing,   provide   a   choice   of   homes   for   Thanet’s   residents   and   for   those   who   have  
invested   in,   or   newly   arrived   in   the   area.  
●Cliftonville   has   an   economically   independent,   settled   and   mixed   community   structure,   with  
the   pride   and   confidence   to   invest   in   quality   development   and   care   for   its   local  
environment.  
●The   villages   retain   their   separate   physical   identity,   historic   character   and   have  
vibrant   communities   with   local   facilities   and   services.  
●The   open   countryside   between   the   towns   and   villages   remains   essentially  
undeveloped,   with   a   varied   landscape,   tranquility   and   distinctive   views.   Opportunity   has  
been   taken   to   increase   public   access   and   there   is   a   diverse   agricultural   economic   base,  
including   green   tourism.  
 
The   Local   Plan   Strategy  
24 The   following   sections   set   out   the   key   drivers   for   this   Local   Plan   strategy,   explains  
the   overarching   principles   of   the   strategy   and   context   of   national   planning   policy,   and   the  
need   to   deliver   sustainable   development.  
 
 
 
6   Sustainable   Development  
 
25 The   Local   Plan   is   prepared   by   Thanet   District   Council   under   the   national   planning  
policy   system,   whose   central   principle   is   to   achieve   “sustainable   development‟.   This   may   be  
defined   as   “development   that   meets   the   need   of   the   present   without   compromising   the   ability   of  
future   generations   to   meet   their   own   needs‟.  
 
26 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   sets   out   the   Government’s   view   of  
what   sustainable   development   in   England   means   in   practice   for   the   planning   system.   The  
NPPF   identifies   the   three   dimensions   of   sustainable   development;   economic,   social   and  
environmental;   giving   rise   to   the   need   for   the   planning   system   to   perform   a   number   of   roles:  
 
an   economic   role    –    contributing   to   building   a   strong,   responsive   and   competitive   economy,   by  
ensuring   that   sufficient   land   of   the   right   type   is   available   in   the   right   places   and   at   the   right   time  
to   support   growth   and   innovation;   and   by   identifying   and   coordinating   development  
requirements,   including   the   provision   of   infrastructure;  
 
a   social   role    –    supporting   strong,   vibrant   and   healthy   communities,   by   providing   the   supply  
of   housing   required   to   meet   the   needs   of   present   and   future   generations;   and   by   creating   a  
high   quality   built   environment,   with   accessible   local   services   that   reflect   the   community’s  
needs   and   support   its   health,   social   and   cultural   well-being;   and  
 
an   environmental   role    –    contributing   to   protecting   and   enhancing   our   natural,   built   and   historic  
environment;   and,   as   part   of   this,   helping   to   improve   biodiversity,   use   natural   resources  
prudently,   minimise   waste   and   pollution,   and   mitigate   and   adapt   to   climate   change   including  
moving   to   a   low   carbon   economy.’  
 
27 In   pursuing   sustainable   development,   this   Plan   positively   seeks   opportunities   to   meet   the  
needs   of   the   area,   and   economic,   social   and   environmental   gains   are   sought   jointly   and  
simultaneously.   The   Plan   as   a   whole   sets   out   what   sustainable   development   means   for   Thanet.  
 
28 A   bold   and   positive   strategy   is   needed   in   order   to   achieve   the   Council’s   vision   for   Thanet.  
Realising   the   economic   aspirations   for   the   district   and   improving   the   quality   of   life   for   all   Thanet’s  
residents   will   require   investment   in   new   job   creation,   new   quality   homes,   open   space   and  
infrastructure,   as   well   as   maintaining   and   enhancing   Thanet's   existing   high   quality   built   and  
natural   environment.  
 
29 Although   Thanet   has   historically   experienced   social   and   economic   problems,   the  
Council   has   high   aspirations   for   growth   as   set   out   in   the   Council's   Corporate   Plan   and  
Economic   Growth   Strategy.   The   Local   Plan   looks   to   support   this   by   identifying,   facilitating   and  
helping   to   deliver   the   development   required.   The   NPPF   requires   the   Council   to   plan   positively  
for   economic   growth   and   boost   housing   supply,   which   is   what   this   Plan   seeks   to   achieve.  
 
30 Preparing   this   draft   Local   Plan   has   involved   some   complex   decisions   including   the  
selection   of   key   sites   to   accommodate   new   development.  
 
31 The  levels  of  development  proposed  within  the  draft  Plan  are  based  upon  robust  and  up                
to  date  evidence  of  the  needs  of  the  district.  Thanet’s  population  is  expected  to  grow  significantly                 
over  the  next  20  years,  and  new  homes  and  jobs  are  required  to  support  this.  The  overall                  
strategy  aims  for  an  optimistic  and  aspirational  level  of  economic  growth  necessary  to  bring               
about  the  step  change  that  is  required  in  the  district.  It  also  aims  to  deliver  the  right  number  and                    
mix  of  housing  required  alongside  such  growth,  as  well  as  delivering  new  open  space,  and                
protecting   and   improving   the   quality   of   Thanet’s   existing   built   and   natural   environment.  
 
7   32 It   is   recognised   that   any   growth   in   Thanet   must   be   supported   by   the   necessary  
infrastructure,   such   as   roads,   schools   and   health   facilities.   The   Plan   aims   to   take   a   co-ordinated  
approach   to   delivering   such   facilities   alongside   new   development,   and   the   Council   has   and   will  
continue   to   work   with   other   agencies,   organisations   and   service   providers   to   ensure   that   this   is  
achieved.   This   is   addressed   in   Policy   SP02   and   through   the   draft   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan.  
 
33 The   location   of   growth   set   out   in   this   Plan   is   based   upon   a   district   settlement   hierarchy  
and   the   key   principle   of   focusing   new   development   in   locations   that   are   highly   accessible,   and  
that   can   take   advantage   of   and   support   Thanet’s   existing   infrastructure   and   services.   Thanet’s  
established   settlement   pattern   and   transport   links   have   evolved   over   a   long   period   of   time,   and  
have   been   strongly   influenced   by   its   coastal   location   and   peninsular   geography.   The   hierarchy  
aims   to   inform   and   underpin   policies   in   this   Local   Plan   to   facilitate   growth   in   a   manner   sustainable  
in   the   local   context.  
 
34 A   number   of   sites   and   proposals   are   of   fundamental   importance   to   delivering   the  
objectives   of   the   Local   Plan.   The   locations   of   sites   of   strategic   importance   for   the   Plan   are  
indicated   on   the   Key   Diagram,   and   the   text   of   the   Local   Plan   sets   out   the   relevant   specific  
policies.  
 
 
 
Strategic   Priorities   and   Objectives  
35 The   following   strategic   priorities   and   objectives   set   out   what   this   Plan   is   seeking   to   do   in  
order   to   achieve   the   Council's   vision   and   deliver   sustainable   development   for   the   district.   (No  
order   of   priority   is   implied)  
8    
Strategic   Priority   1    -   Create   additional   employment   and   training   opportunities,   to   strengthen  
and   diversify   the   local   economy   and   improve   local   earning   power   and   employability.  
 
Objectives:  
 
●Support  the  diversification  and  expansion  of  existing  businesses  in  Thanet,  with  a  focus              
on  advanced  manufacturing,  emerging  technologies,  tourism,  culture  and  leisure  ,  and            
provide   the   right   environment   to   attract   inward   investment.  
●Retain   and   attract   skilled   people.  
●Support   the   sustainable   growth   of   Ramsgate   Port.  
●Support   additional   improvements   to   high   speed   rail   links   that   will   achieve   further  
reduction   of   journey   times.  
●Provide   a   sufficient   and   versatile   supply   of   land   to   accommodate   expansion   and  
inward   investment   by   existing   and   new   businesses.  
●Facilitate   the   provision   of   accessible,   modern   and   good   quality   schools,   as   well   as  
higher   and   further   education   and   training   facilities   to   meet   the   expectations   of   employers  
and   of   a   confident,   inclusive   and   skilled   community.  
●a   Take   advantage   of   the   area’s   unique   coast,   countryside,   its   townscape   and   cultural  
heritage   and   potential   of   the   coastal   towns,   while   safeguarding   the   natural  
environment.  
●Support   a   sustainable   rural   economy,   recognising   the   importance   of   best   and   most  
versatile   agricultural   land.  
 
Strategic  Priority  2 -  Facilitate  the  continued  regeneration  of  the  coastal  town  centres,              
developing  their  individual  niche  roles,  while  also  consolidating  the  role  and  function  of              
Westwood   as   Thanet’s   primary   retail   centre,   ensuring   retail   expenditure   is   retained   in   the   district.  
 
Objectives:  
 
●Guide   investment   in   the   coastal   towns   to   support   the   tourism   economy   and   provide   for  
the   needs   of   local   communities.  
●Reshape  Margate  town  centre  and  seafront  to  achieve  a  sustainable  economic            
heart  celebrating  its  traditions  as  a  place  of  relaxation,  leisure  and  seaside  fun  and               
growing   reputation   as   a   cultural   destination.  
●Assist   Ramsgate   to   achieve   its   full   potential   capitalising   on   its   historical   and  
nautical   heritage   and   visitor   economy.  
●Enhance   Broadstairs’   role   as   a   popular   location   for   visitors   and   the   local   community.  
●Enable   Westwood   to   consolidate   and   evolve   as   an   accessible,   successful   and  
sustainable   residential   and   business   community   with   an   excellent   range   of   homes,  
schools,   leisure,   sports,   shops   and   other   facilities   in   an   attractive   environment.  
 
Strategic   Priority   3    -   Provide   homes   that   are   accessible   to,   and   suited   to   the   needs  
and   aspirations   of,   a   settled   and   balanced   community.  
Objectives:  
 
●Plan   for   sufficient   new   homes   to   meet   local   community   need   so   that,   irrespective   of  
income   or   tenure,   people   have   access   to   good   quality   and   secure   accommodation.  
●Meet   the   housing   needs   and   demands   of   a   balanced   and   mixed   community   and   to  
support   economic   growth.  
●Safeguard   family   homes   and   the   character   and   amenity   of   residential   areas.  
●Increase   the   supply   of   good   quality   affordable   homes.  
●Improve   the   environment   and   the   quality   and   mix   of   housing   in   areas   needing  
revitalisation   to   restore   mixed   and   confident   communities.  
9    
Strategic   Priority   4    -   Safeguard   local   distinctiveness   and   promote   awareness,   responsible  
enjoyment,   protection   and   enhancement   of   Thanet's   environment,   including   the   coast,  
countryside,   rich   seaside   heritage,   historic   environment,   diverse   townscapes   and   landscape,  
biodiversity   and   water   environment.  
 
Objectives:  
 
●Accommodate   the   development   needed   to   optimise   access   to   jobs,   key   services   and  
facilities   required   to   promote   the   physical   and   mental   well-being,   independence   and  
quality   of   life   of   all   sections   of   the   community,   and   retain   young   people.  
●Preserve   and   enhance   Thanet’s   exceptional   built   historic   environment   and  
ancient   monuments   and   their   settings,   and   historic   and   designed   landscapes.  
●Safeguard   and   enhance   the   geological   and   scenic   value   of   the   coast   and   countryside,  
and   facilitate   its   responsible   enjoyment   as   a   recreational   and   educational   resource.  
●Conserve   and   enhance   the   character   of   Thanet’s   landscapes,   while   meeting   the  
area’s   social   and   economic   needs  
●Retain   the   separation   between   Thanet’s   towns   and   villages   as   well   as   their   physical  
identity   and   character.  
●Protect,  maintain  and  enhance  the  district’s  biodiversity  and  natural  environment,           
including  open  and  recreational  space  to  create  a  coherent  network  of  Green             
Infrastructure   that   can   better   support   wildlife   and   human   health.  
●Mitigate   and   adapt   to   the   forecast   impacts   of   climate   change   (including   the  
water   environment,   air   quality,   biodiversity   and   flooding).  
●Use   natural   resources   more   efficiently,   increase   energy   efficiency,   the   use   of  
renewable   and   low   carbon   energy   sources,   to   reduce   the   district's   carbon   footprint.  
●Facilitate   improvements   within   areas   characterised   by   poor   quality   housing,   empty  
property   and   poor   physical   environment.  
●Ensure   that   all   new   development   is   built   to   the   highest   attainable   quality   and  
sustainability   standards   and   enhances   its   local   environment.  
●Reduce   opportunities   for   crime   and   the   fear   of   crime  
●Ensure   Thanet's   community   has   access   to   good   quality   social   and   health   services  
●Broaden   and   improve   the   range   of   active   leisure   facilities   to   encourage   greater  
participation   within   the   local   community.  
●Support   the   social,   economic   and   physical   revitalisation   of   Margate   and   Cliftonville   West  
in   line   with   community   aspirations   and   through   partnership   working.  
 
Strategic   Priority   5    -   Deliver   the   infrastructure   required   to   support   existing   communities   and  
new   development,   including   an   efficient   and   effective   transport   system.  
 
Objectives:  
 
●Promote   development   patterns   and   behaviour   that   will   minimise   the   need   to   travel   or  
use   private   cars   to   access   services   and   amenities.  
●Facilitate   the   enhanced   integration   of   the   High   Speed   1   network   with   the   wider   public  
transport   and   highway   network   by   supporting   infrastructure   that   would   maximise   its  
benefits  
●Promote   an   efficient   public   transport   system   alongside   expansion   of   larger   scale  
transport   infrastructure.  
●Facilitate   provision   of   direct   walking   and   cycling   routes   to   reduce   potential  
congestion,   noise   and   pollution.  
●Deliver   required   improvements   to   the   road   network   in   order   to   reduce   congestion  
and   pollution,   and   to   accommodate   new   development.  
●Facilitate   the   provision   of   infrastructure   required   to   support   new   development  
10   and   communities.  
●Ensure   development   safeguards   public   and   commercial   water   supplies   in   the  
principal   chalk   aquifer  
 
 
Development   Strategy   for   Thanet  
 
36 The   development   strategy   for   Thanet   has   been   determined   by   a   number   of   factors,   namely;  
 
●The   size   and   geography   of   the   District   –   Thanet   is   one   of   the   smallest   districts   in   Kent   and   is  
bounded   by   the   sea   on   three   sides.    The   largest   settlements,   including   the   main   towns   of  
Margate,   Broadstairs   and   Ramsgate   follow   the   coastline   and   form   an   almost   continuous  
urban   area,   separated   only   by   Green   Wedges.  
●Significant   policy   constraints   –   the   Thanet   Coast   is   the   subject   of   multiple   national   and  
international   wildlife   designations,   including   Ramsar   Sites,   Special   Protection   Areas   and  
Special   Areas   of   Conservation.    Extensive   areas   to   the   south   and   west   of   the   District   are   also  
subject   to   high   levels   of   flood   risk   associated   with   former   marshland   and   the   Wantsum  
Channel.  
●Best   and   Most   Versatile   Agricultural   Land   -   The   rural   hinterland   beyond   the   urban   area   is  
predominantly   Grade   I   agricultural   land,   with   lower   grade   land   only   existing   in   small,   isolated  
pockets,   often   subject   to   a   high   risk   of   flooding  
 
37 Westwood   is   part   of   the   wider   urban   area   of   Thanet,   and   is   a   major   source   of   employment  
and   retail   facilities.   In   the   previous   Local   Plan,   a   significant   level   of   housing   was   proposed   to  
encourage   a   more   sustainable   pattern   of   development   and   activity.   That   approach   is   continued   in  
this   Plan.  
 
38 For   these   reasons   the   Plan   does   not   set   out   a   settlement   hierarchy.    Instead,   it   supports   the  
principle   of   new   development   throughout   the   urban   area   as   defined   by   the   boundary   on   the   Policies  
Map.     Additional   development   is   also   supported   on   the   edge   of   the   urban   area   across   a   range   of  
allocated   sites   consistent   with   the   findings   of   the   Sustainability   Appraisal.   
 
39 Beyond   the   urban   area   are   seven   rural   villages   of   varying   size,   form   and   character.    Minster  
is   the   largest   of   Thanet’s   rural   villages   and   has   a   good   range   of   services,   and   is   therefore   capable   of  
accommodating   a   higher   level   of   development,   as   set   out   in   this   Plan.  
 
40 There   are   six   smaller   villages   –   Acol,   Cliffsend,   Manston,   Monkton,   Sarre   and   St.Nicholas   –  
which   possess   a   smaller   range   of   local   services   and   public   transport   connections.  
 
41 Housing   allocations   have   been   made   on   a   proportionate   basis   in   the   villages   of   Cliffsend,  
Monkton   and   St.   Nicholas.    However,   Acol,   Sarre   and   Manston   only   have   very   limited   services   and  
facilities   required   to   meet   the   day-to-day   needs   of   their   residents.    New   development   is   therefore  
limited   to   proposals   which   fall   within   the   confines   of   the   village,   and   is   expected   to   be   small   in   scale,  
consistent   with   their   form   and   character.   
 
42 Development   will   be   permitted   within   the   identified   confines   of   the   rural   villages,   as   defined  
on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
SP01   –   Spatial   Strategy   -   Housing  
 
The   primary   focus   for   new   housing   development   in   Thanet   is   the   urban   area   as   identified   on  
the   Policies   Map.  
 
Within   the   Thanet   villages,   housing   development   is   allocated   primarily   in   Minster,   with  
limited   development   at   Cliffsend,   Monkton   and   St   Nicholas.   No   housing   development   is  
11   specifically   allocated   in   Sarre,   Acol   or   Manston,   but   housing   development   of   a   size   and   scale  
commensurate   with   the   size   of   the   relevant   settlement   will   be   permitted   within   village  
confines,   subject   to   other   policy   requirements   of   the   Plan  
 
 
 
Plan   Implementation   and   Infrastructure  
43 The   provision   of   infrastructure   to   support   development   is   vitally   important.   The   Council  
is   working   with   the   relevant   agencies   to   ensure   that   it   is   fully   informed   about   future   infrastructure  
requirements   and   the   timing   of   those   requirements,   and   to   make   sure   that   this   important   social  
and   physical   infrastructure   is   provided   in   a   timely   manner   alongside   new   development.  
 
44 The   Council   has   also   prepared   a   draft   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan   (IDP)   in   conjunction  
with   those   agencies,   setting   out   the   infrastructure   requirements   and   the   known   costs;   the   phasing  
of   the   requirements   and   the   body   responsible   for   ensuring   delivery.   Some   infrastructure   would  
need   to   be   provided   directly   by   a   developer   on   a   given   site;   some   would   be   off-site   infrastructure  
funded   by   a   developer   and   some   would   be   funded   by   other   mechanisms.   The   Council   will   also  
seek   other   forms   of   funding,   as   appropriate,   to   support   the   provision   of   key   infrastructure  
identified   in   the   working   draft   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan.  
 
45 The   IDP   addresses   the   full   range   of   infrastructure   required   to   support   development  
and   is   the   subject   of   ongoing   independent   viability   assessment.  
 
46 The   Council   is   keen   to   ensure   that   the   Local   Plan   is   fully   implemented,   not   just   the  
housing   and   employment   sites,   but   the   full   range   of   policies,   so   that   the   Plan   is   successful   in  
supporting   long-   term   economic   growth   and   regeneration   for   the   area,   and   meeting   the   strategic  
objectives   of   the   Plan.  
 
47 To   this   end,   the   Council   has:  
 
●Prepared   a   draft   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan,   engaging   with   the   relevant   service  
providers   and   others   to   ensure   that   new   housing   development   in   particular,   is   supported  
by   the   requisite   social   and   physical   infrastructure;  
●Carried   out   viability   assessments   to   ensure   that   key   infrastructure   can   be   delivered   at  
the   appropriate   time;  
●Undertaken   various   discussions   with   neighbouring   authorities,   to   ensure   that  
wider   infrastructure   is   considered   as   part   of   the   Plan   process;  
●Sought   to   develop   initiatives,   outside   the   planning   process,   to   encourage   and   attract  
inward   investment,   and   in   particular   development   investment,   to   the   area;   such   as  
maintaining   and   developing   partnerships   with   various   agencies   (such   as   Homes   England)  
and   private   developers   groups   (such   as   the   Kent   Developers   Group);   and  
●Committed   to   the   preparation   of   a   robust   monitoring   framework.  
 
47 The   Council   does   not   consider   that   the   use   of   CPO   powers   will   normally   be   required  
to   implement   the   Plan,   but   it   will   give   consideration   to   their   use   (subject   to   securing   the  
appropriate   indemnity   arrangements   with   developers)   if   critical   sites   or   infrastructure   are  
delayed,   to   the   detriment   of   implementing   the   provisions   of   the   Plan.  
 
48 The   Council   intends   to   monitor   key   elements   of   the   Local   Plan   strategy,   using   the  
Annual   Monitoring   Report   framework,   to   ensure   that   the   overall   strategy   is   delivered.  
 
49 If   monitoring   through   the   AMR   demonstrates   that   the   implementation   of   the   Plan   is  
not   proceeding   as   expected,   the   Council   will   review   the   implementation   process   and   consider  
12   what   measures   need   to   be   taken   to   progress   implementation.  
 
50 The   Council   will   give   due   consideration   to   the   viability   of   individual   developments,   in  
circumstances   where   independent   viability   appraisals   indicate   that   a   particular   development  
cannot   fully   meet   the   infrastructure   requirements   set   out   in   this   Plan.  
 
Policy   SP02   -   Implementation  
All   new   development   will   be   expected   to   fully   meet   its   infrastructure   requirements,  
whether   directly   on   site   and/or   by   way   of   a   contribution   to   necessary   off-site  
infrastructure,   having   regard   to   the   provisions   of   the   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan.   
Provision   should   be   made   in   accordance   with   a   phasing   and   implementation   plan   where  
necessary.    All   such   requirements   will   be   secured   by   means   of   conditions,   legal  
agreements,   Community   Infrastructure   Levy   or   other   appropriate   mechanisms.  
 
The   Council   will   also,   with   partner   organisations   as   appropriate,   seek   to   obtain  
additional   funding   from   other   sources   to   support   infrastructure   provision   including,   the  
strategic   provision   of   services   and   facilities  
 
If   necessary,   the   Council   will   give   consideration   to   the    use    of   other   available  
mechanisms   (such   as   compulsory   purchase*,   Article   4   Directions   and   so   on)   to   ensure  
the   effective   delivery    of   the   overall   planning   strategy   for   the   district.  
 
[*Footnote:   subject   to   appropriate   indemnity   arrangements   being   in   place]  
 
51 The   Council   will   undertake   an   early   review   of   the   Local   Plan   as   set   out   in   Policy   SP03.   There  
are   several   matters   that   need   consideration,   as   a   result   of   changing   circumstances:   
 
●To   consider   the   implications   of   climate   change;   
●To   review   the   provisions   of   the   Plan   in   relation   to   Manston   Airport   in   the   light   of   a   decision   on   the  
Development   Consent   Order;  
●To   assess   the   implications   of   the   Local   Housing   Need   Methodology   on   housing   requirements   for  
the   district;  
●To   consider   the   provision   of   Gypsy   &   Traveller   sites   to   meet   the   requirements   set   out   in   Policy  
HO22;   and  
●To   ensure   compatibility   with   the   most   recent   National   Planning   Policy   Framework.  
 
52 There   may   be   other   issues   that   arise   that   need   to   be   addressed   through   the   review   of   the  
Plan.  
 
Policy   SP03   -   Local   Plan   Review  
 
Within   six   months   of   the   adoption   of   the   Local   Plan,   the   Council   shall   undertake   and   complete   a  
review   of   the   Plan    with   information   published   as   part   of   an   updated   Local   Development   Scheme  
setting   out   a   timetable   for   the   completion   of   the   review   and   any   update   as   may   be   required .  
 
 
Monitoring   and   Review  
53 The   Council   is   committed   to   monitoring   the   implementation   of   the   Local   Plan   and   to  
undertaking   what   actions   it   can   to   support   delivery   of   the   strategic   objectives   of   the   Plan,   and   the  
individual   development   proposals.  
 
54 Development   monitoring   takes   place   on   a   rolling   annual   basis   through   the  
13   housing   and   commercial   information   audits,   and   the   preparation   of   the   Annual  
Monitoring   Report.  
 
55 It   is   the   Council’s   intention   to   monitor   a   focussed   set   of   key   indicators,   which   will   give  
a   clear   indication   of   how   successful   the   Local   Plan   Strategy   is.   These   indicators   will   relate   to  
key   work   areas;   for   example:  
 
●Delivery   of   key   housing   and   employment   sites  
●Delivery   of   key   elements   of   the   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan  
●Key   environmental   indicators,   such   as   national   and   international   wildlife   sites;   quality  
of   development   in   conservation   areas;   maintenance   of   variety   of   beaches/seafronts  
●Effectiveness   of   the   mitigation   scheme   (Strategic   Access   Management   and  
Monitoring   strategy)   for   the   Special   Protection   Area.  
  
14   1-   Job   Growth   Strategy  
1.1 The   Local   Plan's   job   growth   strategy   sets   out   how   the   Thanet's   economy   should   grow,  
develop   and   create   new   jobs   and   prosperity   over   the   plan   period.   The   strategy   is   based   upon   a  
positive   and   optimistic   level   of   growth.   The   strategy   explains   where   the   growth   is   expected   to  
take   place,   and   what   the   Local   Plan   is   doing   to   support   this,   alongside   the   Economic   Growth  
Strategy   for   Thanet   November   2016.  
 
1.2 One   of   the   core   principles   of   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   is   to  
proactively   drive   and   support   sustainable   economic   development   to   deliver   the   homes,   business  
and   industrial   units,   infrastructure   and   thriving   local   places   that   the   country   needs.   It   states   that  
planning   authorities   should   set   out   a   clear   economic   vision   and   strategy   for   their   areas   which  
positively   and   proactively   encourage   sustainable   growth,   identify   strategic   sites   to   meet  
anticipated   needs   over   the   plan   period,   support   existing   business   sectors   and   plan   for   new   and  
emerging   sectors.   Policies   should   be   flexible   to   accommodate   needs   not   anticipated   and   to   allow  
rapid   responses   to   changes   in   the   economy.   It   also   states   that   clusters   or   networks   of  
knowledge-driven,   creative   high-   technology   industries   should   be   planned   for,   priority   areas   for  
economic   regeneration   and   infrastructure   provision,   and   environmental   enhancement   should   be  
identified,   and   flexible   working   practices   such   as   the   integration   of   residential   and   commercial  
uses   within   the   same   unit   should   be   facilitated.  
 
1.3 It   further   states   that   plans   should   avoid   the   long   term   protection   of   sites   allocated   for  
employment   use   where   there   is   no   reasonable   prospect   of   the   site   being   used   for   that   purpose.  
The   Council   has   reviewed   all   allocated   employment   sites   and   has   retained   only   those   which   are  
in   accordance   with   the   NPPF.  
 
1.4 The   NPPF   states   that   plans   should   recognise   town   centres   as   the   heart   of   their  
communities   and   support   their   vitality   and   viability,   promote   competitive   town   centres   that   provide  
customer   choice   and   a   diverse   retail   offer,   retain   and   enhance   existing   markets   and   introduce  
new   ones,   and   allocate   a   range   of   suitable   sites   to   meet   the   scale   and   type   of   retail,   leisure,  
commercial,   office,   tourism,   cultural,   community   and   residential   development   needed.  
 
1.5 The   NPPF   also   states   that   Local   Plans   should   support   the   sustainable   growth   and  
expansion   of   all   types   of   business   and   enterprise   in   the   rural   areas,   promote   the   development  
and   diversification   of   agricultural   and   other   land   based   rural   businesses,   support   sustainable   rural  
tourism   and   leisure   developments   that   benefits   businesses   in   the   rural   area   and   promote   the  
retention   and   development   of   local   services   and   community   facilities.   The   Plan's   evidence   base  
should   assess   the   needs   of   the   food   production   industry   and   any   barriers   to   investment   that  
planning   can   resolve.  
 
1.6 Thanet   has   a   diverse   economy   which   is   currently   strong   in   the   education   and   health  
sectors   and   traditionally   has   seen   above   average   representation   of   retail   and   public  
administration.   Evidence   shows   that   the   tourism   is   doing   very   well   and   is   gaining   momentum  
year   on   year.   Green   technology   is   currently   doing   well   and   advanced   manufacturing  
technologies   are   expected   to   increase   in   the   district.  
 
1.7 Thanet's   business   parks   have   been   slow   to   develop   leaving   a   significant   amount   of   land  
available   which   in   itself   is   an   opportunity.   This   land   is   beginning   to   be   delivered   which   is   positive  
but   as   evidence   suggests   that   only   30%   of   future   jobs   will   be   in   traditional   office,   industrial   and  
warehouse   (Class   B)   type   uses   that   are   often   located   on   business   parks   and   a   more   flexible  
approach   to   Thanet's   employment   land   is   required.   A   range   of   employment   sites   is   needed   to  
cater   for   all   types   of   employment   generating   development.  
 
15   1.8 Thanet   also   benefits   from   an   international   port   which   offers   significant   potential   to  
deliver   job   growth   and   connections   to   Europe.   Ramsgate   Port   is   a   major   infrastructure   asset  
and   potential   catalyst   for   growth.   It   is   important   for   the   manufacturing   and   green   sectors   and  
as   a   wharf   for   the   movement   of   minerals.   The   Council   supports   the   growth   of   port   related   uses  
and   would   wish   ultimately   to   see   the   reintroduction   of   a   roll-on/roll-off   passenger   ferry   service.  
 
1.9 Tourism   has   historically   been   at   the   heart   of   Thanet's   economy   and   continues   to   be   a  
vitally   important   component   of   Thanet's   economy   along   with   retail   and   leisure   which   have   been  
particularly   strong.   Thanet's   strength   in   the   visitor   economy   stems   from   the   attractive   sandy  
beaches   in   close   proximity   to   London,   the   established   successful   tourist   destination   of  
Broadstairs,   the   development   of   the   Turner   Contemporary   Gallery   and   the   strong   character   of  
Thanet   as   a   traditional   tourist   destination.   Thanet   also   contains   a   wealth   of   heritage   assets   which  
are   attractive   to   visitors   with   around   2,000   listed   buildings.  
 
1.10The   most   recent   tourism   research   commissioned   by   Visit   Kent   shows   the   total  
economic   impact   of   tourism   in   Thanet   was   £293   million   in   2015.   A   good   visitor   economy   can  
also   provide   benefits   for   Thanet   residents   in   terms   of   leisure   facilities,   attractive   public   realm  
and   quality   of   life   which   in   turn   attract   business   to   the   area.   It   is   therefore   of   primary   importance  
to   support   the   tourism   economy.  
 
1.11In   delivering   growth   in   tourism,   the   main   challenge   is   to   increase   visitor   spend   in   Thanet,  
which   can   be   achieved   by   encouraging   the   overnight   visitor   and   developing   more   of   a   year-round  
offer.   The   Council   is   committed   to   addressing   this   and   has   adopted   a   Destination   Management  
Plan   (DMP)   which   focuses   on   individual   projects   bringing   together   a   variety   of   stakeholders   to  
improve   beach   management,   facilitate   coastal   regeneration   and   develop   a   shared   story   to  
improve   marketing   for   visitors.  
 
1.12In   Thanet's   town   centres   there   is   opportunity   to   capitalise   on   heritage   assets   and   cultural  
and   creative   industries,   creating   vibrant   hubs   of   innovation   and   entrepreneurship.   This   is  
increasingly   the   trend   in   Margate,   particularly   the   Old   Town   which   has   a   number   of   cultural   and  
creative   industries.   The   Heritage   Action   Zone   in   Ramsgate   also   looks   to   achieve   economic  
growth   by   using   the   historic   environment   as   a   catalyst.   Research   from   2016   has   found   that  
creative   businesses   in   Thanet   have   grown   by   84%   in   four   years.   It   is   recognised   that   Thanet’s  
developing   cultural   and   creative   industry   is   an   important   component   of   the   district’s   economic  
and   social   profile.    It   is,   therefore,   also   important   that   it   is   both   supported   and   encouraged   to  
grow.   
 
1.13Thanet's   manufacturing   base   has   traditionally   been   characterised   by   small   scale  
business   which   are   fundamentally   important   to   Thanet's   economy   and   it   is   imperative   that  
existing   and   new   micro   businesses   are   supported.   These   smaller   manufacturing   firms   require  
smaller   industrial   units   and   it   is,   therefore,   important   within   the   strategy   to   protect   our   existing  
fit   for   purpose   sites.   There   also   has   to   be   consideration   of   grow   on   space   as   local   businesses  
grow   and   require   larger   premises.   This   will   keep   successful   businesses   local   to   the   area   and  
provide   economic   sustainability.  
 
1.1430%   of   overall   job   growth   is   still   likely   to   be   from   the   development   in   B   use   classes  
found   on   business   parks.   Many   existing   businesses   in   Thanet   need   space   for   growth   and   the  
availability   of   suitable   premises   is   a   challenge   to   be   overcome,   particularly   the   availability   of  
spec   units   which   individual   companies   do   not   have   the   capacity   to   build.  
 
1.15There   has   been   growth   in   low   carbon   goods   and   services,   renewable   energy,  
advanced   manufacturing   and   service   businesses.   These   sectors   are   likely   to   deliver   some   job  
growth   over   the   plan   period.   Thanet   has   already   seen   above   average   development   of   offshore  
wind   farms,   solar   farms,   anaerobic   digesters   and   other   renewable   sources   of   energy  
16   production   particularly   located   around   the   former   Richborough   Power   Station   site.   Thanet  
Earth   is   a   prime   example   of   cutting   edge   "agritech"   technology.   It   is   important   that   sufficient  
employment   land   is   available   to   facilitate   any   future   growth.  
 
1.16Improving   education   and   skills   in   Thanet   in   partnership   with   the   private   sector   is   an  
important   part   of   growing   the   economy.   The   Plan   seeks   to   support   the   provision   of   these   facilities  
particularly   the   expansion   and   diversification   of   further   and   higher   education.  
1.17Canterbury   Christ   Church   University   is   pioneering   the   STEM   agenda   by   operating   as   Kent  
&   Medway   STEM   (Science,   Technology,   Engineering   and   Maths)   providing   information   and   links  
to   STEM   Enhancement   &   Enrichment   (E&E)   activities.   This   enables   young   people   to   make  
informed   decisions   about   future   career   paths   in   and   from   STEM,   provides   teachers   with   impartial  
information   and   support   to   enable   them   to   deliver   STEM   curriculum,   support   industry   in   reducing  
the   STEM   skills   gap   and   raises   the   profile   of   science   and   engineering   in   the   region.   This   is   a  
significant   opportunity   for   the   area.  
 
1.18Thanet's   current   employment   offer   and   relatively   peripheral   location   combined   with  
improving   transport   and   communications   infrastructure   means   that   a   certain   level   of   commuting  
is   expected.   Currently   the   majority   of   working   age   people   that   live   in   Thanet   work   in   Thanet   but   a  
significant   number   commute   to   the   neighbouring   districts   of   Dover   and   Canterbury,   as   well   as  
further   afield.   Improved   rail   linkages   in   the   future   could   expand   this.   This   is   not   necessarily   a  
harmful   trend   as   it   brings   wealth   to   the   area   and   better   access   to   jobs   which   increases   local  
consumer   spend,   further   strengthening   the   retail   and   leisure   professions.   It   is   envisaged  
particularly   that   the   Discovery   Park   Enterprise   Zone   established   in   Sandwich   following   the  
closure   of   the   Pfizer   pharmaceutical   plant,   will   impact   upon   out   commuting   levels,   but   its   close  
proximity   to   Thanet   is   beneficial   in   terms   of   retention   of   wealth   in   the   area   as   well   as   potential  
relocation   of   firms   to   Thanet's   nearby   employment   sites.   The   proximity   of   the   Enterprise   Zone   to  
Thanet   is   positive   for   employment   and   Thanet's   economic   strategy   takes   account   of   this   in   order  
to   complement   Discovery   Park   and   benefit   from   it.  
 
1.19Thanet   has   7   rural   settlements   with   a   population   of   around   6,000   residents   which   make  
up   just   4%   of   the   population.   The   employment   land   review   concludes   that   Thanet   has   quite   a  
low   representation   of   rural   employment   enterprises   when   compared   to   the   rest   of   the   south  
east   with   less   than   10%   of   VAT   registered   premises   being   located   in   the   rural   areas.  
Nonetheless   the   Council   wishes   to   support   rural   economic   development   of   an   appropriate  
scale.  
 
1.20Thanet   currently   has   a   high   proportion   of   people   who   work   from   home.   With   anticipated  
growth   in   housing   it   is   considered   that   with   appropriate   digital   infrastructure   and   business  
support   those   sustainable   enterprising   communities   can   be   created.  
 
1.21Given   that   Thanet   has   a   diverse   economy   a   flexible   economic   strategy   is   needed   in  
order   to   accommodate   all   employment   generating   uses.   Future   job   growth   in   Thanet   is   expected  
to   remain   strong   in   town   centre   uses,   as   well   as   in   public   administration   and   education.   Thanet  
is   a   popular   retirement   area   and   this   brings   with   it   benefits   to   the   economy   particularly   in   terms  
of   the   health   and   caring   professions   which   are   expected   to   grow.  
 
1.22The   Economic   Growth   Strategy   for   Thanet   identified   transformational   initiatives   to   focus  
on   to   deliver   employment   growth.   These   are:  
 
 
●Developing   the   Port   at   Ramsgate  
●Investing   in   high   value   manufacturing   and   engineering   across   Thanet   and   east   Kent  
●Position   Thanet   as   a   global   agritech   hub  
●Promoting   Thanet's   broader   cultural/leisure   offer  
17   ●Cultivating   the   creative   industries   across   Thanet  
●Designing   enterprise   into   new   communities  
●Long   term   feasibility   modelling   for   Margate   and   Ramsgate  
 
1.23The   overall   target   is   to   deliver   a   minimum   of   5,000   jobs   across   the   district   during   the  
plan   period   to   2031   concentrating   on   the   transformational   initiatives   coupled   with   improved  
transport   and   communications   infrastructure.  
 
1.24Job   growth   in   the   district   will   be   supported,   promoted   and   delivered   by;  
 
●supporting   the   growth   of   port   related   uses   at   Ramsgate   Port.  
●allocation   and   retention   of   employment   land   and   premises   that   are   fit   for   purpose   across   the  
district;  
●flexibility   of   uses   on   some   employment   land;  
●allocation   of   vibrant   town   centres   able   to   accommodate   a   wide   range   of   compatible   uses  
reflecting   their   individual   characters   and   economies;  
●recognising   the   important   role   of   cultural   and   creative   industries   in   the   regeneration   and  
reinvigoration   of   Thanet's   towns;  
●being   flexible   with   regard   to   holiday   accommodation   reflected   and   supported   by   the   Council's  
Destination   Management   Plan;  
●providing   for   cultural   and   creative   industries   within   the   town   centres  
●providing   suitable   and   sufficient   employment   land   to   support   growth   in   advanced  
manufacturing;   and  
●nurturing   workforce   skills   by   supporting   education   and   skills   facilities.  
 
1.25It   is   not   possible   to   predict   or   plan   specifically   for   the   needs   of   all   significant   job   creating  
development   proposals   that   may   arise   over   the   lifetime   of   the   Plan   and   only   30%   or  
employment   growth   is   expected   to   be   in   the   B   use   classes   that   are   traditionally   located   on  
business   parks.   The   Council   wishes   to   plan   positively   for   all   kinds   of   employment   generating  
development   taking   account   of   relevant   environmental   and   countryside   policies   and   the  
aspirations   of   the   strategic   priorities.   Account   will   also   be   taken   of   prospective   benefits   arising  
from   additional   and   better   paid   local   employment.  
 
The   following   policy   sets   out   the   Job   Growth   Strategy   for   this   Plan.  
 
 
Policy   SP04   -   Economic   Growth  
A   minimum   of   5,000   additional   jobs   are   planned   for   in   Thanet   to   2031.  
 
The   aim   is   to   accommodate   inward   investment   in   job   creating   development,   the  
establishment   of   new   businesses   and   expansion   and   diversification   of   existing  
firms.   Sufficient   sites   and   premises   suited   to   the   needs   of   business   are   identified  
and   safeguarded   for   such   uses.   Manston   Business   Park   is   the   key   location   for  
advanced   manufacturing   and   large   scale   job   creating   development.  
 
Land   is   identified   and   allocated   to   accommodate   up   to   53.5ha   of   employment   space   over   the   period   to  
2031.   Land   and   premises   considered   suitable   for   continued   and   future   employment   use   will   be   identified  
and   protected   for   such   purpose.     Within   the   urban   area,   and   the   confines   of   villages   as   defined   on  
the   policies   map,   proposals   for   employment   generating   development   on   non-allocated   sites   will  
be   supported   in   principle,   subject   to   meeting   the   requirements   of   other   policies   in   the   Plan.   
 
 
Thanet's   town   centres   are   priority   areas   for   regeneration   and   employment  
18   generating   development,   including   tourism   and   the   cultural   and   creative   industries  
which   will   be   supported.   
 
The   growth   of   the   Port   of   Ramsgate   is   supported   as   a   source   of   employment   and   as  
an   attractor   of   inward   investment.  
 
New   tourism   development,   which   would   extend   or   upgrade   the   range   of   tourist  
facilities   particularly   those   that   attract   the   staying   visitor,   increase   the   attraction   of  
tourists   to   the   area   and   extend   the   season,   will   be   supported.  
 
Development   is   supported   that   enhances   the   rural   economy   subject   to   protecting   the  
character,   quality   and   function   of   Thanet's   rural   settlements   and   natural  
environments.  
 
 
Employment   Land  
1.26The   employment   land   strategy   sets   out   how   the   Council   proposes   to   support   job   growth  
through   the   allocation   of   employment   land   for   development,   the   safeguarding   of   existing  
premises   and   flexibility   regarding   the   types   of   development   considered   appropriate.   The   supply  
of   employment   land   is   supported   by   the   town   centre   strategy   which   also   provides   land   for  
economic   development   and   job   growth.  
 
1.27The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   that   local   planning   authorities  
set   out   a   clear   economic   vision   and   strategy   for   their   area   which   positively   and   proactively  
encourages   sustainable   growth,   identify   strategic   sites   to   meet   anticipated   needs   over   the   plan  
period,   support   existing   business   sectors   and   plan   for   new   and   emerging   sectors.   It   also   requires  
flexibility   and   states   that   the   long   term   protection   of   sites   with   little   chance   of   being   used   for  
employment   purposes   should   be   avoided.  
 
1.28In   accordance   with   the   NPPF   an   assessment   of   current   and   future   growth   sectors   has  
been   carried   out   along   with   an   assessment   of   Thanet's   employment   sites   and   land   available.  
 
1.29Forecasts  show  that  Thanet  will  need  in  the  region  of  15  ha  of  employment  land  (B1,  B2                  
and  B8  uses)  over  the  plan  period.  Methodology  and  discussion  of  this  is  contained  in  the                 
employment   growth   topic   paper   and   the   Economic   and   Employment   Assessment   2012.  
 
1.30There   is   a   need   to   provide   land   for   potential   inward   investment   and   for   growing   existing  
businesses   to   relocate   to.   There   is   also   a   need   for   affordable   premises   for   the   indigenous  
market   and   start   up   space   also   fulfills   an   important   role.  
 
1.31Thanet   needs   to   cater   mainly   for   small   to   medium   sized   businesses   and   tourism   related  
trade.   Some   land   needs   to   be   made   available   for   larger   businesses   but   some   of   these   types   of  
businesses   may   be   drawn   towards   Discovery   Park   Enterprise   Zone   and   Thanet's   employment  
allocations   will   complement   this   trend.   Some   larger   established   sites   such   as   Pysons   Road,  
Haine   Road   and   Westwood   Industrial   Estate   are   in   need   of   some   investment   to   secure   their  
renewal   and/or   upgrade.   Good   quality,   popular   sites   that   are   within   the   urban   and   rural   confines  
are   retained   and   protected.   Of   particular   importance   are   quality   sites   that   support   Thanet's   small  
and   medium   enterprises   such   as   Manston   Green.   As   far   as   possible   there   is   a   balanced  
distribution   of   sites   across   the   district.  
 
 
19   1.32There   is   a   need   to   keep   a   range   of   sites   for   cheap   premises   and   business   start   ups.  
Thanet   also   needs   to   retain   some   sites   that   can   accommodate   uses   such   as   paint   spraying   and  
tyre   recycling.   The   range   of   sites   includes   some   in   the   rural   area   to   support   the   rural   economy.   A  
"flagship"   site   for   inward   investment   that   can   also   accommodate   growing   indigenous   businesses  
is   provided   for   at   Manston   Business   Park.   There   is   also   a   need   for   "flexible"   sites   where  
alternative   non   Class   B   uses   will   be   allowed.   This   reflects   the   current   trend   and   ensures   land   is  
provided   to   meet   all   types   of   economic   development.    For   the   purposes   of   applying   Policy   SP03  
flexible   uses   include   leisure,   tourism   and   other   town   centre   uses   which,   due   to   scale   and   format  
cannot   be   accommodated   within   town   centres.   They   also   include   uses   known   as   sui   generis  
which   do   not   fall   into   a   category   in   the   Use   Classes   Order.   These   include   uses   such   as   car  
showrooms   and   crèches.  
 
1.33Thanet's   portfolio   of   employment   sites   caters   for   all   of   these   uses   both   in   terms   of   new  
sites   and   existing   sites   protected   for   future   employment   purposes.   The   following   policy  
identifies   Thanet's   employment   allocations,   where   new   employment   generating   development  
will   be   promoted   and   supported.   These   sites   are   shown   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
Policy   SP05   -   Land   Allocated   for   Economic   Development  
The   following   sites   are   allocated   for   business   and   employment   generating   purposes:  
 
 
 Total   Site  
Area   (ha)  Remaining  
employment  
allocation  
(ha)  
Manston   Business  
Park,   Manston  75.2  42.53  
Eurokent   (part)*,  
Ramsgate  38.6  5.45  
Thanet   Reach  
Business   Park,  
Broadstairs  9.74  3.7  
Hedgend   Industrial  
Estate,   St   Nicholas  2.46  1.61  
TOTAL  126  53.29  
 
At   Manston   Business   Park   and   Hedgend   Industrial   Estate   development   will   be   restricted  
to   use   classes   B1   (business),   B2   (general   industry)   and   B8   (storage   and   distribution).  
Eurokent   is   allocated   for   flexible   business   use   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP09   (2)*  
Thanet   Reach   Business   Park   is   also   suitable   for   education   related   uses   as   well   as   B1  
and   B8   uses.  
 
*   Eurokent   is   a   flexible   employment   site,   where   a   wider   range   of   employment  
generating   uses   will   be   allowed   in   addition   to   B1,   B2   and   B8   uses.   Development   must  
be   compatible   with   neighbouring   uses.   Proposals   for   main   town   centre   uses   over   and  
above   2000sqm   for   which   planning   permission   has   already   been   granted   should  
comply   with   Policy   E05   -   the   sequential   test.   Flexible   employment   uses   will   be  
expected   to   contribute   towards   the   Local   Employment   and   Training   Fund.  
 
Development   proposals   must   provide   for   at   least   one   electric   vehicle   charging   point   for   every  
10   spaces   provided.  
 
20   Manston   Business   Park  
1.34Manston  Business  Park  is  a  prime  business  investment  location,  being  strategically            
located  at  the  centre  of  Thanet  and  adjacent  to  the  former  Manston  Airport.  It  also  has  easy                  
accessibility  from  the  centres  of  population,  the  port  at  Ramsgate  and  excellent  road  links  to  the                 
rest   of   Kent   and   the   UK   via   the   A299   and   M2.  
 
1.35Approximately   half   of   the   site   is   owned   by   East   Kent   Opportunities   which   is   a   joint   venture  
between   Kent   County   Council   and   Thanet   District   Council.   The   aim   for   the   joint   venture   is   to  
bring   forward   economic   growth   and   regeneration   in   Thanet.   Manston   Business   Park   is  
approximately   half   developed,   and   there   is   some   infrastructure   in   place   ready   for   the   rest   of   the  
site   to   be   developed.   Whilst   development   on   the   site   has   been   slow   to   come   forward   in   the   past,  
more   recent   developments   have   included   speculative   business   units,   and   purpose   built  
accommodation.   The   site   provides   a   good   opportunity   for   the   relocation   of   existing   growing  
business.  
 
1.36The   focus   for   development   of   the   site   should   be   office,   industrial   and   warehousing,  
whilst   some   mixed   use   including   additional   business   support   services   and   training   facilities  
which   demand   a   location   outside   of   Westwood   and   of   the   coastal   urban   belt   will   be  
considered   appropriate,   where   this   would   serve   to   attract   new   or   support   existing   job   creating  
development.  
 
1.37Development   on   this   site   will   be   expected   to   contribute   to   the   delivery   of   the   transport  
strategy   particularly   the   extension   of   Columbus   Avenue   and   improvements   to   Spitfire   junction.  
 
 
Policy   SP06   -   Manston   Business   Park  
Manston   Business   Park   is   allocated   and   safeguarded   for   business   purposes   within  
classes   B1   (business),   B2   (general   industry)   and   B8   (storage   and   distribution).  
 
Development   proposals   will   need   to   comply   with   all   of   the   following   criteria:   
 
1)Provide   Green   Infrastructure   to    ensure   that   proposals   take   into   account   the  
location   of   the   site   and   the   rural   character   and   appearance   of   the   immediate  
surrounding   area   
2)Provide   necessary   on-site   transport   infrastructure   and   proportionate  
contributions   to   the   improvement   of   the   ‘Spitfire   Junction’   and   the   Columbus  
Avenue   extension   
 
 
Manston   Airport  
 
1.38The   Council   recognises   that   proposals   being   put   forward   by   River   Oak   Strategic   Partners  
for   an    airport   operation   at   the   site,   through   a   proposed   development   consent   order   (DCO),  
pursuant   to   the   Planning   Act   2008.    The   application   is   before   the   Secretary   of   State   for  
consideration   and   the   proposals   are   subject   to   thorough   scrutiny   as   part   of   this   process.   A   DCO,  
if   granted,   would   give   consent   for   the   project   in   recognition   of   its   national   importance   and   may  
also   include   authorisation   for   the   compulsory   acquisition   of   land   to   assist   in   the   achievement   of   its  
objectives.   
 
1.39If   a   DCO   for   Airport   use   is   granted,   the   early   review   of   the   Plan   will   need   to   take   this   into  
21   account   as   well   as   its   implications   for   other   policies   in   the   Plan   and   consequential   land   use  
considerations.   In   the   event   that   the   DCO   is   not   granted   or   does   not   proceed,   the   Council   will  
similarly   need   to   consider   the   most   appropriate   use   for   the   site   as   part   of   the   early   review.  
 
Policy   SP07   –   Manston   Airport  
 
Manston   Airport   as   identified   on   the   Policies   Map   is   safeguarded   for   airport   related   uses.  
Whether   or   not   the   DCO   is   confirmed,   the   future   use   and   development   of   Manston   Airport  
and/or   other   policies   affected   by   the   outcome   of   the   DCO   process   will   be   determined  
through   the   early   review   of   the   Plan.   
  
22    
 
2-   Town   Centre   Strategy  
2.1 The   town   centre   strategy   sets   out   how   Thanet's   town   centres   will   develop,   the  
inter-relationship   between   them,   and   how   the   towns'   commercial   functions   will   support   and  
contribute   to   the   overall   economic   strategy   for   the   district.  
 
2.2 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   states   that   planning   policies   should   be  
positive   and   promote   competitive   town   centre   environments   and   set   out   policies   for   their  
management   and   growth   over   the   plan   period.   Plans   should   recognise   town   centres   as   the  
heart   of   the   community   and   pursue   their   vitality   and   viability.   A   network   of   centres   should   be  
defined   that   reflects   the   relationship   between   them   in   order   to   guide   future   development.  
 
2.3 The   strategy   for   Thanet's   town   centres   seeks   to   reinforce   the   different   but   complementary  
roles   of   the   primary   centre   at   Westwood   and   of   the   coastal   town   centres   of   Margate,   Ramsgate  
and   Broadstairs.   The   objectives   of   the   hierarchy   are   to:  
 
●Safeguard   and   sustain   Westwood's   role   in   preventing   retail   expenditure   leaking   outside  
the   district.  
●Enable   the   coastal   towns   to   achieve   and   maintain   a   viable,   diverse   and   sustainable  
commercial   base.  
●Ensure   the   scale   of   development   at   the   District   and   Local   Centres   is   sufficient   to   serve  
local   catchments   but   not   harmful   to   the   function   of   the   town   centres.  
●Allow   residential   development   in   locations   that   support   the   function   of   the   town   centres.  
 
2.4 The   Council   is   required   to   set   out   a   network   and   hierarchy   of   centres.   Identifying   the  
existing   hierarchy   provides   an   understanding   of   the   role   and   function   of   the   town   centres   and  
their   inter-   relationship.   A   major   factor   in   determining   the   role   of   the   centres   is   the   catchment  
which   they   serve.   Canterbury   is   the   pre-dominant   centre   in   the   wider   sub   region   of   East   Kent.  
Thanet's   hierarchy   of   centres   is   set   out    i n   Policy   SP06   below:  
 
2.5 The   retail   hierarchy   demonstrates   an   understanding   of   how   town   centres   interact   with  
one   another   at   district   and   sub-regional   levels.   It   is   not   designed   to   favour   one   centre   over  
another   and   does   not   in   itself   direct   investment   decisions.  
 
2.6 Thanet   currently   retains   84%   of   retail   expenditure   within   the   district   and   given   this  
healthy   retention   rate   there   is   no   need   to   increase   Thanet's   market   share   within   the   sub   region.  
However,  
in   order   to   maintain   the   current   market   share   the   following   growth   will   be   required   over   the  
plan   period:  
 
●24,567   square   metres   of   floorspace   selling   comparison   (high   street   style)   goods.  
The   majority   of   this   is   needed   at   Westwood   which   requires   16,787   square   metres.  
●1,255   square   metres   of   floorspace   selling   convenience   goods   and   4,338   square  
metres   of   A2-A5   floorspace   is   needed   across   Thanet.  
 
2.7 Convenience   retailing   is   currently   skewed   towards   the   large   supermarkets   clustered  
around   the   Westwood   area   and   this   trend   is   likely   to   continue.   However,   the   Council   would   like  
to   encourage   more   convenience   provision   within   the   coastal   town   centres.  
 
2.8 In   addition   to   this,   an   assessment   has   been   made   of   other   uses   that   are   traditionally  
found   in   high   street   locations   and   support   the   retail   function   of   centres   -   these   include   uses   such  
23   as   banks,   building   societies,   restaurants,   take   aways,   and   drinking   establishments   and   are  
known   in   planning   terms   as   the   A2-A5   use   classes.   The   assessment   concluded   that   a   total   of  
3,499   square   metres   of   such   floorspace   is   needed   in   the   district   to   support   the   retail   function   of  
town   centres.   Much   of   this   is   shown   to   be   needed   at   Westwood   although   uses   such   as  
restaurants   would   support   the   tourism   appeal   of   the   coastal   town   centres.  
 
2.9 Town   centres   are   hubs   of   the   community   and   as   such   are   not   just   retail   areas.   They  
contain   a   number   of   uses   including   leisure   and   tourism.   Although   no   need   for   major   commercial  
leisure   facilities   such   as   cinemas   has   been   identified,   there   is   a   need   to   be   flexible   within   the  
town   centres   in   order   to   support   the   tourism   economy.  
 
Table   1   below   sets   out   the   retail   need   for   Thanet's   town   centres   (gross   floorspace)  
 
Table   1*   -   Indicative   retail   need   for   Thanet's   town   centres   to   2031   (gross)  
 
 Convenience  
sqm  Comparison   (high   street   goods)  
sqm  A2-A5   uses  
sqm  Total   Need  
sqm  
Westwood  -  16,787  910  17,697  
Margate  700  1,853  496  3,049  
Broadstairs  1,650  2,143  1,161  4,954  
Ramsgate  783  2,822  932  4,537  
 
*This   gives   an   indication   of   the   quantitative   level   of   retail   need   and   shouldn't   be  
applied   rigidly.   It   should   be   regarded   as   a   guide   rather   than   a   target.  
 
 
Policy   SP08   -   Thanet's   Town   Centres  
Provision  is  made  for  main  town  centre  uses  reflecting  the  individual  role,  character              
and  heritage  of  the  town  centres  (as  identified  on  the  Policies  Map),  including  provision               
for  retail  development  as  referred  in  Table  1  above(see  policies  SP09  to  SP12              
respectively).  
 
Thanet’s   retail   centre   hierarchy   is   as   follows:  
 
Westwood   -   this   centre   sits   at   the   top   of   the   hierarchy   as   it   caters   for   high   order   need,   attracts  
the   major   national   retailers   and   has   a   catchment   that   covers   the   whole   of   Thanet   as   well  
extending   to   areas   outside   of   the   district.  
 
Coastal   Town   Centres   -   Margate,   Broadstairs   and   Ramsgate.   The   catchments   of   these   town  
centres   are   their   individual   town   populations   and   tourist   trade   with   a   wide   range   of   shops   to  
cater   for   everyday   need,   special   interest   and   tourism.   These   towns   have   traditionally   attracted  
national   retailers   and   services   as   well   as   local   businesses.  
 
  District   Centres   -   Cliftonville,   Westgate,   Birchington   and   Minster.   These   centres   cater   for   local  
needs   and   services.   They   serve   large   residential   and   semi-rural   locations   but   catchments   are  
limited   and   these   locations   are   not   appropriate   for   large   scale   retail   development.  
 
Local   Centres   -   Several   across   the   district   such   as   Westbrook   and   St   Peter's   (defined   in   Policy  
E06).   These   cater   for   a   more   restricted   local   need   and   tend   to   have   a   small   catchment.   These  
centres   provide   services   such   as   takeaways,   hairdressers   and   small   convenience   stores.  
Business   is   often   local   rather   than   the   national   multiples.   These   centres   are   not   appropriate   for  
large   scale   retail   development.  
24    
Westwood  
2.10The   key   issues   for   Westwood   are:  
 
●developing   it   into   a   sustainable   residential   community;  
●ensuring   safe   movement   by   pedestrians   and   cyclists   within   the   commercial   area;  
●reducing   current   levels   of   traffic   congestion.  
 
2.11Westwood   Cross   opened   in   June   2005   consolidating   what   had   become   piecemeal   retail  
development   in   the   Westwood   area.   Since   its   opening   there   have   been   a   number   of   further  
developments   such   as   the   development   of   the   leisure   complex   and   numerous   developments   at  
and   improvements   to   the   surrounding   retail   parks.   Westwood   has   proved   highly   successful   in   its  
aims   of   clawing   back   retail   expenditure   formerly   lost   to   locations   outside   the   district   boundary.   It  
has   secured   its   place   as   the   preferred   location   for   the   large   format   style   of   retailing   favoured   by  
the   national   chains.   This   style   and   scale   of   retail   was   never   before   available   in   Thanet.  
 
2.12Figures   show   that   in   the   region   of   17,000   square   metres   of   retail   floorspace   is  
needed   at   Westwood   to   maintain   the   status   quo.   Some   of   this   floorspace   is   already   taken  
up   by   recent   permissions,   leaving   no   reason   to   significantly   expand   the   boundaries   of   the  
town   centre.   The   remaining   floorspace   need   at   Westwood   to   the   end   of   the   plan   period   can  
be   accommodated   amongst   the   existing   town   centre   development   by   way   of   redevelopment  
and   reconfiguration.  
 
2.13The   adjacent   housing   allocation   and   flexible   employment   allocation   at   Eurokent  
supports   tourism   and   leisure   uses   as   well   as   B1   uses   and   will   serve   to   add   footfall   to   the   town  
centre   and   increase   its   vitality,   viability,   accessibility   and   sustainability.  
 
2.14In   addition   to   the   976   new   homes   under   construction,   Westwood   is   identified   as   a  
wider   strategic   housing   allocation   to   enable   its   development   as   a   sustainable   mixed   use  
business   and   residential   community.  
 
2.15The   area   currently   suffers   from   poor   connectivity   between   sites,   both   vehicular   and  
pedestrian.   This   is   a   challenge   that   needs   to   be   addressed   in   the   future   development   of  
Westwood.  
 
2.16A   relief    strategy   is   in   development   to   address   this   issue,   which   the   Council   is  
implementing.   This   requires   developer-led   solutions.   A   fundamental   objective   of   this    strategy   is  
to   realign   traffic   routes   to   enable   free   movement   by   pedestrians   between   town   centre   facilities.  
The   final   element   of   the   relief    strategy   that   still   needs   to   be   delivered   is   a   link   between    Margate  
Road   and   Westwood   Road.   The   Council    will   continue   to   explore   options   which   are   available   to  
delivering   this   link.  
 
2.17The   piecemeal   nature   of   the   way   Westwood   has   grown   over   the   years   means   that   it   does  
not   form   a   cohesive   town   centre   as   many   of   the   individual   component   sites   face   inwards   on   each  
other   leading   to   problematic   pedestrian   connectivity   between   sites.   The   Council   now   seeks   to  
ensure   that   any   new   development   at   Westwood   addresses   this   problem   and   seeks   to   encourage  
active   frontages   on   the   intersections   between   the   different   retail   parks   and   better   pedestrian  
flows   between   sites.   Ultimately   the   vision   is   for   the   whole   area   to   look   and   feel   more   like   a   single  
town   centre.   A   supplementary   planning   document   will   be   drafted   to   seek   to   establish   this   aim  
following   the   adoption   of   the   Local   Plan.   SPD   will   consider   short,   medium   and   long   term   solutions  
and   will   be   presented   in   three   phases   as   follows:  
 
25   ● Phase   1   –   Completion   of   Westwood   Relief   Strategy/Improved   signage  
● Phase   2   –   General   Pedestrian   Improvements/   Pedestrianisation/Stopping   up   traffic  
● Phase   3   –   Remodelling   the   various   component   sites   following   redevelopment  
 
In   the   interim   period   any   new   development   will   be   expected   to    be   consistent   with   these   aims.  
 
 
 
Policy   SP09   -   Westwood  
The   Council   will   seek   to   support   the   evolution   and   development   of   Westwood   as   a  
mixed   use   business   and   residential   community   in   line   with   the   following   area   based  
policies,   indicated   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
Development   proposals   in   the   Westwood   Area   should   have   regard   to   the   aims   and   objectives   of  
the   Westwood   Area   SPD   and   also   the   Westwood   Relief   Strategy   once   adopted.  
 
1)Westwood   Town   Centre  
 
  Main   town   centre   uses   will   be   directed   to   the    town   centre   area   at   Westwood   in  
accordance   with   policies   E04   and   E05     Any   development   proposals   should   ensure  
there   is   no   net   loss   in   overall   commercial   floorspace   unless   permitted   by   other  
Local   Plan   policies.  
 
2)Eurokent   Mixed   Use   Area  
 
Development   of   Eurokent   will   be   for   a   mix   of   residential   and   business   purposes,   in  
accordance   with   a   comprehensive   masterplan   linking   and   integrating   the   development  
into   the   wider   Westwood   community.  
 
Land   at   Eurokent    is   allocated   for:  
 
●up   to   550   new   dwellings,   and  
●the   development   of   up   to   5.45ha   of   land   for   flexible   business   uses   as   identified  
in   Policy   SP05.  
 
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a   masterplan   as   required   below:   
 
●A   minimum   of   3.4   ha   of   publicly   accessible   natural/semi   natural   open   space  
in   accordance   with   the   requirements   of   Policy   SP34.  
●A   range   of   community   facilities   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP14,   including   small  
scale   convenience   retail   provision   to   serve   the   day   to   day   needs   of   the   community  
●Development   will   be   expected   to   provide   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   offsite  
highway   improvements   in   the   form   of   the   Westwood   Relief   Strategy,   improvements   to   the  
A256   from   Lord   of   the   Manor   and   any   other   improvements   identified   in   the   Transport  
Assessment.  
 
All   development   proposals   must   include   a   phasing   and   implementation   plan   to   include  
the   phasing   of   development,   infrastructure   and   landscaping.   
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
 
●Liaison   with   service   providers   to   investigate   the   need   to   upgrade   the   capacity   of  
any   utility   services   and   infrastructure.  
26   ●Archaeological   assessment   and   the   need   to   preserve   and   enhance   the  
setting   of   heritage   assets   adjoining   the   site.  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
 
●Assess   the   impact   of   the   development   on   the   local   road   network  
●Identify   measures   to   promote   multi   modal   access   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections,   and   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   development,   and   rail  
linkages.  
 
3)Thanet   Reach  
 
In   accordance   with   Policy   SP05,   part   of   Thanet   Reach   is   allocated   for   employment  
and   education   uses.   The   southern   part   of   the   site   is   allocated   for   residential  
development.   (80   dwellings)   in   accordance   with   Policy   HO1.  
 
.  
Margate  
2.18The   vision   for   Margate   is   to   build   on   its   success   as   a   fashionable   seaside   resort   based  
on   its   unique   assets   of   a   sandy   beach,   harbour,   rich   townscape,   and   on   the   success   of   the  
Turner   Contemporary   Gallery   and   a   revived   Dreamland   Heritage   Amusement   Park.   Margate's  
economic   heart   will   be   diversified   through   creative   and   cultural   development   and   the   town   will  
no   longer   suffer   disproportionately   high   levels   of   deprivation,   transience   and   poor   quality  
accommodation.  
 
2.19Positive  signs  of  this  step  change  are  beginning  to  emerge,  with  a  14%  increase               
recorded  in  contacts  to  the  Visitor  Information  Centre  in  May  2017  compared  to  May  2013.                
Margate  has  a  rich  heritage  which  is  important  to  the  vibrancy  of  the  town  and  as  an  attraction                   
for   visitors.  
 
2.20Margate   has   a   number   of   commercial   areas   such   as   the   Old   Town,   College   Square   and  
the   upper   and   lower   High   Street   areas   that   perform   different   functions   around   the   town.   The  
upper   and   lower   High   Street   along   with   the   seafront   have   suffered   from   high   vacancy   rates  
although   this   is   now   beginning   to   improve.  
 
2.21The   Old   Town   area   is   a   vibrant   part   of   the   town   which   contains   many   restaurants,   cafes,  
gift   shops   and   galleries.   This   area   is   popular   with   tourists   and   local   people   alike.   This   area   of   the  
town   lends   itself   to   tourism   and   leisure   uses.  
 
2.22Dreamland   Amusement   Park   is   synonymous   with   Margate   as   a   seaside   resort.   The  
park   closed   after   the   2006   season.   Since   its   closure   the   Council   has   worked,   alongside  
partners   to   re-   open   Dreamland   as   an   amusement   park.   The   Council   has   compulsory  
purchased   the   site   and   a   comprehensive   phased   development   scheme   is   in   place,   maximising  
its   potential   to   contribute   to   the   economic   well-being   and   attractiveness   of   Margate   as   a   visitor  
destination.  
 
2.23The   run   down   Lido   complex   is   situated   close   to   the   Margate   Winter   Gardens   and   Turner  
Contemporary   and,   given   its   coastal   location,   provides   an   ideal   opportunity   for   a   leisure/tourism  
related   development   with   uninterrupted   sea   views.   The   site   is   also   an   important   heritage   asset  
but   is   in   need   of   significant   restoration   and   repair,   which   the   Council   considers   should   be   the  
main   focus   for   any   redevelopment   proposals.  
 
27   2.24Strategic   Local   Plan   designations   that   are   expected   to   help   deliver   the   continued  
regeneration   of   Margate   include   Margate's   Town   Centre   and   Old   Town   area,   Margate's   seafront  
area,   and   Dreamland.  
 
2.25Margate   has   a   number   of   sites   which   present   the   opportunity   for   mixed   use  
redevelopment   that   potentially   include   residential.   These   will   also   contribute   to   the   overall  
vibrancy   and   energy   of   the   town.   These   sites   include   Arlington   House,   the   Rendezvous   site,   the  
Centre,   the   Cottage   car   park   and   Bilton   Square.  
 
2.26The  Arlington  House  site  is  a  highly  prominent  site  in  Margate  and  has  permission               
for  a  supermarket.  Should  this  development  not  commence,  the  Council  considers  that             
this   site   is   suitable   for   mixed   use   redevelopment.  
 
2.27The   strategy   for   Margate's   core   area   is   to   support   retail   uses   including   banks,   restaurants  
and   drinking   establishments   in   the   primary   shopping   frontage   centred   around   the   upper   and  
lower   High   Street.   The   Old   Town   area   will   provide   a   range   of   town   centre   uses   including   cultural  
and   creative   industries.   There   will   also   be   a   designated   Margate   Seafront   and   Harbour   Arm   area  
that   supports   and   encourages   seafront   leisure   uses   that   are   sympathetic   to   the   surrounding  
seafront   architecture.   Evidence   shows   that   in   Margate   there   is   a   need   for   an   additional   3,049  
square   metres   of   retail   floorspace   to   the   end   of   the   plan   period.   Current   vacancy   levels   and   the  
wider   town   centre   designations   can   adequately   accommodate   this   need.  
2.28Seafront   areas   are   important   to   the   vitality   and   viability   of   the   coastal   town   centres   as  
they   attract   tourists   and   provide   a   natural   leisure   focus   for   the   towns   in   close   proximity   to   the  
High   Streets   and   main   shopping   areas.   As   such,   it   is   important   that   leisure   and   tourism   uses  
are   encouraged   here   that   are   complementary   to   the   town   centres   and   encourage   economic  
growth.  
2.29The   District   Council   recognises   the   need   for   a   new   Lifeboat   station   in   the   Margate  
area,   capable   of   accommodating   the   latest   class   of   lifeboat.   It   is   recognised   that   there   are  
limited   opportunities   for   such   a   facility,   and   the   Council   will   work   with   the   RNLI   to   identify   a  
suitable   location   to   meet   their   operational   requirements.   Key   issues   that   need   to   be  
considered   as   part   of   that   process   would   be   the   potential   impact   on   heritage   assets   (Policies  
SP34   and   HE01   –   HE03   apply)   and   national   and   international   wildlife   sites   (Policies   SP25  
and   GI01   apply).  
 
 
Policy   SP10   -   Margate  
The  Council  will  seek  to  support  the  continued  regeneration  and  development  of  Margate              
as  a  contemporary  seaside  resort  in  line  with  the  following  area  based  proposals,              
indicated   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
1)Margate   Town   Centre  
 
  Main   town   centre   uses   will   be   directed   to   the   town   centre   area   at   Margate    in  
accordance   with   policies   E04   and   E05.  
 
2)Margate   Old   Town  
 
Margate's   Old   Town   area   will   continue   in   its   complementary   role,   contributing   to   the  
vitality   and   viability   of   Margate's   town   centre,   increasing   footfall   and   enhancing   quality  
and   choice   of   facilities   in   the   town   centre.   It   will   be   a   focal   location   for   creative   and  
cultural   industries.   
 
28   Residential   development   will   be   permitted   above   ground   floor   level   only   and   the   Council  
will   resist   the   loss   of   existing   commercial   premises   in   the   area   unless   it   can   be  
demonstrated   that   there   has   been   a   consistent   and   genuine   but   unsuccessful   attempt   to  
market   the   premises   for   a   period   of   12   months   prior   to   an   application   being   made   at   an  
open   market   value   that   reflects   its   existing   commercial   use   and   condition.  
 
3)Margate   Seafront   and   Harbour   Arm  
 
Within   the   seafront   area   of   Margate   and   the   Harbour   Arm   as   indicated   on   the   Policies  
Map,   leisure   and   tourism   uses   will   be   permitted,   including   retail,   where   they   enhance   the  
visual   appeal   of   these   areas   and   protect   the   seafront   character   and   heritage.   Residential  
development   above   ground   floor   will   be   permitted.  
 
4)Dreamland  
 
Dreamland   will   be   developed   as   an   amusement   and/or   theme   park   and   will   be   a  
significant   attraction   supporting   the   regeneration   of   the   town.  
 
Proposals   that   seek   to   extend,   upgrade   or   improve   the   attractiveness   of   Dreamland   as   an  
amusement   and/or   theme   park   will   be   permitted.   Development   on   site   that   would   lead   to  
the   reduction   in   its   attractiveness   as   a   leisure   or   tourist   destination,    will   be   resisted,  
including   the   loss   of   the   scenic   railway.  
 
Proposals   would   be   required   to   be   compatible   with   the   context   and   proposals   of  
the   strategic   urban   design   framework,   and   integration   with   appropriate   proposals  
for   redevelopment/refurbishment   of   neighbouring   sites.  
 
5)Opportunity   Areas  
 
There   are   Opportunity   Areas   identified   on   the   Policies   Map   at   Arlington,   the   Rendezvous  
site,   The   Centre,   the   Cottage   car   park   and   Bilton   Square,   which   are   considered   suitable   for  
mixed   use   town   centre   development.   The   ultimate   goal   of   redevelopment   of   these   sites   is  
regeneration.   Residential   development   will   be   considered   acceptable   where   this   does   not  
conflict   with   the   area   based   criteria   above.  
 
6)    The   Lido  
 
Proposals   for   leisure   and   tourism   related   uses   will   be   supported   at   the   Lido.   Any  
development   must   respect   and   restore   the   site's   status   as   a   significant   heritage  
asset.  
 
7)   Lifeboat   Station  
 
The   development   of   a   new   lifeboat   station   in   the   Margate   area   will   be   supported,   subject   to  
relevant   Local   Plan   policies.  
 
Development   will   only   be   permitted   under   this   policy   where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   will  
not   adversely   affect   any   designated   nature   conservation   sites   through   any   pathway   of   impact,  
including   increased   visitor   pressure.   Development   proposals   must   comply   with   the  
requirements   of   SP28,   SP29   and   GI01.  
 
 
Ramsgate  
29   2.30The   vision   for   Ramsgate   is   to   maximise   its   maritime   heritage,   Royal   Harbour,   marina,  
beach   and   attractive   waterfront,   and   provide   an   economic   base   for   its   vibrant   mix   of   town   centre  
uses,   visitor   economy   and   café   culture.   The   former   surplus   of   small   shops   beyond   the   town's  
commercial   core   has   been   refurbished   to   provide   quality   residential   accommodation   and   there  
is   a   viable   balance   and   mix   of   residential   and   commercial   use   including   specialist   shopping.  
 
2.31Ramsgate   has   been   adversely   affected   by   the   decline   of   the   traditional   resort   holiday.  
However,   with   its   rich   heritage   adding   vibrancy   to   the   town.   Ramsgate   has   been   quick   to  
recover.   A   café   culture   has   developed   around   the   harbour   area   and   this   needs   to   be   further  
encouraged.  
 
2.32The   key   issue   for   Ramsgate   town   will   be   to   maintain   and   improve   the   vitality,   diversity  
and   economic   vibrancy   of   the   town   centre,   secure   enhancement   of   historic   buildings,   support  
development   of   the   visitor   economy   including   cultural   creativity,   attract   more   economically  
active   residents   and   strengthen   the   range   of   local   services.  
 
2.33Ramsgate   contains   many   separate   commercial   areas.   As   well   as   at   the   traditional   focal  
point   of   the   High   Street,   commercial   development   has   stretched   to   the   upper   High   Street   and  
the   length   of   King   Street.   Over   recent   years   as   with   all   high   streets,   Ramsgate   has   seen   an  
increase   in   vacancies   and   commercial   development   has   become   somewhat   sporadic   and   in  
some   cases   run   down.   The   strategy   of   the   Council   has   been   and   continues   to   be   to   draw  
commercial   development   back   to   the   commercial   heart   of   Ramsgate   and   allow   the   more  
peripheral   areas   of   the   town   centre   to   revert   to   residential   use.   This   strategy   has   been   showing  
results   and   Ramsgate   is   benefitting   from   an   improved   public   realm   and   so   it   is   appropriate   for  
this   policy   approach   to   be   continued.  
 
2.34Ramsgate   has   a   need   for   an   additional   4,537   square   metres   of   retail   floorspace.   The  
current   vacancies   and   scale   of   the   town   centre   boundary   can   adequately   accommodate   this   in  
the   plan   period.  
 
2.35Retail   development   will   be   focused   in   Ramsgate's   core   area   with   complementary   town  
centre   uses   accommodated   within   the   wider   town   centre   boundary.   Leisure   and   tourism   uses   will  
be   particularly   encouraged   around   the   marina   area.  
 
2.36Land   at   and   adjacent   to   Ramsgate   harbour   is   identified   for   a   mix   of   uses   including  
leisure,   tourism,   retail   and   residential   purposes.   Any   proposals   should   have   regard   to   the  
Ramsgate   Maritime   Plan   or   any   future   plan   for   the   port   and   Royal   Harbour.  
 
2.37The   Royal   Harbour   and   historic   waterfront   are   important   for   both   leisure   and   commercial  
users   which   is   important   for   the   vibrancy   of   the   town.   The   seafront   area   already   has   a   thriving  
café   culture.   The   Royal   Harbour   is   a   Grade   II*   listed   structure   and   is   at   the   heart   of   Ramsgate  
Conservation   Area.   The   regeneration   of   Ramsgate   depends   on   the   continued   attractiveness   of  
the   Royal   Harbour   and   new   development   in   this   area   will   need   to   preserve   and   enhance   its  
character   and   appearance.   It   is   a   tourism   and   leisure   attraction   with   significant   potential   and  
already   offers   much   to   smaller   pleasure   craft.   Commercial   fishing   and   ship   repair   are   also  
carried   out   in   the   Royal   Harbour.  
 
2.38The   growth   of   the   Port   of   Ramsgate   is   supported   as   a   source   of   employment   and   as  
an   attractor   of   inward   investment.   The   Kent   Minerals   and   Waste   Local   Plan   2013-2030  
safeguards   the   port   for   the   importation   of   minerals   into   Kent   (Policies   CSM6   and   CSM7   apply).  
In   addition   to   the   potential   growth   of   port   trade   including   passenger   ferry   operations,   there   is  
additional   employment   associated   with   marine   engineering,   including   the   use   of   the   port   as   a  
base   to   assemble   and   maintain   offshore   wind   turbines,   and   other   businesses   benefiting   from   a  
30   port   location.  
 
2.39Further   development   will   be   permitted   at   Ramsgate   Port   that   supports   the   aims   of   the  
Ramsgate   Maritime   Plan   or   any   future   plan   which   the   Council   as   Port   Authority   adopts.   The  
Maritime   Plan   is   a   non-statutory   operational   plan   that   seeks   to   set   out   the   strategy   for   the  
Port   and   is   updated   from   time   to   time.   Any   business   plans   and   supplementary   guidance   will  
have   regard   to   the   need   to   make   optimum   use   of   the   existing   port   land   to   protect   and  
support   diversification   of   its   function.  
 
2.40Recognising   the   proximity   of   the   port   to   the   Sandwich   Bay   and   Thanet   Coast   SSSIs,  
SPAs,   Ramsar   Site,   Marine   SAC   and   Thanet   Marine   Conservation   Zone   (MCZ),   development  
proposals   for   growth   would   be   subject   to   the   Habitat   Regulations   and   will   need   sensitive  
consideration   in   relation   to   nature   conservation   and   landscape.   Proposals   would   need   an  
acceptable   environmental   assessment   of   their   impact   on   the   Harbour,   its   setting   and   surrounding  
property,   and   the   impact   of   any   proposed   land   reclamation   upon   nature   conservation,  
conservation   of   the   built   environment,   the   coast   and   archaeological   heritage,   together   with   any  
proposals   to   mitigate   the   impact.  
 
 
Policy   SP11   -   Ramsgate  
The  Council  will  seek  to  support  the  continued  regeneration  and  development  of             
Ramsgate  focusing  on  its  maritime  heritage  and  developing  leisure  role,  in  line  with  the               
following   area   based   proposals,   indicated   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
1)Ramsgate   Town   Centre  
 
  
Main   town   centre   uses   will   be   directed   to   the   town   centre   area   at   Ramsgate   in   accordance  
with   policies   E04   and   E05.  
 
2)Ramsgate   Waterfront   and   Royal   Harbour  
 
Land   at   and   adjacent   to   Ramsgate   Royal   Harbour,   as   indicated   on   the   Policies   Map,   is  
identified   for   development   for   a   mixture   of   leisure,   tourism,   retail   and   residential  
purposes.  
 
Any   such   proposals   should   have   regard   to   the   Ramsgate   Maritime   Plan   or   any  
subsequent   plan   adopted   by   the   Council.   The   following   activities   and   development   will  
be   supported:  
 
●Eastern   Undercliff   -   mixed   leisure,   tourism   and   residential   uses;   and  
●Ramsgate   Royal   Harbour   -   continued   development   of   mixed   leisure   and  
marina   facilities,   in   particular   at   the   Military   Road   arches.  
 
All   proposals   must:  
 
●Take   particular   care   in   the   design,   location,   use   of   materials   and   relationship   of  
land-   based   facilities   with   open   water,   such   as   to   protect   important   views   and  
preserve   or   enhance   the   historical   character   of   the   Royal   Harbour   and   seafront.  
●    Ensure   that   the   integrity   of   nature   conservation   interests   within   the  
adjacent   SSSI,   SPA,   SAC,   Ramsar,   Thanet   MCZ   site   is   maintained.  
 
31   3)Opportunity   Areas  
 
There   are   Opportunity   Areas   identified   on   the   Policies   Map   at   Staffordshire   Street   car   park  
and   Eastern   Undercliff,   which   are   considered   suitable   for   mixed   use   town   centre  
development.   The   ultimate   goal   of   redevelopment   is   regeneration.  
Residential   development   will   be   considered   acceptable   where   this   does   not   conflict   with  
the   area   based   criteria   above.  
 
4)Ramsgate   Port  
 
The   Council   supports   further   development   at   Ramsgate   Port   which   would   facilitate   its  
improvement   as   a   port   for   shipping,   increase   traffic   through   the   port,   and   introduce   new  
routes   and   complementary   land   based   facilities   including   marine   engineering,   subject  
to:-  
 
●a   demonstrable   port-related   need   for   any   proposed   land   based   facilities   to   be  
located   in   the   area   of   the   port,   and   a   demonstrable   lack   of   suitable   alternative  
inland   locations;   and  
●compatibility   with   the   character   and   function   of   Ramsgate   waterfront   and   the  
Royal   Harbour   as   a   commercial   leisure   facility;   and  
●an   acceptable   environmental   assessment   of   the   impact   of   the   proposed  
development   upon   the   harbour,   its   setting   and   surrounding   property,   and   the  
impact   of   any   proposed   land   reclamation   upon   nature   conservation,   conservation  
of   the   built   environment,   the   coast   and   archaeological   heritage,   together   with   any  
proposals   to   mitigate   the   impact.  
 
Land   reclamation   will   not   be   permitted   beyond   the   western   extremity   of   the   existing   limit  
of   reclaimed   land.  
 
Development   will   only   be   permitted   under   this   policy   where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   will  
not   adversely   affect   any   designated   nature   conservation   sites   through   any   pathway   of   impact,  
including   increased   visitor   pressure.   Development   proposals   must   comply   with   the  
requirements   of   SP28,   SP29   and   GI01.  
 
 
 
Broadstairs  
2.41Broadstairs   is   an   attractive   town   with   a   thriving   town   centre   and   is   a   popular   location  
for   visitors   and   residents   who   enjoy   its   heritage,   Dickensian   past,   beaches,   local   events   and  
picturesque   waterfront.   Broadstairs   has   a   strong   commercial   and   visitor   economy   and   has  
been   resilient   during   the   economic   downturn.   It   is   important   to   maintain   and   enhance   the  
town's   attractive   character   and   economic   base.  
 
2.42Broadstairs   is   a   popular   shopping   destination   characterised   by   small   independently   owned  
shops.   The   town   has   many   independent   shops   interspersed   with   cafes,   restaurants   and   drinking  
establishments   that   have   enabled   the   town   to   buck   the   trend   of   high   vacancy   rates.   The   town   has  
a   particular   demand   for   retail   premises   selling   high   street   style   goods   (comparison   goods).  
 
2.43There   is   a   need   for   4,954   square   metres   of   additional   retail   floorspace   to   the   end   of   the  
plan   period.   The   prime   focus   for   retail   is   centered   around   the   High   Street   but   with   supporting  
town   centre   uses   along   Albion   Street   and   the   upper   end   of   High   Street   towards   the   railway  
station.   The   town   centre   is   largely   linear   in   character   and   there   is   little   scope   for   physical  
expansion   and   development.   In   order   to   accommodate   retail   need   in   the   future   it   will   be  
32   necessary   to   be   flexible   and   allow   some   development   on   the   edge   of   the   town   centre   as   close  
as   possible   to   the   High   Street.  
 
2.44Broadstairs   promenade   and   beach   front   is   an   important   part   of   the   town   and   is   an  
attraction   in   itself,   drawing   families   to   the   area.   It   contains   a   mix   of   cafes,   restaurants   and  
drinking   establishments   as   well   as   residential   uses   and   areas   of   open   space.   It   is   important   that  
existing   commercial   premises   are   retained   in   order   to   maintain   the   commercial   function   of   this  
area   as   a   link   between   the   beach   and   the   High   Street.   Development   in   this   area   should  
contribute   to   and   support   the   vibrancy   of   the   town   centre   but   also   respect   its   peaceful   and   unique  
character.  
 
2.45The   town   is   linear   in   style   with   separate   beachfront   and   town   centre   areas   and   the   town  
would   benefit   from   improved   pedestrian   connectivity   between   these   two   areas.  
 
 
Policy   SP12   -   Broadstairs  
The   Council   will   seek   to   support   proposals   that   maintain   and   enhance   the   role   and  
character   of   Broadstairs   as   a   popular   attractive   small   seaside   town   in   line   with   the  
following   area   based   proposals,   indicated   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
1)Broadstairs   Town   Centre  
 
Main   town   centre   uses   will   be   directed   to   the   town   centre   area   at   Broadstairs   in   accordance   with  
policies   E04   and   E05.  
 
New   retail   development   will   be   acceptable   on   the   edge   of   Broadstairs   town   centre,  
subject   to   Policy   E05.   Proposals   will   be   required   to   provide   direct   pedestrian   links   to   the  
High   Street,   be   well   related   to   the   retail   core,   centres   of   population   and   be   accessible   by  
a   range   of   means   of   transport.  
 
2)Broadstairs   Promenade   and   Beach   Front  
 
Opportunities   to   enhance   the   use   and   attractiveness   of   the   promenade,   seafront   and  
beach   are   welcomed,   particularly   where   they   achieve   improved   connectivity   between   the  
town   centre   and   beach   front.   Within   this   area,   small   scale   leisure   and   tourism   uses   will   be  
permitted,   including   retail,   where   they   do   not   harm   the   character   and   heritage   interest   of  
the   surrounding   area.   Within   Victoria   Gardens,   open   space   policies   will   prevail.     The  
Council   will   resist   the   loss   of   existing   commercial   premises   in   the   area   unless   it   can   be  
demonstrated   that   there   has   been   a   consistent   and   genuine   but   unsuccessful   attempt   to  
market   the   premises   for   a   period   of   12   months   prior   to   an   application   being   made   at   an  
open   market   value   that   reflects   its   existing   commercial   use   and   condition.  
 
Development   will   only   be   permitted   under   this   policy   where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   will  
not   adversely   affect   any   designated   nature   conservation   sites   through   any   pathway   of   impact,  
including   increased   visitor   pressure.   Development   proposals   must   comply   with   the  
requirements   of   SP28,   SP29   and   GI01.  
 
  
33    
3-   Housing   Strategy  
 
3.1    The   Plan's   housing   strategy   sets   out   how   the   Local   Plan   seeks   to   meet   the   housing  
needs   of   Thanet   alongside   other   partners,   including   the   Council's   housing   regeneration,   empty  
property   and   strategy   functions.   The   Local   Plan   proposes   to   do   this   by  
●identifying   sufficient   and   suitable   land   for   expected   population   growth  
●requiring   the   right   types   of   homes,   including   affordable   homes   and   self-build   and   custom-   build  
housing,   to   be   provided   to   support   economic   growth   and   to   meet   the   needs   of   the   local  
community  
●supporting   the   re-use   of   empty   properties   and   restricting   the   loss   of   existing   residential  
property;   and  
●supporting   area   specific   regeneration   objectives.  
 
3.2 The   Local   Plan   must   allocate   enough   land   to   accommodate   the   amount   of   housing  
needed   by   2031.   This   amount   of   housing   is   known   as   the   Objectively   Assessed   Need   (OAN)   and  
is   calculated   based   on   a   number   of   factors   including   population   growth,   population   change  
market   signals   and   in-migration   (including   from   London)   and   out   migration.   This   Local   Plan  
allocates   sufficient   land   to   meet   the   housing   target   over   the   plan   period.  
 
3.3 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   aims   to   boost   the   housing   supply   and  
expects   Local   Plans   to   meet   the   full   objectively   assessed   needs   for   market   and   affordable  
homes.  
 
3.4 The   assessment   of   development   needs   is   presented   in   the   Thanet   Strategic   Housing  
Market   Assessment   (SHMA)   January   2016   and   update   September   2016.   Neighbouring   Councils  
and   other   key   stakeholders   were   invited   to   participate   in   workshops   on   the   methodology   and  
findings   of   the   SHMA   and   subsequent   review.   In   identifying   this   need   it   is   important   to   consider  
key   functional   linkages   between   places   where   people   live   and   work   -   this   is   known   as   a   Housing  
Market   Area   and   comprises   the   districts   of   Thanet,   Canterbury   and   Dover.   (There   is   also   some  
overlap   with   parts   of   other   adjoining   authorities   -   Faversham   in   Swale,   Chilham   in   Ashford   and  
Folkestone   in   Shepway).   The   Council   has   worked   closely   with   neighbouring   authorities   in  
addressing   strategic   housing   needs   and   other   cross-boundary   issues.   The   Council   intends   to  
meet   its   housing   need   within   the   Thanet   district.  
 
3.5 The   key   driver   of   housing   growth   in   Thanet   has   been   the   number   of   in-comers   choosing  
to   live   in   the   district.   Further   in-migration   will   be   needed   to   provide   an   adequate   labour   supply   to  
deliver   the   economic   strategy.  
 
3.6 The   Council's   Housing   Strategy   seeks   to   create   sustainable   communities,   recognising   the  
need   for   Thanet's   residents   to   have   access   to   high   quality   housing   which   they   can   afford.  
 
3.7 In   particular   it   recognises   the   need   for   a   greater   emphasis   on   provision   of   family   homes,  
that   need   for   affordable   housing   outweighs   supply,   the   importance   of   bringing   empty   property  
back   into   use   to   provide   new   homes,   and   the   need   to   work   with   the   private   sector   to   drive   up  
standards   in   the   private   rented   sector.   Its   main   objectives   are   to:   -  
 
●Deliver   a   range   of   homes   to   meet   the   local   housing   need   which   residents   can   afford;  
●Make   better   use   of   the   existing   housing   stock   across   all   tenures   and   improve   housing  
conditions;  
●Enable   vulnerable   people   to   access   good   quality   housing   and   to   live   independently;  
34   ●Provide   an   accessible   housing   options   service   for   Thanet   residents;  
●Deliver   housing   in   support   of   our   regeneration   and   economic   development   objectives  
 
3.8 Reflecting   this,   an   imperative   of   the   housing   strategy   of   the   Local   Plan   will   be   to   facilitate  
delivery   of   the   type   and   quality   of   homes   that   will   meet   the   needs   of   settled   and   mixed  
communities   including   in   particular   those   aspiring   to   take   advantage   of   and   generate   new  
employment   opportunities.  
 
Amount   of   Housing  
3.9 Housing   provision   is   made   for   17,140   additional   homes   over   the   20   year   period   to   2031.  
This   reflects   forecasts   based   on   an   updated   assessment   of   migration   trend   based   population  
projections   (2014)   and   the   labour   requirements   supporting   the   Council's   aspirations   for  
economic   and   employment   growth.   The   NPPF   requires   local   authorities   to   be   able   to  
demonstrate   that   the   sites   in   its   housing   land   supply   are   deliverable.   The   Council   is   taking   a  
"stepped"   approach   to   delivering   the   housing   target   ie.   a   lower   target   is   set   for   the   first   five  
years,   with   higher   targets   for   the   following   10   years   to   make   good   the   total   housing   requirement  
for   the   Plan   period.   This   is   for   two   main   reasons:  
 
●There   are   significant   infrastructure   requirements   that   need   to   be   delivered   to   support   new  
development.   If   the   Council   were   required   to   allocate   more   sites   to   cover   average  
requirement   for   the   first   five-year   period,   this   might   undermine   the   delivery   of   that  
infrastructure,   and   therefore   the   wider   Local   Plan   strategy;   and  
●Thanet   has   an   emergent   development   market,   but   there   is   a   real   possibility   that   driving   high  
levels   of   requirement   in   the   early   years   might   undermine   the   viability   of   some   sites,   or   result   in  
lowered   viability,   which   again   could   affect   the   delivery   of   services   and   infrastructure,   as   well   as  
affordable   housing  
 
3.10Taking   a   "stepped   approach"   to   meeting   the   housing   target   means   that   the   Council   can   ensure  
that   developments   are   supported   by   the   necessary   services   and   infrastructure,   and   reflects   the  
expected   trajectory   of   housing   delivery   from   the   strategic   sites.   
 
3.11The   Council   is   also   seeking   to   work   with   the   market   to   encourage   higher   rates   of   house-  
building   and   recently   achieved   accreditation   to   the   Housing   Business   Ready   Programme,   run   by  
the   Housing   &   Finance   Institute   (HFI).   This   involvement   of   the   Homes   &   Communities   Agency  
(HCA)   in   development   in   the   district,   and   their   purchase   of   sites   for   development,   is   an   indicator  
of   commitment   to   delivery   in   the   area.   The   Council   has   been   demonstrating   its   commitment   to   the  
delivery   of   housing,   both   to   meet   local   housing   need   and   to   support   economic   regeneration,   by  
granting   planning   permission   for   residential   development   on   sites   proposed   for   housing  
allocations,   and   non-allocated   sites.  
 
Policy   SP13   -   Housing   Provision  
Provision   is   made   for   at   least    17,140   additional   homes   in   the   period   to   2031,   with  
notional   delivery   across   the   period   as   indicated   below.    The   Council   will   review   the  
provisions   of   this   policy   as   part   of   the   wider   Local   Plan   review   set   out   in   Policy   SP03  
 
 
Period  2011-16  2016-21  2021-26  2026-31  
Additional  
Homes  1555  
 
311pa  3000  
 
600pa  6000  
 
1200pa  6585  
 
1317pa  
 
35   Location   of   Housing  
3.12Thanet   is   a   relatively   small   district   surrounded   on   three   sides   by   the   coast.   The   three  
main   coastal   towns   of   Margate,   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs,   and   the   central   island   development  
of   Westwood   form   the   main   urban   areas.   Outside   of   the   urban   areas   is   open   countryside  
including   high   quality   farm   land   and   seven   rural   settlements.   Thanet's   Green   Wedges   serve   an  
important   function   by   maintaining   the   physical   separation   between,   and   identity   of,   the   Thanet  
towns   and   have   been   consistently   protected   from   development   by   local   plan   policies.   Thanet  
currently   has   an   under   provision   of   all   5   typologies   of   open   space   identified   in   the   Open   Space  
Strategy   (2017).   These   limitations   restrict   the   availability   of   sites   that   are   appropriate   for   housing  
allocations.   In   considering   appropriate   site   options   to   accommodate   the   housing   target   as  
required   in   the   NPPF,   the   Council   has   also   had   to   take   into   account   a   number   of   environmental  
issues   including   internationally   and   nationally   important   nature   conservation   designations,   local  
wildlife   designations,   areas   at   risk   of   flooding   and   archaeology/designated   heritage   assets.  
 
3.13Identification   and   allocation   of   housing   land   has   been   informed   by   assessment   of  
the   sustainability   of   individual   sites   through   the   Strategic   Housing   Land   Availability  
Assessment   alongside   the   strategy   for   the   planned   location   of   homes   whose   key  
principles   are   to:-  
 
●optimise   use   of   capacity   from   sites   in   the   built   up   areas   of   the   coastal   towns;  
●focus   provision   at   sites   abutting   those   areas;   and  
●make  modest  provision  at  rural  settlements  to  meet  identified  need  for  affordable  homes  and               
to  provide  locational  choice  at  a  scale  compatible  with  their  character  and  access  to  services                
and   facilities.  
 
3.14A   number   of   allocated   sites   are   of   strategic   importance   for   delivering   the   quantity   and  
type   and   variety   of   homes   required   to   deliver   the   strategy.   These   are   identified   as   Strategic  
sites.   The   distribution   of   allocated   housing   land   is   illustrated   in   Table   2.  
 
3.15Within   the   total   housing   provision   shown   below   the   Strategic   Housing   Land   Availability  
Assessment   suggests   capacity   to   deliver   some   3017   dwellings   exists   by   way   of   sites   which  
have   already   received   planning   permission.   In   addition   some   1555   dwellings   have   already  
been   delivered   since   the   start   of   the   Plan   period.  
 
 
Table   2   -   Total   Housing   Distribution  
 
Period  2011-2031  
Strategic   Sites   (sites   of   500+  
dwellings)   
Westwood  1,450  
Birchington   on   Sea  1,600  
Westgate   on   Sea  2,000  
Manston   Green  (planning   permission   granted   so   not   counted   in  
allocations)  
Land   at   Manston   Court/Haine   Road  1400  
Land   north   and   south   of   Shottendane  
Road  550  
Other   Housing   Sites/Areas  1,691  
 
 
36   Table   3   -   Total   Housing   Supply  
 
Local   Plan   requirement  17,140  
 
Completions   from   01/04/11   to   31/03/19  
 2704  
Residual   requirement  
 14,436  
Total   allocations   supply  
 8691  
Planning   permissions   supply  
 4713  
Empty   Homes   27   pa   (27x12)  
 324  
Windfall   allowance   225x9*  
 2025  
  
 
*Windfall   allowance   discounted   for   the   first   3   years   to   avoid   any   potential   double   counting.  
 
Area   Specific   Objectives  
3.16Reflecting   the   make-up   of   the   housing   stock   and   specific   issues   in   different   parts   of  
Thanet,   the   Council   has   identified,   and   will   seek   to   achieve,   the   following   area   based   objectives.  
It   will   expect   applications   for   residential   development   to   demonstrate   that   full   account   has   been  
taken   of   these.  
 
 
Table   4   -   Area   Specific   Objectives  
 
Area  Area   specific   housing   objectives  
 
District   wide  Increase   the   proportion   of   houses   (non   flatted   homes)   within   the   overall  
dwelling   stock.   Safeguard   and   increase   the   stock   of   family   homes.  
Increase   the   stock   of   affordable   homes  
Safeguard   and   enhance   the   character   and   amenity   of   existing   residential  
neighbourhoods.  
 
 
Westwood  Transform   the   neighbourhood   into   a   mixed   business   and   residential   community  
benefiting   from   mutual   proximity,   accessibility   and   supporting   amenity  
infrastructure.  
 
Contribute   a   significant   addition   to   the   district's   stock   of   non-flatted  
accommodation   including   family   sized   houses   and   of   affordable   homes.  
Coastal   town  
centres  Contribute   to   area   regeneration   objectives   expressed   in   policy   or   supplementary  
guidance,   and,   where   appropriate,   in   line   with   specific   site   development   briefs.  
 
Cliftonville   West  
&   Margate  Establish   a   mixed,   inclusive   and   settled   community   through   improvements   to   the  
quality   and   configuration   of   residential   accommodation   and   its   environment   and  
diversity   of   tenure.  
 
Apply   public   sector   intervention   and   finance   to   pump-prime   private   sector  
investment.  
37   King   Street,  
Ramsgate  Improve   the   visual   appearance   of   the   area   and   provide   good   quality   housing  
that   is   affordable   and   well   managed.  
Newington   &  
Millmead  Establish   a   mixed,   inclusive   and   settled   community   through   improvements   to   the  
quality   and   configuration   of   residential   accommodation   and   to   the   local  
environment   and   diversity   of   tenure.  
 
 
Rural  
settlements  Accommodate   additional   homes   to   provide   locational   choice   at   a   scale  
compatible   with   the   size   and   character   of   the   settlement   and   in   light   of  
accessibility   of   services   and   community   facilities.  
 
Increase   the   stock   of   affordable   housing   at   a   scale   commensurate   with   any  
outstanding   local   need.  
 
 
Strategic   Housing   Site   Allocations  
3.17The   existing   built   up   areas   of   the   district   will   continue   to   deliver   additional   housing.  
However,   a   significant   amount   of   greenfield   housing   land   is   required   to   meet   the   housing   target.  
Assessment   has   revealed   that   some   of   the   suitable   and   sustainably   located   greenfield   sites  
identified   are   large   and   some   are   adjoining   or   in   mutual   proximity.   These   sites   provide   the  
opportunity   to   deliver   development   at   a   scale   that   will   serve   both   to   facilitate   a   step   change   in  
delivering   the   type   of   homes   required   to   meet   need   and   secure   the   infrastructure   required   to  
support   them.   Such   large   and   clustered   sites   have   been   identified   as   strategic   housing  
allocations   that   will   be   of   particular   importance   in   delivering   the   Plan's   housing   objectives.  
 
3.18The   geographical   extent   indicated   for   individual   strategic   site   allocations   represents   the  
anticipated   maximum   land   requirement.   Proposals   will   be   expected   to   consider,   and   where  
possible   accommodate,   notional   maximum   dwelling   capacities   indicated   together   with   all   other  
relevant   policy   requirements   within   a   lower   level   of   greenfield   land   take.   This   section   identifies,  
and   sets   out   policies   for,   housing   sites   of   strategic   significance   to   the   Local   Plan   strategy.  
 
3.19The   sites   listed   below   are   identified   as   Strategic   Housing   Sites.   Applications   to   develop  
such   sites   shall   be   accompanied   by   a   detailed   development   brief   including   an   illustrative   site  
masterplan   featuring   all   elements   of   the   proposal   and   indicating   phasing   of   development   and  
supporting   infrastructure.   Applications   will   be   determined   in   light   of   the   following   site   specific  
policies:  
 
SP15   Manston   Green   
SP16   Birchington   on   Sea   
SP17   Westgate   on   Sea   
SP18   Westwood  
SP19   Land   fronting   Nash   and   Haine   Roads   
SP20   Land   at   Manston   Court/Haine   Road  
SP21   Land   north   and   south   of   Shottendane   Road   
 
General   Housing   Policy   Requirements  
3.20There   are   a   number   of   policy   requirements   relating   to   residential   development   that   will  
apply   to   all   of   the   site   specific   policies   and   land   allocated   for   housing.   The   following   policy  
applies   to   all   sites   allocated   in   this   Local   Plan   for   residential   development.   NB   There   are   other  
policies   in   the   Local   Plan   that   would   also   apply   to   new   residential   developments   -   the   plan   must  
be   read   as   a   whole.  
 
38   3.21One   of   the   “transformational   initiatives”   identified   in   the   Council’s   Economic   Growth   Strategy  
(EGS)(November   2016)   is   “designing   enterprise   into   communities”.   This   is   particularly   important   in  
Thanet,   where   a   significant   proportion   of   jobs   growth   is   expected   in   the   SME   and   micro-business  
sector.   As   well   as   supporting   working   at   home   with   good-quality   broadband   as   provided   in   policies   E02  
and   E03,   the   provision   of   active   working   space   and   networking   opportunities   for   the   self-employed   and  
sub-contractors   is   seen   as   a   means   of   enhancing   this   aspect   of   Thanet’s   employment   profile.   This   is  
the   basis   for   seeking   “community   business   space”   within   the   strategic   housing   allocations.    The  
intention   is   for   community   buildings   to   be   provided   which   make   provision   in   whole   or   in   part   for   small,  
fully   serviced   and   flexible   spaces   suitable   for   use   by   small   businesses   and   sole   traders   to   support  
business   activity.    This   approach   is   also   supported   by   Policy   CM01,   which   makes   provision   for  
broadband   in   community   facilities.  
 
 
Policy   SP14   -   General   Housing   Policy  
Proposals   for   residential   development   on   sites   allocated   in   this   plan   must:  
 
1)Provide   one   electric   car   charging   point   for   every   10   parking   spaces   provided   in  
communal   areas,   or   one   charging   point   to   be   provided   for   every   new   dwelling   with  
parking   provision   within   its   curtilage  
2)Retain   existing   boundary   features   where   possible  
3)Provide   a   connection   to   the   sewerage   system   at   the   nearest   point   of   adequate  
capacity,   in   collaboration   with   the   service   provider  
4)Allow   future   access   to   the   existing   water   supply   infrastructure   for   maintenance   and  
upsizing   purposes  
5)Provide   for   the   installation   of   digital   infrastructure  
6)Provide   for   the   installation   of   Fibre   to   the   Home   (FTTH)  
7)Contribute   towards   the   Strategic   Access   Management   and   Monitoring   Plan   to   meet  
the   requirements   of   SP29  
 
Additionally,    all    proposals   for   10   or   more   units   must:  
 
1)Provide   an   appropriate   mix   of   dwellings   (including   care   and   supported   housing)   to  
meet   the   requirements   of   Policy   SP22  
2)Include   an   element   of    self-build   properties   where   there   is   a   demonstrable    demand  
from   persons   included   in   the   Council’s   self-build   register  
3)Provide   affordable   housing   to   meet   the   requirements   of   Policy   SP23  
4)Provide   accessible   homes   to   meet   the   requirements   of   Policy   QD05;   and  
5)Include   an   assessment   of   the   development’s   effect   on   ‘functional   land’   that   may   be  
used   as   a   roosting   or   feeding     habitat   by   wintering   and   breeding   birds   identified   by  
the   Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   Special   Protection   Area   citation,   and   provide  
mitigation   where   necessary.    All   development   must   comply   with   policies   relating   to   the  
Protection   of   International   and   European   Designated   Sites   and   associated   Mitigation  
Strategy.  
 
In   addition   to   the   timely   delivery   of   education,   health   and   transport   infrastructure,   proposals   for  
the   development   of   strategic   sites   under   Policies   SP15   –   SP21   a   must   include   an   assessment   of  
the   need   for   community   facilities   as   part   of   the   masterplanning   process.    Where   required   to  
create   sustainable,   mixed-use   communities   the   Council   will   expect   such   facilities   to   include  
community   business   space   having   regard   to   the   Economic   Growth   Strategy  
 
A   Heritage   Impact   Assessment   will   be   required   at   the   masterplanning   stage   for   the  
strategic   sites   to   assess   any   cumulative   impacts   of   the   site   allocations   and   highways  
infrastructure   on   heritage   assets   and   archaeological   resources.  
39    
Strategic   Site   Policies  
 
 
Policy   SP15   -   Strategic   Housing   Sites   -   Manston   Green  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   785   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   (net)   at   land   known   as   Manston   Green.   Proposals   will   be   judged  
and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a   masterplan   for   the   whole   site   which   should  
include   :  
 
1)a   minimum   of    6.3   ha   of   open   space,  
2)a   fully   serviced   area   of   2.05   ha   (to   be   provided   at   the   cost   of   the   developer)   to   accommodate   a  
new   two-form   entry   primary   school   and   its   construction   in   a   location   and   in   a   form   agreed  
with   the   County   Council;  
3)a   range   of   community   facilities   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP14,   including   small   scale  
convenience   retail   provision   to   accessibly   serve   the   day-to-day   needs   of   the   residents;  
4)  linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail   services;  
5)  improvements   to   the   roundabout   at   the   junction   with   A256   Haine   Road/B2050   Manston   Road  
and   approach   roads;   and  
6)  a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway   improvements   in   accordance   with  
Policy   SP47  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address   the   following:  
 
1)built   development   will   be   focused   at   the   northern   part   of   the   site  
2)a   pre-design   archaeological   assessment   taking   account   the   presence   of   any  
significant   and   sensitive   remains,  
3)the   preservation   of   the   setting   of   listed   buildings   at   Ozengell,  
4)the   integration   of   development   and   landscaping   to   enable   a   soft   edge   between   the  
site   and   open   countryside   and   minimise   impact   on   long   views   southwards   toward  
Pegwell   Bay,  
5)the   provision   of   sustainable   urban   drainage   taking   account   of   the   site's   location   in  
the   Groundwater   Source   Protection   Zone,  
6)the   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure,   and   any   need   and   provision  
for   improved   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required  
by   service   providers).  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner   and  
accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:   
 
1)assess    the   impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network;   
2)identify    measures   to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and  
cycleway   connections   and   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential  
development   and   rail   linkages.  
 
 
3.22Westgate-on-Sea   and   Birchington,   along   with   Garlinge   and   Westbrook   form   part   of  
the   continuous   urban   coastal   belt   of   Thanet,   located   to   the   west   of   Margate.  
 
40   3.23Westgate   comprises,   in   the   main,   high   quality   residential   environments   and   was   originally  
developed   as   a   seaside   resort   for   the   upper   and   middle   classes.   It   has   a   small   commercial   centre  
which   serves   the   surrounding   residential   community,   and   a   train   station   with   routes   to   Margate  
and   the   rest   of   Thanet,   as   well   as   Faversham   and   London.   Between   Westgate   and   Margate   are  
the   smaller   suburbs   of   Westbrook   and   Garlinge,   both   of   which   also   have   small   commercial  
centres   that   serve   the   local   community.  
 
3.24Birchington   is   a   large   village   with   an   existing   population   of   approximately   10,100.   It   has   a  
good   sized   and   well-functioning   commercial   centre   which   serves   the   surrounding   residential  
community.   The   village   has   a   train   station   with   routes   to   Margate,   and   the   rest   of   Thanet   as   well  
as   Faversham   and   London,   with   regular   bus   services   running   to   Canterbury.   Birchington   Square  
lies   on   the   main   route   to   Margate   for   those   travelling   into   the   district   from   the   west,   and   as   such   at  
peak   times   suffer   from   traffic   congestion.   This   has   also   resulted   in   the   area   suffering   from   higher  
levels   of   air   pollution.  
 
3.25These   settlements   are   considered   to   be   sustainable   locations   for   new   development,   with  
good   access   to   local   services,   including   schools   and   other   community   facilities,   as   well   as  
convenient   transport   options   to   the   rest   of   Thanet   and   locations   outside   of   the   district.   Developers  
will   need   to   work   with   relevant   health   care   providers   to   ensure   adequate   provision   is   made   in  
these   locations.  
 
 
Policy   SP16   -   Strategic   Housing   Site   -   Birchington  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   1,600   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   net   at   Birchington.   Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in  
accordance   with   a   masterplan   for   the   whole   site   which   should   include:  
 
1)a   minimum   of   12.8   ha   of   open   space  
2)a   fully   serviced    area   of   2.05   ha   (to   be   provided   at   the   cost   of   the   developer)   to   accommodate   a  
new   two-form   entry   primary   school   and   its   construction   in   a   location   and   in   a   form   agreed   with  
the   County   Council;  
3)a   range   of   community   facilities   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP14,   including   small   scale  
convenience   retail   provision   to   serve   the   day-to-day   needs   of   the   residents;  
4)provision   for   the   expansion   of   medical   services   at   the   Birchington   Medical   Centre   to   cater   for  
the   additional   needs   created   by   the   development;  
5)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail   services;  
6)a   new   link   road   to   serve   the   development   and   extending   from   Minnis   Road   and   the   A28,   and  
A28   to   Manston   Road   including   new   junctions   on   A28/Minnis   Road   and   Acol   Hill/   Manston  
Road;  
7)access   on   to   Park   Lane   and   a   footway   connection   to   the   entire   frontage   to   connect   to   the  
existing   footway   in   Park   Lane   near   to   the   access   with   Brunswick   Road   and  
8)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway   improvements   in   accordance   with  
Policy   SP47.  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address   the   following:  
 
1)measures   to   the   preserve   the   listed   buildings   Gore   End   Barn   and   Upper   Gore   End   Farmhouse  
and   their   setting   ,including    the   setting   of   Quex   Park  
2)measures   to   integrate   the   development   within   the   landscape    to   enable   a   soft   edge   between  
the   site   and   the   open   countryside;  
3)pre-design   archaeological   evaluation;  
4)noise   mitigation   for   any   development   near   the   northern   edge   of   the   site   which   is   adjacent   to  
41   the   railway   line   
5)The   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure   and   any   need   (and   provision   of)  
improved   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required   by   service  
providers)  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated  
manner   and   accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.    
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
 
1)assess   the   impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network;  
2)identify   measures   to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections   and   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential   development  
and   rail   linkages  
 
 
 
 
Policy   SP17   -   Strategic   Housing   Site   –   Westgate-on-Sea  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   2,000   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average     density   of  
35   dwellings   per   hectare   (net).   at   land   to   the   east   and   west   of   Minster   Road,  
Westgate-on-Sea.  
  Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   masterplan   for   the   whole  
site   which   should   include:  
 
1)a   minimum   of   16   ha   of   open   space   to   include    functional   green   space(s)    between  
existing   urban   edge   and   new   development   
2)a   fully   serviced   area   of   2.05   ha   (to   be   provided   at   the   cost   of   the   developer)   to  
accommodate   a   new   two-form   entry   primary   school,   and   its   construction   in   a  
location   and   in   a   form   agreed   with   the   County   Council;  
3)a   range   of   community   facilities   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP14,   including   small  
scale   convenience   retail   provision   to   serve   the   day-to-day   needs   of   the   residents;  
4)provision   of   serviced   1   ha   of   land   suitable   for   a   new   medical   centre   to   cater   for   the  
additional   needs   created   by   the   development;  
5)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail  
services;  
6)Vehicular   access   from   Minster   Road   and   Dent-de-Lion   Road;  
7)the   provision   of   link   road   between   Dent   de   Lion   Road   and   Minster   Road   (including  
necessary   junctions)   and   the   provision   of   a   new   signal   controlled   junction   at   High  
Street   Garlinge/A28;  
8)improvements   at   Dent-de-Lion   Road/High   Street,   Garlinge   junction;  
9)an   assessment   to   identify   necessary   measures   to   manage   on-street   car   parking   in  
Dent-de-Lion   Road   and   Garlinge   High   Street,   between   the   site   and   the   A28,   and  
potential   methods   of   delivery;  
10)the   upgrade   of   Shottendane   Road   to   Local   Distributor   standard;   and  
11)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway    improvements   in  
accordance   with   Policy   SP47.  
 
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address  
 
42    
 
1)an   archaeological   evaluation,  
2)the   preservation   and/or   enhancement   of   the   setting   of   scheduled   ancient   monuments   and   the  
listed   Dent   de   Lion   Gateway,   and   the   measures   to   be   undertaken;  
3)the   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure   and   any   need   (and   provision   of)  
improved   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required   by   service  
providers);  
4)appropriate   arrangements   for   surface   water   management/sustainable   drainage   schemes   in  
line   with   Margate   Surface   Water   Management   Plan,  
5)Landscape   and   Visual   Impact   Assessment   to   address   any   visual   impact   on   views   to   and   from  
the   adjacent   Green   Wedge   and   protecting   wide   open   landscapes   and   strategic   views   and  
6)the   integration   of   development   and   landscaping   to   take   account   of   public   rights   of   way   and  
the   provision   of    a   soft   edge   between   the   site   and   open   countryside.  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner   and  
accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
 
1)assess   the   impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network   and   address   any   implications   for  
on-street   car   parking   arrangements   in   Dent-de-Lion   Road   and   Garlinge   High   Street,   between  
the   site   and   the   A28;   and  
2)identify   measures     to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections,   and   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential   development   and   rail  
linkages.  
 
 
3.26Westwood   was   originally   allocated   as   a   new   town   centre   in   the   2006   Thanet   Local   Plan  
and   is   a   significant   area   for   retail   and   commercial   developments.   The   land   fronting   Nash   and  
Haine   Roads   as   identified   on   the   Policies   Map   (Policy   SP19   refers)   already   has   the   benefit   of  
various   planning   permissions.    Outline   planning   permission   was   granted   in   2008   for   a   mixed   use  
urban   extension   comprising   residential   use   (total   of   1020   units),   community   facilities,   commercial  
and   employment   uses   and   associated   infrastructure   including   a   new   link   road   and   associated  
alterations   to   existing   junctions   and   new   access   arrangements.     Development   is   well   advanced  
with   most   phases   of   the   development   having   been   completed.    The   delivery   of   the   proposed  
school   and   medical   centre   have   been   negotiated   through   various   stages   of   the   planning  
application   process,   and   remaining   phases   3c,   4   and   5   (providing   a   total   of   770   residential   units)  
of   the   development   are   expected   to   be   completed   within   this   local   plan   period.  
 
Applications   for   strategic   sites   at   Westwood   identified   in   this   plan   should   have   regard   to   previous  
planning   permissions   to   ensure   a   cohesive   and   comprehensive   delivery   of   infrastructure   and  
community   facilities   is   provided   to   serve   the   existing   and   wider   allocations.  
 
 
 
Policy   SP18   –   Strategic   Housing   Site   -   Westwood   
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   1,450   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   40  
dwellings   per   hectare   (net)   at   Westwood.   
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a   masterplan   for   the  
whole   site   which   should   include:  
 
43   1)a   minimum   of   11   ha   of   open   space  
2)a   fully   serviced   area   of   2.05ha   (to   be   provided   at   the   cost   of   the   developer)   to   accommodate   a  
new   two-form   entry   primary   school   and   its   construction   in   a   location   and   in   a   form   agreed   with  
the   County   Council;  
3)A   range   of   community   facilities   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP14,   including   small   scale  
convenience   retail   provision   to   serve   the   day-to-day   needs   of   the   residents;  
4)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport;   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail   services;  
5)highway   improvements   including   widening   of   Nash   Road   and   links   to   Nash   Road   and   Manston  
Road,   to   local   distributor   standard   between   the   southern   extent   of   the   site   and   Star   Lane   and  
6)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway   improvements   in   accordance   with  
Policy   SP47.  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
 
1)pre-design   archaeological   assessment,  
2)the   preservation   of   the   setting   of   listed   buildings   at   Nash   Court   Farm;  
3)the   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure   and   the   provision   for   any   necessary  
improvements   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required   by  
service   providers);  
4)arrangements   for   surface   water   management   in   line   with   the   Margate   Surface   Water  
Management   Plan.  
5)a   layout   that   responds   to   the   existence   of   overhead   power   lines;  
6)measures   to   integrate   the   development   within   the   landscape    to   enable   a   soft   edge   between  
the   site   and   the   open   countryside.  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner  
and   accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
1)assess   the   impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network  
2)identify    measures   to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections,   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential   development   and   rail  
linkages.  
  
Policy   SP19   -   Strategic   Housing   Site   -   Land   fronting   Nash  
and   Haine   Roads  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   1020   new   dwellings    at   land   fronting   Nash   and   Haine   Roads.  
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a   masterplan   for   the  
whole   site    which   shall   include:  
 
1)a   minimum   of   1.75   ha   as   local   open   space   (including   an   equipped   play   area   and  
casual/informal   play   space)   together   with   an   area   of   usable   amenity   space   as   an   integral   part  
of   the   design   of   the   development.   Where   feasible,   the   area   of   local   open   space   should   be  
larger   than   the   minimum   indicated   above  
2)a   fully   serviced   area   of   2.05   ha   (to   be   provided   at   the   cost   of   the   developer)   for   a   new   two   form  
entry   school   as   an   integral   part   of   the   development,  
3)a   minimum   of   2   ha   to   enable   provision   of   a   medical   centre   and   provide   a   community   assembly  
facility.  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address   the   following :  
44   1)landscaped   buffer   zones   adjacent   to   any   new   road   infrastructure   and   along   the   boundaries   to  
adjacent   to   open   farmland,  
2)provision   and   maintenance   of   appropriate   equipment   for   continuous   monitoring   of   local   air  
quality   to   inform   the   Council's   ongoing   air   quality   review   and   assessment   programme.  
 
All   development   proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner   and  
accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.  
 
Applications  for  successive  phases  of  development  will  have  regard  to  the  need  to              
integrate  as  far  as  feasible  with  any  approved  masterplans  relating  to  neighbouring  areas              
addressed   in   this   policy   and   with   the   Thanet   Transport   Strategy.  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
 
1)Provide   for   any   highway   improvements   identified   as   necessary   in   a   traffic   assessment  
and   the   development   masterplan.   Individual   phases   of   development   will   be   required   to  
make   provision   pro-rata   towards   such   improvements,  
2)incorporate   and   provide   for   connections   and   improvements   to   footpath   and   cycle  
networks   facilitating   walking,   cycling   and   public   transport   to,   from   and   within   the   site,  
including   provision   of   or   contribution   to   improvements   to   public   transport   services  
 
 
Policy   SP20   -Strategic   Housing   Site   -   Land   at   Manston  
Court   Road/Haine   Road  
 
Land   is   allocated   for   a   mixed   use   development,   comprising   up   to    1400   new   dwellings  
with   an   approximate    average    density   of    35   dwellings   per   hectare   (net),   and   leisure  
uses   at   land   at   Manston   Court   Road/Haine   Road   
 
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a   masterplan   for   the  
whole   site   which   should   include:  
1)A   minimum   of   11.24ha   of   open   space;  
2)Provision   on   site   of   a   serviced   site   of   no   less   than   8ha   for   a   6-form   entry   secondary  
school   and   its   construction   in   a   location   and   in   a   form   agreed   with   the   County  
Council;  
3)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail  
services;  
4)the    provision   of   an   internal   spine   road   laid   out   in   accordance   with   the   requirements   of  
the   draft   Transport   Strategy   
5)junction   improvement   at   A256    Haine   Road/New   Haine   Road   and   Star   Lane/Haine   Road  
(including   a   dual   lane   link   between   them)   and;  
6)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway    improvements   in  
accordance   with   Policy   SP47  
 
Masterplaning   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
 
1)pre-design   archaeological   evaluation;  
2)the   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure   and   any   need   and   provision    for  
improved   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required   by   service  
providers).  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner   and  
accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.  
45    
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
 
1)assess   the    impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network  
2)identify    measures   to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections,   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential   development   and   rail  
linkages.  
 
 
 
Policy   SP21   –   Strategic   Housing   Site   –   Land   north   and   south   of  
Shottendane   Road  
 
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   300   dwellings   at   land   north   of   Shottendane   Road,   and   up   to   250  
dwellings   at   land   south   of   Shottendane   Road,   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   net.   
 
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a      Masterplan    for   the   whole  
site     which   should   include:  
 
1)a   minimum   of      4.4   ha   of   open   space   –   this   may   be   spread   over   both   sites   but   must   be   readily  
accessible    to   both   sites   
2)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail   services  
3)a   local   distributor   link   road   between   Shottendane   Road   and   Manston   Road,   including   new  
roundabouts   on   Shottendane   Road   and   Manston   Road   and   a   new   junction   with    Hartsdown  
Road;  
4)the   reconfiguration   of   the   Coffin   House   Corner   signal   controlled   junction   and   the   Manston  
Road   and   Shottendane   Road   junction;  
5)Provision   for   the   retention   and/or   upgrading   of   designated    footpath   TM14   
6)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway    improvements   in   accordance   with  
Policy   SP47  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1)pedestrian   and   cycle   access   between   the   two   sites   
2)appropriate   landscape   treatment   in   order   to   provide   an   appropriate   transition   between   the  
development   and   the   adjacent   open   countryside;  
3)A   Heritage   Impact   Assessment   to   assess   effects   on   St   Johns   Cemetery   and   sites/memorials  
within   it   and   consideration   of   the   setting   of   Shottendane   Farm   House  
4)an   assessment   of   potential   implications   of   policies   CSW16   and   DM8   of   the   Kent   Minerals   and  
Waste   Local   Plan   (or   subsequent   revision)   and   the   need   (if   any)   to   mitigate   any   potential  
impacts   on   waste   management   capacity   
5)the   capacity   of   any   utility   services   and   infrastructure   and   any   need   (and   provision   of)  
improved   or   additional   infrastructure   (as   may   be   advised   or   reasonably   required   by   service  
providers)  
 
All   development  proposals   must   be   planned   and   implemented   in   a   coordinated   manner   and  
accompanied   by   an   infrastructure   delivery   and   phasing   plan.    
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
1)assess   the    impact   of   development   on   the   local   road   network  
2)identify    measures   to   promote   multi-modal   access,   including   footway   and   cycleway  
connections,   an   extended   bus   service   accessible   to   the   residential   development   and   rail  
linkages  
 
46   Type   and   size   of   dwellings  
3.27The   Strategic   Housing   Market   Assessment   2016   (SHMA)   identified   as   a   critical  
challenge   tackling   the   impact   of   an   ageing   population,   and   forecast   loss   of   younger   age  
groups   with   the   resultant   potential   loss   of   working   age   population.  
 
3.28Subsequent   economic   and   population   forecasts   based   on   the   economic   aspirations   and  
housing   provisions   in   this   Local   Plan   also   predict   for   Thanet   an   increase   in   the   ageing  
population   (especially   those   above   retirement   age).   However,   they   do   also   predict   that   there  
will   be   an   increase   in   younger   age   groups.  
 
3.29Both   the   SHMA   and   the   subsequent   forecasts   referred   to   above   show   that   single   person  
households   are   expected   to   increase   in   number.   The   SHMA   notes   however   that   there   is   a  
greater   supply   of   smaller   units   than   of   family   homes   and   houses,   and   that   this   demographic  
trend   should   not   dictate   policy.   Indeed   it   notes   that   in   aiming   to   deliver   substantive   regeneration  
and   economic   strategies   the   housing   role   in   turning   round   economic   performance   is   both   to  
provide   appropriate   and   attractive   housing   for   higher   earners   and   facilitate   retention   of   local  
young   families.  
 
3.30The   SHMA   notes   that   the   housing   stock   is   characterised   by   a   combination   of   dense  
provision,   overprovision   of   smaller   flats   and   flatted   buildings,   and   a   shortage   of   larger   homes   of  
three   bedrooms   and   more.   It   states   that   it   is   important   that   future   development   policy   prioritises   a  
rebalancing   of   stock   to   incentivise   the   provision   of   family   homes   and   control   the   expansion   of  
"flatting"   of   larger   homes,   while   at   the   same   time   recognising   solid   demand   for   smaller   homes  
including   from   young   single   people   and   increasing   numbers   of   older   single   people.  
 
3.31Cliftonville   West   and   (part   of)   Margate   Central   wards   have   had   particular   issues   relating   to  
the   availability   of   cheap   properties   that   have   been   converted   into   small   residential   units   and  
resultant   transient   community.   Due   to   the   severity   of   the   issues   in   these   areas,   evidence   is  
available   to   support   planning   policies   to   resist   the   conversion   of   buildings   to   1-bedroom   flats,   and  
provide   more   family   housing.   These   policies   are   included   in   the   Cliftonville   Development   Plan  
Document   (adopted   2010)  
 
3.32In   assessing   housing   needs   the   SHMA   considers   information   about   aspirations,  
economic   development   plans   for   the   sub-region,   opportunities   to   attract   mature   working  
households   that   new   rail   links   will   bring   and   priority   need   for   affordable   housing.   It   recommends  
broad   proportions   of   the   sizes   and   types   of   market   and   affordable   homes   that   should   be  
provided.   This   is   shown   in   tables   5   and   6.  
 
3.33In   applying   Policy   SP22,   the   Council   will   have   regard   to   the   relevant   conclusions   of   the  
Strategic   Housing   Market   Assessment   (2016)   or   any   relevant   evidence   serving   to   refresh   or  
update   it.    On   sites   of   10   units   or   less   the   Council   will   take   a   flexible   approach   to   the   application   of  
the   SHMA   recommendations,   taking   into   account   the   nature   and   location   of   the   site.  
 
Table   5   -   Mix   of   market   housing   by   dwelling   type   (built   form)  
 
 Detached  Semi-detached  Terraced  Flat  
Thanet  25-30%  25-30%  20-25%  20-25%  
 
The  SHMA  recommends  the  following  sizes  of  dwellings  needed  for  market  housing  (including              
a  higher  requirement  for  2  bedroom  homes,  reflecting  the  result  of  a  growing  older  population                
and   younger   households   living   in   smaller   households)  
 
47   1-bed   properties:   10-15%  
2-bed   properties:   40-45%  
3-bed   properties:   30-35%  
4-bed   properties:   10-15%  
  
   Table   6   -   Mix   of   affordable   housing   by   dwelling   type   (built   form)  
 
 Detached  Semi-detached  Terraced  Flat  
Thanet  0-5%  25-30%  20-25%  45-50%  
 
The   SHMA   recommends   the   following   sizes   of   dwellings   needed   for   affordable   housing  
 
1-bed   properties:   35-40%  
2-bed   properties:   30-35%  
3-bed   properties:   20-25%  
4-bed   properties:   5-10%  
 
3.34Previous   dwelling   completions   in   Thanet   have   included   a   large   share   of   flatted  
accommodation.   Consequently,   in   line   with   the   SHMA   recommendations   it   is   important   to  
increase   the   proportion   of   houses   in   the   overall   stock.   The   SHMA   recommends   a   mix   of   20-25%  
flats   and   75-80%   houses   for   market   housing,   and   45-50%   flats   and   50-55%   houses   for  
affordable   housing.   Accordingly   proposals   will   be   expected   to   deliver   at   least   the   proportion   of  
houses   (as   opposed   to   flats)   in   line   with   Policy   SP22.   It   is   recognised   that   in   some   instances  
there   may   be   reasons   such   as   configuration   of   buildings   contributing   to   townscape   quality   why  
only   flatted   accommodation   will   be   feasible.   Schemes   proposing   a   higher   proportion   of   flats   will  
need   to   be   accompanied   by   a   supporting   justification.  
 
 
Policy   SP22   -   Type   and   Size   of   Dwellings  
Proposals   for   housing   development   will   be   expected   to   provide   an   appropriate   mix   of  
market   and   affordable   housing   types   and   sizes   having   regard   to   the   SHMA  
recommendations   as   may   be   reviewed   or   superseded.  
 
The   Council   will   encourage   proposals   for   residential   development   to   incorporate   a   higher  
ratio   of   houses    to   flats    (as   recommended   in   the   SHMA   as   may   be   reviewed   or  
superseded).   Proposals   for   developments   incorporating   a   higher   proportion   of   flats    will  
need   specific   justification.  
 
Proposals   to   convert   properties   currently   used   as   flats   to   use   as   single   family   or   single  
household   accommodation   will   be   permitted   where   a   satisfactory   standard   of  
accommodation   can   be   provided.   
 
Development   proposals   involving   the   net   loss   of   single   family   dwelling   houses   will   only   be  
permitted   where   the   subdivision   or   redevelopment   of   the   site   continues   to   provide  
accommodation   suitable   for   occupation   by   families.  
 
Providing   affordable   homes  
3.35Affordable   housing   is   defined   as   social   rented,   affordable   rented,   intermediate   housing,  
provided   to   eligible   households   whose   needs   are   not   met   by   the   market.   The   Strategic  
Housing   Market   Assessment's   (SHMA)   analysis   is   that   tackling   the   backlog   of   need   is   an  
48   enormous   task.   The   SHMA   also   sets   out   the   requirement   for   a   proportion   of   starter   homes  
(homes   for   first   time   buyers   under   the   age   of   40   at   a   discount   of   at   least   20%   below   the   open  
market   value)   to   be   delivered   on   all   suitable   reasonably-sized   housing   developments.  
 
3.36Through   its   functions   as   housing   and   planning   authority   the   Council   will   aim   to   maximise  
the   number   of   decent   affordable   homes   that   can   viably   be   delivered   alongside   market   homes   in  
order   to   meet   need.   Negotiating   elements   of   affordable   housing   in   new   schemes   will   contribute  
valuably   to   meeting   local   need.  
 
3.37Reflecting   economic   viability   considerations   in   general   the   Council   will   negotiate  
for   an   element   of   30%   affordable   housing   in   residential   development  
 
3.38In   applying   the   following   policy,   site   specific   considerations   will   be   taken   into   account   in  
relation   to   the   element   of   affordable   housing   that   will   be   expected.   The   presumption   is   that   the  
affordable   element   will   be   delivered   on   the   application   site,   unless   robust   justification   exists   for  
provision   on   an   alternative   site   in   the   developer's   ownership   and   control,   or   for   a   financial  
contribution   in   lieu   of   on-site   provision   which   will   help   to   deliver   strategic   housing   objectives.   It   is  
accepted   that   on   sites   comprising   a   total   of   10   dwellings   or   less    and   which   have   a   maximum  
combined   floorspace   of   no   more   than   1,000   square   meters ,   a   financial   contribution   should   not  
be   sought.  
 
3.39Developers   will   be   required   to   demonstrate   how   any   affordable   housing   will   be   made  
available   to   households   unable   to   obtain   adequate   housing   through   the   private   market   and   will   be  
expected   to   engage   with   registered   providers.   (The   Council   can   provide   a   list   of   provider  
partners).   This   may   be   secured   by   entering   into   a   planning   agreement.   The   developer   will   be  
required   to   demonstrate   that   enjoyment   of   the   affordable   housing   as   such   can   be   guaranteed   for  
successive   as   well   as   initial   occupiers   for   the   foreseeable   future.   However,   eligibility   of   owners   to  
acquire/   progress   to   full   ownership   is   acknowledged   as   an   exception.  
 
Policy   SP23   -   Affordable   Housing  
Residential   development   schemes   for   more   than   10   dwelling   units,   including   mixed  
use   developments   incorporating   residential   and   developments   with   a   combined   gross  
floor   area   of   more   than   1,000   square   meters   shall   be   required   to   provide   30%   of   the  
dwellings   as   affordable   housing.   
The   affordable   housing   shall   be   provided   in   proportions   set   out   in   the   Strategic  
Housing   Market   Assessment   or   successive   documents   
 
The   above   requirements   will   only   be   reduced   if   meeting   them   would   demonstrably  
make   the   proposed   development    unviable.  
  
49    
4-   Environment   Strategy  
 
Protecting   the   Countryside  
4.1 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   local   plans   should   take  
account   of   the   roles   and   character   of   different   areas,   promoting   the   vitality   of   our   main   urban  
areas   and   recognising   the   intrinsic   character   and   beauty   of   the   countryside.  
 
4.2 Thanet's   open   countryside   is   particularly   vulnerable   to   development   because   of   its  
limited   extent,   the   openness   and   flatness   of   the   rural   landscape   and   the   proximity   of   the   towns.  
Thanet's   countryside   provides   important   landscapes   that   contribute   to   its   sense   of   place,   as   well  
as   making   Thanet   an   attractive   place   that   people   want   to   come   to.   Much   of   the   countryside   is  
classified   as   'best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land'.   The   countryside   also   supports   a   variety  
of   habitats   and   species,   particularly   a   number   of   important   species   of   farmland   birds   which   have  
declined   in   numbers   over   the   last   few   decades.  
 
4.3 There   is   a   presumption   against   development   in   the   countryside   as   the   sites   allocated  
in   this   plan   meet   the   development   needs   of   the   district.   The   Council   has   assessed   all   of   the  
sites   put   forward,   and   some   have   been   allocated   in   rural   settlements   where   this   has   been  
considered   appropriate   to   meet   the   needs   of   sustainable   development  
 
4.4 The   Council   considers   that   it   is   essential   to   protect   the   countryside   through   planning  
policy   in   view   of   its   vulnerability   to   sporadic   forms   of   development   and   will   locate   all   but  
essentially   rural   development   in   the   Thanet   towns.   The   only   exception   to   this   will   be   proposals   for  
development   that   meet   the   criteria   set   out   in   paragraph   55   of   the   NPPF:  
 
●The   essential   need   for   a   rural   worker   to   live   permanently   at   or   near   their   place   of  
work   in   the   countryside;   or  
●Where   such   development   would   represent   the   optimal   viable   use   of   a   heritage  
asset   or   would   be   appropriate   enabling   development   to   secure   the   future   of  
heritage   assets;   or  
●Where   the   development   would   re-use   redundant   or   disused   buildings   and   lead  
to   an   enhancement   to   the   immediate   setting;   or  
●The   exceptional   quality   or   innovative   nature   of   the   design   of   the   dwelling.  
 
Such   a   design   should:  
 
●Be   truly   outstanding   or   innovative,   helping   to   raise   standards   of   design   more  
generally   in   rural   areas  
●Reflect   the   highest   standards   in   architecture  
●Significantly   enhance   its   immediate   setting;   and  
●Be   sensitive   to   the   defining   characteristics   of   the   local   area  
 
The   following   policy   seeks   to   achieve   the   objective   of   safeguarding   the   geological   and   scenic  
value   of   the   coast   and   countryside.  
 
 
 
 
 
50    
 
 
 
Policy   SP24   -   Development   in   the   Countryside  
 
Development   on   non-allocated   sites   in   the   countryside   will   be   permitted   for   either:  
1.the   growth   and   expansion   of   an   existing   rural   business;  
2.the   development   and   diversification   of   agricultural   and   other   land   based   rural   businesses;  
3.rural   tourism   and   leisure   development;  
4.the   retention   and/or   development   of   accessible   local   services   and   community   facilities;   or  
5.the   redevelopment   of   a   brownfield   site   for   a   use   that   is   compatible   with   its   countryside  
setting   and   its   surroundings.  
 
Isolated   homes   sites   in   the   countryside   will   not   be   permitted   unless   they   fall   within   one   of   the  
exceptions   identified   in   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework.  
 
All   development   proposals   to   which   this   policy   applies   should   be   of   a   form,   scale   and   size  
which   is   compatible   with,   and   respects   the   character   of,   the   local   area   and   the   surrounding  
countryside   and   its   defining   characteristics.   Any   environmental   impact   should   be   avoided   or  
appropriately   mitigated.  
  
Green   Wedges  
4.5 The   coastal   towns   of   Thanet   are   separated   by   three   particularly   important   areas   of   open  
countryside   which   are   known   as   the   Green   Wedges   indicated   on   the   policies   map.  
 
4.6 The   Green   Wedges   are   significant   in   shaping   the   character   of   Thanet   which   has   historically  
been   a   'horseshoe'   of   built   development   wrapping   around   the   coast.   The   Green   Wedges   provide   a  
clear   visual   break   when   passing   between   the   towns,   giving   a   recognised   structure   and   identity   to  
Thanet's   settlements.   The   Green   Wedges   are   distinct   from   other   types   of   open   space   as   they   provide   a  
link   between   the   open   countryside   and   land   which   penetrates   into   the   urban   areas.   The   Green   Wedges  
also   make   a   valuable   contribution   to   green   infrastructure   for   the   District.  
 
4.7 The   three   Green   Wedges   differ   in   size   and   character.   The   largest   is   the   one   that   separates  
Margate   and   Broadstairs.   Substantial   areas   of   this   Green   Wedge   consist   of   high   quality   agricultural  
land   in   large   open   fields   without   fences   or   hedgerows.   Other   parts   have   isolated   belts   of   woodland.   The  
other   two   Green   Wedges   which   separate   Birchington   and   Westgate,   and   Broadstairs   and   Ramsgate  
are   considerably   smaller   but   perform   a   very   significant   function   and,   due   to   their   limited   extent   are   also  
potentially   more   vulnerable   to   development   pressures.  
 
4.8 There   is   very   limited   built   development   within   the   Green   Wedges.   The   areas   have   level  
or   gently   undulating   landform   and   generally   sparse   vegetation.   The   public   perception   of   space,  
openness   and   separation   is   largely   gained   from   roads   and   footpaths   that   run   through   or  
alongside   the   Green   Wedges   in   undeveloped   frontages.   These   factors   allow   many   extensive  
and   uninterrupted   views   across   open   countryside,   enabling   people   to   find   the   recreational,  
scenic   or   amenity   resources   they   require   without   having   to   travel   long   distances.   This   is  
important   as   it   adds   to   the   quality   of   life   and   well-being   perceived   by   people   in   the   community.  
 
4.9 The   aesthetics   of   the   Green   Wedges   are   varied,   and   they   are   not   always   accessible   to  
51   the   public.   There   is   an   opportunity   to   enhance   the   Green   Wedges   by   creating   and   enhancing  
wildlife   habitats,   for   example   working   with   landowners   to   encourage   farmland   birds,   and   to   make  
the   areas   more   accessible,   potentially   for   recreation   use.   This   may   require   changing   farming  
activities.   Funding   may   be   available   for   environmental   land   management   through   Natural  
England's   Stewardship   Schemes.  
 
4.10Local   Plan   policies   have   historically   been   used   to   prevent   urban   sprawl,   maintain   the  
separation   of   the   Thanet   towns   and   prevent   their   coalescence,   preserving   their   unique  
identities.   The   Green   Wedge   policy   has   been   consistently   and   strongly   supported   at   appeals.  
Inspectors'   comments   in   appeal   decisions,   and   the   Inspector's   Report   to   the   Thanet   Local   Plan  
Inquiry,   highlight   the   significance   of   the   open   countryside   between   the   Thanet   Towns,   in  
providing   visual   relief   in   a   highly   urbanised   area.  
 
4.11Some   areas   of   the   Green   Wedges   are   vulnerable   to   development   pressures,   and   some  
sites   within   them   have   been   suggested   as   housing   allocations.   The   Council   has   assessed   the  
sites   put   forward   in   the   Green   Wedges   and   found   that   the   allocation   of   some   sites   proposed   in  
the   Green   Wedges   would   cause   less   harm   than   others.   However,   although   allowing   some   small  
scale   development   may   not   significantly   diminish   the   Green   Wedge,   the   cumulative   impact   of  
several   small   scale   developments   could   be   of   detriment   to   the   Green   Wedges   and   cause   new  
development   pressures   where   there   are   currently   none.   It   could   also   set   a   precedent   of  
releasing   Green   Wedge   sites   and   result   in   further   development   within   the   Green   Wedges   which  
would   diminish   their   functions.  
 
4.12The   Council   considers   the   Green   Wedges   still   perform   a   highly   significant   function  
which   overrides   the   need   for   development,   and   should   continue   to   be   protected   through  
planning   policy   and   meet   the   strategic   objective   of   retaining   the   separation   between   Thanet's  
towns   and   villages   with   the   following   policy.  
 
4.13Policy   SP25   sets   out   the   policy   approach   in   the   Green   Wedges.    The   Policy   recognises  
that   there   may   be   circumstances   where   it   is   essential   for   development   to   be   located   in   the  
Green   Wedges,   where   there   are   no   other   suitable,   available   sites.    This   may   include  
development   to   support   agriculture,   where   agricultural   units   are   located   wholly   or   largely   with  
the   Green   Wedges;   or   schemes   to   provide   essential   infrastructure.   Applicants   will   need   to  
demonstrate   that   it   is   essential   for   the   proposed   development   to   be   within   the   Green   Wedges,  
and   in   the   case   of   agricultural   development,   to   demonstrate   that   the   development   is   required  
as   part   of   the   business   plan   for   the   unit.  
 
 
Policy   SP25   -   Safeguarding   the   Identity   of   Thanet's   Settlements  
Within   the   Green   Wedges   new   development   (including   changes   of   use)   will   only  
be   permitted   if   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   development   is  
 
1.not   detrimental   or   contrary   to   the   following   aims   to:  
 
●Safeguard   areas   of   open   countryside    in   order   to   maintain     physical  
separation   and   avoid   coalescence   of   the   towns,   retaining   their   individual  
character   and   distinctiveness,    for   example   by   the   expansion   of   isolated  
groups   of   houses   or   other   development).  
●Conserve,   protect   and   enhance   the   essentially   rural   and   unspoilt   character,  
and   distinctive   landscape   qualities   of   the   countryside   that   separates   the   urban  
areas,   for   the   enjoyment   and   amenity   of   those   living   in,   and   visiting,   Thanet.  
●Increase   access   and   usability   without   compromising   the   integrity   of   the   Green  
Wedges.  
52   Or   is  
2.essential   to   be   located   within   the   Green   Wedges.  
 
Open   sports   and   recreational   uses   will   be   permitted   subject   to   there   being   no   overriding  
conflict   with   other   policies,   the   wider   objectives   of   this   plan   and   the   stated   aims   of   this  
policy.   If   granted,   any   associated   built   development   must   be   kept   to   a   minimum,  
essential,   small   in   scale   and   be   necessary   to   support   the   open   use.   It   should   also   be   well  
related   to   adjacent   urban   edge   and   sensitively   located   to   retain   openness   of   the   area.  
 
Proposals   for   policy   compliant   development   that   include   measures   that   will   create   or  
enhance   wildlife   habitats   and   biodiversity   within   the   Green   Wedges,   or   will   improve  
the   quality   of   the   Green   Wedges   by   providing   high   quality   public   amenity   space   will  
be   supported.  
 
Views   and   Landscapes  
4.14The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   the   planning   system  
should   contribute   to   and   enhance   the   natural   and   local   environment   by   protecting   and  
enhancing   valued   landscapes.  
 
4.15Thanet   has   historically   been   recognised   for   its   distinctive   wide,   simple   and   unrestricted  
views   and   dramatic   chalk   cliffs   along   parts   of   its   coastline.   The   Thanet   Coast   is   the   longest  
continuous   stretch   of   coastal   chalk   in   the   UK   and   is   one   of   the   reasons   for   its   designation   as  
Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC).   Useful   resources   and   guidance   for   the   interpretation   of  
landscape   are   the   Natural   England   National   Character   Areas,   the   Kent   Historic   Landscape  
Characterisation   (2001)   which   has   identified   the   broad   historic   character   of   the   landscape   of  
Kent,   and   the   Thanet   Landscape   Character   Assessment.   In   addition   KCC   commissioned   a  
Seascape   Character   Assessment   for   the   Dover   Strait   (2015)   which   identifies   the   character  
areas   associated   with   the   Dover   Strait   from   North   Foreland   to   Dungeness.  
 
4.16Thanet   has   a   distinct   landscape   area   defined   by   the   Wantsum   channel   which   gave  
Thanet   its   "island"   identity   by   separating   it   from   the   mainland.   The   Channel   silted   up   around  
1,000   years   ago,   and   is   characterised   by   former   shoreline   and   port   settlements   and   irregular  
fields   bounded   by   roads,   tracks   and   paths.   The   Wantsum   has   a   history   of   reclamation   and   usage  
stretching   back   to   at   least   the   12th   and   13th   centuries   in   connection   with   the   considerable  
ecclesiastical   estates   in   the   region.  
 
4.17The   contribution   Thanet's   landscapes   make   to   Thanet's   sense   of   place   and   island  
characteristics   is   very   strong,   as   well   as   providing   economic   benefits   in   making   the   district   an  
attractive   place   to   settle   and   visit.   Tourism   and   recreation   uses   compatible   with   Thanet's   historic  
landscapes   would   be   encouraged.   Development   would   be   expected   to   respect   the   diverse  
landscape   characteristics   of   the   countryside   and   coast.   The   character   of   the   landscape   within  
Thanet's   countryside   is   varied,   ranging   from   the   distinctive   sweep   of   Pegwell   Bay,   the   flood   plains  
of   the   River   Stour   and   former   Wantsum   Channel,   the   open   slopes   of   the   former   Wantsum  
Channel,   the   level   to   undulating   Central   Chalk   Plateau,   the   wooded   parkland   at   Quex   and   the  
urban   coast.   Landscape   does   not   stop   at   administrative   boundaries   and   two   of   the   broad   areas  
associated   with   Pegwell   Bay   and   the   Wantsum,   continue   into   neighbouring   districts   of   Dover   and  
Canterbury.   Developers   may   be   required   to   submit   a   Landscape   and   Visual   Impact   Assessment  
(LVIA)   with   planning   applications   that   are   likely   to   have   a   significant   impact   on   the   landscape.   The  
LVIA   should   identify   the   nature,   scale   and   magnitude   of   landscape   and   visual   effects,   and   also  
help   to   identify   ways   of   avoiding,   reducing   and   mitigating   any   adverse   effects.   The   Landscape  
Institute   provides   guidance   on   carrying   out   such   an   assessment.  
 
4.18Thanet   sits   within   the   Natural   England's   National   Character   Area   (NCA)   number   113   the  
53   North   Kent   Plain   which   sits   between   the   outer   Thames   Estuary   and   the   Kent   Downs.   This  
describes   Thanet   as   a   'discrete   and   distinct   area'   within   this   NCA,   characterised   by   its   unity   of  
land   use.   The   Thanet   Landscape   Character   Assessment   (2017)   refines   this   character   area   at   the  
local   level   by   identifying   7   broad   landscape   character   types   -   chalk   plateau,   chalk   slopes,  
undulating   chalk   farmland,   parkland   and   estates,   marshes,   undeveloped   coast   and   developed  
coast.   These   are   further   refined   into   13   landscape   character   areas   as   set   out   below   in   table   7.  
The   assessment   sets   out   the   key   characteristics   which   are   evaluated   through   key   sensitivities  
and   qualities   leading   to   a   landscape   strategy   setting   out   guidelines   for   each   character   area.  
These   guidelines   should   be   taken   into   consideration   when   considering   development   proposals  
within   these   areas.   It   is   the   Council's   intention   to   adopt   the   Landscape   Character   Assessment   as  
a   Supplementary   Planning   Document   which   will   provide   a   framework   for   future   development  
when   drawing   up   masterplans   particularly   for   the   strategic   sites.  
 
Table   7   -   Landscape   Character   Areas  
 
Landscape   Character  
Type  Landscape   Character   Area  
A:   Chalk   Plateau  A1:   Manston   Chalk   Plateau  
B:   Chalk   Slopes  B1:Wantsum   North   Slopes  
C:   Undulating   Chalk  
Farmland  C1:   St   Nicholas-at-Wade   Undulating  
Farmland  
 C2:   Central   Thanet   Undulating   Farmland  
 C3:   St   Peter's   Undulating   Farmland  
 C4:   Newlands   Farm  
D:   Parkland   and   Estates  D1:   Quex   Park  
E:   Marshes  E1:   Stour   Marshes  
 E2:   Wade   Marshes  
F:   Undeveloped   Coast  F1:   Pegwell   Bay  
 F2:   Foreness   Point   and   North   Foreness  
G:   Developed   Coast  G1:   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs   Cliffs  
 G2:   North   Thanet   Coast  
  
54   Map   2   -   Landscape   Character   Areas  
 
 
The   Chalk   Plateau  
 
4.19The   central   part   of   the   district   is   characterised   by   A1:   the   Manston   Chalk   Plateau,   a  
generally   flat   or   gently   undulating   landscape,   with   extensive,   unenclosed   fields   under   intensive  
arable   cultivation.   This   open   landscape   is   fragmented   by   the   location   of   large   scale   developments  
such   as   the   former   airport,   Manston   Business   Park   and   a   sporadic   settlement   pattern   to   the   north  
of   the   airport.   The   character   of   this   area   is   also   defined   by   the   proximity   of   the   edges   of   the   urban  
areas.   This   character   area   contains   the   highest   point   on   the   island   at   Telegraph   Hill.   The   elevated  
plateau   results   in   long   distance   panoramic   views   to   the   south   over   Minster   Marshes   and   across  
Pegwell   Bay   and,   in   the   west,   across   the   Wantsum.   The   elevated   central   chalk   plateau   also   forms  
a   skyline   in   many   views   back   from   lower   landscapes   in   Thanet,   including   the   coast   and  
marshlands.  
 
The   Chalk   Slopes  
 
4.20This   area   largely   comprises   the   distinctive   and   often   quite   steep   hill   slopes   leading   down  
from   the   Central   Chalk   Plateau   to   the   former   Wantsum   Channel   -   B1:   Wantsum   Northern   Slopes.  
The   landscape   is   very   open   with   few   features   and   the   former   shoreline   is   more   distinct   in   some  
places   than   in   others,   with   the   variation   in   the   contour   pattern.   From   the   upper   slopes   it   affords  
extensive   views   across   the   whole   of   the   former   Wantsum   Channel   to   the   slopes   on   the   opposite  
banks   and   in   many   places   to   the   sea.   The   former   shoreline   is   more   distinct   in   some   places   than  
in   others,   with   the   variation   in   the   contour   pattern.   However,   it   also   provides   the   unique   setting   of  
the   former   channel   side   villages   of   Minster,   Monkton,   Sarre   and   St   Nicholas,   and   the   smaller,  
originally   farm   based,   settlements   of   Shuart,   Gore   Street   and   Potten   Street.   These   elements  
provide   important   visual   evidence   of   the   growth   of   human   settlement,   agriculture   and   commerce  
in   the   area.  
55   
4.21The   openness   of   this   landscape   provides   wide   and   long   views   of   the   former   Wantsum  
Channel   area   and   Pegwell   Bay.   The   area   also   possesses   a   large   number   of   archaeological   sites  
(including   scheduled   ancient   monuments);   numerous   listed   buildings   (including   Minster   Abbey,  
the   churches   at   Minster,   Monkton   and   St   Nicholas,   and   Sarre   Mill);   and   the   historical   landing   sites  
of   St   Augustine   and   the   Saxons,   Hengist   and   Horsa.  
 
Undulating   Chalk   Farmland  
 
4.22The   undulating   chalk   farmland   is   a   particular   landscape   feature   in   Thanet   and   consists   of  
four   landscape   character   areas:   C1:   St   Nicholas-at-Wade   Undulating   Farmland,   C2:   Central  
Thanet   Undulating   Farmland;   C3:   St   Peter's   Undulating   Farmland;   and   C4:   Newlands   Farm.  
Some   of   these   character   areas   are   important   for   their   long   distant   views   to   the   marshes   and   sea  
while   in   others   the   agricultural   land   performs   a   settlement   separation   function.   These   areas   of  
high   quality   agricultural   land   are   of   value   for   farmland   and   roosting   coastal   birds.   The   openness  
and   undeveloped   character   of   the   farmland   contributes   to   the   essentially   rural   character   and  
relatively   dark   skies.  
 
Parks   and   Estates  
 
4.23Quex   Park   (D1)   is   unique   within   the   Thanet   context,   comprising   a   formal   and   extensive  
wooded   parkland   and   amenity   landscape   within   an   otherwise   open   intensively   farmed   landscape.  
It   possesses   a   formal   landscape   structure   and   gardens   that   act   as   an   effective   setting   to   Quex  
House   Grade   II   listed.   The   parkland   is   intensively   cultivated   between   the   tree   belts,   with   limited  
grazing   pasture   remaining.   Two   important   historic   features   of   the   Park   are   the   Grade   II   listed  
Waterloo   Tower   and   a   round   castellated   brick   tower   to   the   north   of   the   main   House.  
 
Marshes  
 
4.24The   two   marshland   landscapes   of   E1:   Stour   Marshes   and   E2:   Wade   Marshes   formerly  
separated   the   Isle   of   Thanet   from   the   mainland   and   formed   part   of   the   former   Wantsum   channel.  
The   former   channel   stretches   from   Reculver   (in   Canterbury   District)   to   Richborough   (in   Dover  
district)   marked   by   the   remains   of   Roman   forts   at   these   locations.   These   Roman   forts   guarded  
the   two   entrances   of   the   channel   and   the   area   is   potentially   rich   in   archaeology.   Therefore   this   is  
a   sub   regionally   important   landscape   as   it   extends   into   the   neighbouring   districts   of   Canterbury  
and   Dover   and   includes   the   flood   plain   of   the   River   Stour.   Both   areas   are   characterised   by   a   vast,  
flat,   open   landscape   defined   by   the   presence   of   an   ancient   field   system,   defined   by   an   extensive  
ditch   and   dyke   system,   the   sea   walls   and   isolated   groups   of   trees.   These   elements   provide  
important   visual   evidence   of   the   physical   evolution   of   the   Wantsum   Channel   and,   like   other   marsh  
areas   in   Kent,   produce   huge   open   skies.   The   former   grazing   land   has   been   improved   and  
managed   as   arable   farmland,   however,   it   still   retains   its   network   of   ditches   which   provide  
biodiversity   interest.   In   both   of   these   landscapes   it   is   important   to   conserve   the   long   distance  
views   to   the   Thames   Estuary   to   the   north   and   Pegwell   Bay   to   the   south.  
 
Undeveloped   Coast  
 
4.25There   are   two   stretches   of   undeveloped   coast   with   the   most   extensive   being   Pegwell   Bay  
(F1)   which   stretches   into   Dover   District   at   Sandwich.   The   other   is   F2:   Foreness   Point   and   North  
Foreness   to   the   north   east   of   Thanet.  
 
4.26Pegwell   Bay   is   an   extensive   area   of   mixed   coastal   habitats,   including   mudflats,   saltmarsh  
and   coastal   scrub   stretching   from   Ramsgate   in   the   north   to   Sandwich   in   the   south.   These  
habitats   form   an   open   and   relatively   unspoilt   landscape,   with   a   distinctive   character.   The   area  
possesses   a   sense   of   remoteness   and   wildness   despite   the   relative   proximity   of   development.  
Among   its   most   important   features   in   the   area   is   the   unique   sweep   of   chalk   cliffs   viewed   across  
56   Pegwell   Bay   from   the   south.   This   landscape   creates   large   open   skies.   This   is   also   of   more   than  
district   significance  
as   it   stretches   into   the   neighbouring   district   of   Dover.   The   bay   is   of   significant   nature  
conservation   interest   which   is   reflected   by   its   International,   European   and   national   designations.  
 
Developed   Coast  
 
4.27The   long   coastline   is   one   of   Thanet's   main   assets.   There   are   two   character   areas  
associated   with   the   developed   coast   G1:   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs   Cliffs   and   G2:   North   Thanet  
Coast.   The   distinctive   east   facing   low   chalk   cliffs   of   Thanet   and   the   open   seascape   create   a  
dramatic   contrast   to   the   almost   continuous   urban   area   of   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs   located   on  
the   cliff   top.   The   North   Thanet   Coast   extends   from   the   western   edge   of   Birchington   along   the  
northern   edge   of   Margate.   The   North   Thanet   Coast   is   characterised   by   a   series   of   sandy   bays  
with   chalk   reefs,   mudflats   and   rock   pools   backed   by   a   line   of   low   white   chalk   cliffs.  
 
4.28With   the   exception   of   the   Green   Wedges,   this   area   is   heavily   urbanised.   The   coastal  
strip   is   characterised   by   the   presence   of   traditional   seaside   architecture,   active   harbour   areas  
and   beaches   and   some   extensive   public   open   clifftop   areas.   The   pattern   of   bays   and   chalk  
headlands   provides   long   sweeping   and   panoramic   views   of   the   coast,   which   are   often  
complimented   by   a   positive   relationship   with   adjacent   built   development.  
 
4.29The   Thanet   Landscape   Character   Assessment   provides   the   more   detailed   guidance   for  
development   proposals   in   each   of   the   local   landscape   character   areas   and   will   be   adopted   and  
supplementary   planning   guidance.   The   following   policy   aims   to   safeguard   and   enhance   the  
open   and   historic   characteristics   of   Thanet's   countryside   and   landscapes.  
 
Policy   SP26   -   Landscape   Character   Areas  
The   Council   will   identify   and   support   opportunities   to   conserve   and   enhance  
Thanet's   landscape   character   and   local   distinctiveness.  
 
Development   proposals   should   demonstrate   how   their   location,   scale,   design   and  
materials   will   conserve   and   enhance   Thanet's   local   distinctiveness,   in   particular:  
 
1. Its   island   quality   surrounded   by   the   silted   marshes   of   the   former   Wantsum  
Channel   and   the   sea;  
2. A   sense   of   openness   and   'big   skies',   particularly   in   the   central   part   of   the   District;  
3. Its   long,   low   chalk   cliffs   and   the   sense   of   'wildness'   experienced   at   the   coast   and  
on   the   marshes;  
4. Gaps   between   Thanet's   towns   and   villages,   particularly   those   areas   designated  
as   Green   Wedges;  
5. Long-distance,   open   views,   particularly   across   the   Dover   Strait   and   English  
Channel,   North   Sea   and   across   adjacent   lowland   landscapes;   and  
6. Subtle   skylines   and   ridges   which   are   prominent   from   lower   lying   landscape  
both   within   and   beyond   the   District.  
 
Development   proposals   should   demonstrate   how   they   respect   and   respond   to   the  
character,   key   sensitivities,   qualities   and   guidelines   of   the   relevant   landscape   character  
areas,   as   detailed   in   the   Landscape   Character   Assessment   (LCA)   and   summarised  
below.  
 
All   development   should   seek   to   avoid   skyline   intrusion   and   the   loss   or   interruption   of  
long   views   of   the   coast   and   the   sea,   and   proposals   should   demonstrate   how   the  
development   will   take   advantage   of   and   engage   with   these   views.  
57    
Development   should   generally   be   directed   away   from   the   Stour   Marshes   (E1),   Wade  
Marshes   (E2)   and   Pegwell   Bay   (F1)   character   areas   (as   detailed   in   the   LCA),   as   these  
are  
largely   undeveloped   and   key   to   retaining   the   island   character   of   Thanet.   The  
undeveloped   character   of   Landscape   Character   Type   F:   Undeveloped   Coast   should   also  
be   maintained.  
 
Proposals   on   the   coast   (within   landscape   character   types   F:   Undeveloped   Coast   and   G:  
Developed   Coast   and   the   surrounding   area)   should   respect   the   traditional   seafront  
architecture   of   the   area,   maintain   existing   open   spaces   and   should   ensure   that  
recreational   and   wildlife   opportunities   are   not   compromised   by   development.   Proposals  
should   maintain   and   enhance   the   setting   of   sandy   bays,   low   chalk   cliffs   and   associated  
grassland   and   long   sweeping   views   of   the   coastline.  
 
The   rural-urban   boundary   is   distinctive   in   some   parts   of   Thanet,   particularly   where   there  
is   an   abrupt   urban   edge   and   where   the   countryside   extends   into   the   urban   areas   as  
Green   Wedges.   The   distinction   between   town   and   countryside   should   be   retained.  
 
Development   proposals   that   conflict   with   the   above   principles   will   only   be   permitted  
where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   they   are   essential   for   the   economic   or   social  
well-being   of   the   area.   In   such   cases,   landscape   impacts   should   be   minimised   and  
mitigated   as   far   as   possible.  
 
Green   Infrastructure   Network  
4.30The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   local   plans   should   plan  
positively   for   the   creation,   protection,   enhancement   and   management   of   networks   of   biodiversity  
and   Green   Infrastructure.   It   states   that   local   ecological   networks   should   be   identified   and   these  
should   include   the   hierarchy   of   international,   national   and   locally   designated   sites   of   importance  
for   biodiversity,   wildlife   corridors,   stepping   stones   that   connect   them,   and   areas   identified   by   local  
partnerships   for   habitat   restoration   or   creation.  
 
4.31Planning   policies   should   promote   the   conservation,   restoration   and   re-creation   of   priority  
habitats,   ecological   networks   and   the   protection   and   recovery   of   priority   species.  
 
4.32The   NPPF   also   states   that   international,   national   and   locally   designated   nature  
conservation   sites   should   be   protected,   with   appropriate   weight   given   to   the   importance   of   their  
designation.  
 
4.33The   NPPF   states   that   existing   open   space,   sports   and   recreational   buildings   and   land  
(including   playing   fields)   should   not   be   built   on   unless   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   land   is   surplus  
to   requirements   or   if   it   would   be   replaced   by   equivalent   or   improved   provision.   Planning   policies  
should   also   protect   and   enhance   public   rights   of   way   and   access.  
 
4.34Thanet   boasts   a   wealth   of   natural   features   contribute   to   the   green   infrastructure   network,  
including   internationally   and   nationally   designated   sites   and   associated   species,   a   magnificent  
coastline,   chalk   cliffs,   geological   features,   river   and   marshland   systems   and   areas   of   open  
countryside   with   distinctive   landscapes   and   views.   It   is   important   that   these   are   maintained   and  
enhanced,   and   better   linked   to   provide   a   comprehensive   Green   Infrastructure   network.  
 
4.35Natural   England   defines   Green   Infrastructure   (GI)   as:  
 
58   'a   strategically   planned   and   delivered   network   comprising   the   broadest   range   of   high   quality  
green   spaces   and   other   environmental   features.   It   should   be   designed   and   managed   as   a  
multifunctional   resource   capable   of   delivering   those   ecological   services   and   quality   of   life  
benefits   required   by   the   communities   it   serves   and   needed   to   underpin   sustainability.   Its  
design   and   management   should   also   respect   and   enhance   the   character   and   distinctiveness  
of   an   area   with   regard   to   habitats   and   landscape   types.  
 
Green   infrastructure   includes   established   green   spaces   and   new   sites   and   should   thread  
through   and   surround   the   built   environment   and   connect   the   urban   area   to   its   wider   rural  
hinterland.  
Consequently   it   needs   to   be   delivered   at   all   spatial   scales   from   sub-regional   to   local  
neighbourhood   levels,   accommodating   both   accessible   natural   green   spaces   within   local  
communities   and   often   much   larger   sites   in   the   urban   fringe   and   wider   countryside.'  
 
4.36Green   infrastructure   does   not   necessarily   stop   at   District   boundaries   and   so   the   District  
Council   will   work   the   other   East   Kent   Councils   to   ensure   that   any   Green   Infrastructure   strategy   is  
compatible   with   adjacent   studies.   The   various   components   that   make   up   Thanet's   existing   Green  
Infrastructure   is   shown   on   policies   map.  
 
4.37There   are   various   Green   Infrastructure   projects   being   progressed   by   the   Council   and   other  
organisations,   and   also   a   number   of   community   projects.   These   include   Dane   Valley   Woods,  
Westbrook   Undercliffe   Nature   Park,   Friends   of   Mocketts   Wood,   Montefiore   Woodland   and   the  
Windmill   Community   Allotments.   All   large   development   sites   will   be   expected   to   contribute   to  
Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure   in   line   with   Policy   SP27   which   should   include   an   appropriate   mix,  
compatible   with   the   surrounding   landscape   and   habitats.    The   Government   has   recently   published  
its   25   Year   Environment   Plan   (2018)   which   seeks   to   connect   people   with   the   environment   to   improve  
health   and   wellbeing   through   the   creation   of   new   green   infrastructure.    At   the   local   level   further  
guidance   on    the   provision    of   green   infrastructure   including   provision   of   new   rights   of   way   and  
cyclepaths   can   be   found   in   Kent   Design.   
 
4.38The   Council   seeks   to   continue   increasing   and   enhancing   Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure  
network,   and   will   encourage   new   community   Green   Infrastructure   projects   by   working   with  
relevant   organisations.   The   Council   will   produce   a   Green   Infrastructure   Strategy   in   consultation  
with   relevant   groups   and   organisations   following   adoption   of   the   Plan.   The   Plan   sets   out   the  
strategic   approach   to   Green   Infrastructure   in   policy   SP27   which   aims   to   deliver   the   strategic  
objectives   by   protecting,   maintaining   and   enhancing   biodiversity   and   the   natural   environment   and  
creating   a   coherent   network   of   Green   Infrastructure.   More   detail   will   be   added   in   the   forthcoming  
Green   Infrastructure   Strategy.   Provision   of   new   infrastructure   in   new   developments,   particularly  
for   informal   recreation   and   dog   walking   can   help   to   reduce   the   impact   of   visitor   pressure   on   the  
nature   conservation   interest   at   the   coast.   It   can   also   aid   restoration   of   the   landscape,   improve  
biodiversity   and   improve   connectivity   between   habitats   or   habitat   features   such   as   hedgerows.  
Good   Green   Infrastructure   can   have   additional   benefits   to   the   wider   ecosystem   services  
including   healthy   water   and   nutrient   cycles,   improved   air   quality,   managing   flood   risk   and   water  
pollution   and   minimising   the   effects   of   climate   change.   There   are   more   direct   benefits   to   local  
communities   including   the   enjoyment   of   the   natural   environment   and   improved   health   and  
wellbeing.  
 
4.39Development   proposals   should   consider   the   example   list   below   which   is   not   exhaustive,  
when   considering   the   inclusion   of   green   infrastructure   within   their   proposals.    Not   all   of   these  
measures   may   be   appropriate   in   all   cases   as   they   need   to   be   applicable   to   the   conditions   of   the  
site:  
 
●create   new   wildlife   and   biodiversity   habitats;   
●integrate   Sustainable   Drainage   Systems   (SuDs);   
59   ●plant   hedgerows   and   trees;  
●provide   green   roofs;  
●create   ponds;  
●create   urban   green   corridors;  
●create   roadside   verges;  
●provide   and   manage   new   accessible   open   space   including   linear   routes,   for   informal  
recreation/walking   and   dog   walking   and   provide   linkages   between   areas   of   open   space;  
●provide   private   gardens   and   play   space;  
●conserve   and   enhance   the   character   of   historic   green   spaces;  
●provision   of   off-site   enhancements;  
●contribute   to   the   enhancement   of   Thanet's   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Areas   or   the  
enhancement   of   the   Green   Wedges   including   the   introduction   of   linear   features   such   as  
native   hedgerows   and   water   bodies   where   appropriate;  
●reinforce   and/or   restore   landscape   character   in   line   with   the   relevant   landscape   character  
assessment   guidelines.  
●Planning   new   Green   Infrastructure   assets   to   maximise   their   provision   of   ecosystem   services  
including,   but   not   limited   to,   improved   air   quality,   natural   flood   management   and   climate  
change   adaptation   where   appropriate;  
●Other   suitable   planting   schemes   to   provide   biodiversity   opportunities  
 
 
Policy   SP27   -   Green   Infrastructure  
All   development   proposals   should,    where   possible,    safeguard   Thanet's   Green  
Infrastructure   network   and   enhance   it   by   integrating   new   multifunctional   Green  
Infrastructure   by   integrating   Green   Infrastructure   provision   in   the   design   of  
developments.   Opportunities   to   improve   Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure   network   by  
protecting   and   enhancing   existing   Green   Infrastructure   assets   and   the   connections  
between    and   providing   new   Green   Infrastructure   assets   should   be   included   early   in  
the   design   process   for   major   developments,   together   with   consideration   of   how   they  
will   be   managed   and   maintained   in   the   long   term.  
 
Development   should   make   a   positive   contribution   to   Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure  
network    wherever   possible   and   appropriate,   by   the   incorporation,   provision   or   fulfilment  
of   those   matters   and   objectives   set   out   in   paragraph.   4.39   above.  
 
  
Biodiversity:   International   and   European   Sites  
4.40International   and   national   legislation   provide   statutory   protection   for   the   most   important  
nature   conservation   sites.   These   are   Ramsar   sites,   Special   Protection   Areas   (SPA)   and   Special  
Areas   of   Conservation   (SAC)   which   form   a   network   of   Natura   2000   sites   across   Europe  
designated   for   their   important   habitat   and/or   birds.   Most   of   the   Thanet   coastline   is   designated  
and   is   important   for   its   intertidal   chalk,   caves,   species   (such   as   blue   mussel   beds   and   piddocks),  
dunes   and   mudflats,   and   certain   migratory   and   breeding   bird   species.  
 
4.41Ramsar   sites   have   been   designated   as   wetlands   of   International   Importance   as   a   Waterfowl  
Habitat   under   the   Ramsar   Convention.   This   requires   signatory   governments   to   conserve   wetlands  
and   designated   sites.   Special   Protection   Areas   are   designated   under   Article   4   of   the   Birds   Directive  
(Directive   2009/147/EC   on   the   Conservation   of   Wild   Birds),   which   requires   member   states   to   take  
"appropriate   steps   to   avoid   pollution   or   the   deterioration   of   habitats   or   any   disturbance   affecting   the  
birds".   Special   Areas   of   Conservation   have   also   been   designated   under   the   EU   Habitats   Directive  
(Directive   92/43/EEC   on   the   Conservation   of   Natural   Habitats   and   of   Wild   Fauna   and   Flora)   to  
60   provide   increased   protection   to   a   variety   of   species,   plants   and   habitats   of   importance   to   biodiversity  
both   on   a   national   and   international   scale.  
 
4.42There   are   currently   six   internationally   designated   sites   within   or   adjacent   to   the   District:  
 
●Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   Special   Protection   Area   (SPA)  
●Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   Ramsar   site  
●Thanet   Coast   Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC)  
●Sandwich   Bay   Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC)  
●Margate   and   Long   Sands   SAC  
●Outer   Thames   Estuary   Marine   SPA  
 
4.43Designations   do   not   stop   at   the   District   boundary,   nor   do   the   nature   conservation   interest  
of   the   sites.   For   example   the   Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   Special   Protection   Area   and  
Ramsar   extend   into   adjacent   Districts.   There   are   a   number   of   other   sites   within   or   abutting   East  
Kent   which   are   located   in   neighbouring   districts   such   as   Stodmarsh   (SAC,   SPA,   Ramsar)   and  
the   Blean   Complex   (SAC)   and   development   proposals   will   need   to   consider   their   impact   on  
these   in   line   with   Habitat   Regulations.   Thanet   District   Council   and   Canterbury   City   Council   are  
working   co-   operatively   to   deliver   a   joint   approach   to   mitigation.  
 
 
Policy   SP28   -   Protection   of   the   International   and  
European   Designated   Sites  
Sites   of   International   Nature   Conservation   Importance   will   receive   the   highest   level  
of   protection.  
 
Proposals   likely   to   have   a   significant   effect   on   an   SPA,   SAC   or   Ramsar   site,   either   alone  
or   in-combination,   will   be   required   to   undergo   appropriate   assessment   as   per   the  
Conservation   of   Habitats   and   Species   Regulations   2017   (as   may   be   amended).   Where  
possible     applicants   should   incorporate   measures   to   avoid   or   mitigate   any   adverse  
impacts.   Where,   despite   all   possible   avoidance   and   mitigation   measures   being   put   in  
place,   a   proposal   is   still   shown   to   have   an   adverse   effect   on   the   integrity   of   an  
International   site,   planning   permission   will   only   be   granted   in   exceptional  
circumstances,   where   there   are   no   less   ecologically   damaging   alternatives,   there   are  
imperative   reasons   of   overriding   public   interest   and   damage   can   be   fully   compensated.  
 
Where   proposals   are   considered   likely   to   have   a   significant   effect   on   an   International  
site,   early   consultation   with   Natural   England,   the   Council   and   any   other   appropriate  
statutory   consultees   is   recommended.  
 
 
Strategic   Access   Management   and   Monitoring   Plan  
(SAMM)   and   the   Thanet   Coast   Project  
4.44Recreational   pressure   at   the   European   sites,   particularly   the   SPA,   has   given   cause   for  
concern   from   Natural   England   and   the   Kent   Wildlife   Trust   regarding   the   impact   of   disturbance  
to   over-wintering   birds.   There   is   further   concern   regarding   the   impact   of   increased   recreational  
pressure   as   a   result   of   population   increases.  
 
4.45Evidence   suggests   that   any   new   housing   development   in   Thanet   has   the   potential   to  
increase   the   recreational   impacts   on   the   SPA   resulting   from   the   increase   in   population.   This   may  
61   have   an   adverse   impact   on   the   species   for   which   the   SPA   has   been   designated.   The   actual   level  
of   impact   from   individual   developments   may   not   be   significant,   however   the   in-combination   effect  
of   all   housing   developments   proposed   in   the   district   cannot   rule   out   a   significant   impact.  
 
4.46As   a   result   of   this   impact   the   Council   appointed   specialist   consultants   to   produce   a   Strategic  
Access   Management   and   Monitoring   Plan   (SAMM)   (2016)   to   address   any   potential   impact.   The  
Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   SPA   is   used   by   a   large   number   of   migratory   birds   particularly  
over-wintering   Turnstones   and   European   Golden   Plover.   Much   of   the   coast   is   accessible   for   walking  
and   cycling   and   the   large   stretch   of   promenade   along   the   coast   bring   the   Turnstones   very   close   to  
users   and   potential   disturbance.   Recent   surveys   have   revealed   a   decline   in   their   population   eg   a  
50%   drop   in   Turnstone   numbers   in   2013,   subsequent   years   also   show   a   decline   in   numbers.  
Evidence   shows   that   recreational   activity   causes   disturbance   to   birds,   particularly   dog   walking.   This  
type   of   recreational   activity   is   most   likely   to   increase   with   increased   housing   and   it   is   this   activity   that  
the   mitigation   strategy   seeks   to   address.  
 
4.47The   zone   of   influence   around   a   European   designated   site,   is   the   geographical   area   within  
which   people   will   travel   to   visit   it.   To   keep   it   to   a   manageable   extent   a   zone   of   influence   is   usually   set  
so   as   to   capture   the   majority   of   visits   or   visitors,   rather   than   every   single   one.   Within   this   zone,    any  
potential   impacts   need   to   be   avoided   or   mitigation   provided.   The   whole   of   the   District   falls   within   a  
6km   radius   of   the   SPA   boundary   and   evidence   has   shown   the   zone   of   influence   for   the   site   to  
extend   further   than   this.    Therefore   residents   from   all   new   housing   in   Thanet   have   the   potential   to  
increase   recreational   pressure   on   the   SPA   and   the   mitigation   approach   set   out   in   the   SAMM  
strategy   applies   to   the   entire   District.  
 
4.48The   mitigation   package   will   include   measures   such   as   a   wardening   service   to   provide   on-site  
presence   throughout   the   SPA   for   the   peak   overwintering   period   -   October   and   April.   A   co-   ordination  
role   will   be   required   to   manage   the   wardening   and   co-ordinate   activities   throughout   the   year   such   as  
education   and   awareness   activities   such   as   signage   and   interpretation.   Other   measures   could   include  
limited   access   management.   Regular   monitoring   of   birds   and   visitors   will   also   be   required.   This   list   is  
not   exhaustive   and   other   appropriate   activities   may   be   put   in   place.   The   SAMM   will   be   reviewed   no  
later   than   10   years   or   sooner   if   monitoring   and   surveys   reveal   issues   which   are   not   being   addressed   by  
the   mitigation   package.   The   mitigation   package   will   be   delivered   by   the   Thanet   Coast   Project.  
 
4.49The   Thanet   Coast   Project   was   established   in   2001   and   is   tasked   with   much   of   the   delivery   of  
the   North   East   Kent   Marine   Protected   Area   (NEKMPA)   Action   Plan   and   therefore   delivery   of   the  
majority   of   the   objectives   of   the   Thanet   Cliffs   and   Shore   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Area   (BOA)   within  
Thanet.   The   main   aims   of   the   project   are   to:-  
 
●Raise   awareness   of   the   important   marine   and   bird   life,   and   how   to   avoid   damaging   them.  
●Work   with   local   people   to   safeguard   coastal   wildlife   and   implement   the   Management  
Scheme   Action   Plan.  
●Encourage   and   run   wildlife   related   events   and   make   links   with   wildlife,   green   tourism,  
coastscape   and   the   arts.  
●Be   a   focal   point   for   enquiries   and   gathering   information   on   coastal   wildlife   and  
environmental   issues.  
●Keep   everyone   informed   with   progress   through   various   means,   including   newsletters,  
articles   and   stakeholder   workshops.  
 
4.50The   Thanet   Coast   Project   has   been   very   successful   with   the   following   activities   and   projects  
set   up   to   deliver   these   objectives:-  
 
●10   coastal   codes   of   conduct   formulated   with   stakeholders   to   alleviate   the   impacts   of  
human   activities   on   the   European   sites.  
●One   scientific   research   code   formulated   by   The   North   East   Kent   Scientific   Coastal  
62   Advisory   Group.  
●A   twice   yearly   Thanet   Coast   newsletter.  
●Educational   activities   and   resources   for   all   ages.  
●Volunteering   opportunities   from   volunteer   wardens   to   participation   in   ecological   research.  
 
4.51The   SAMM   has   developed   a   tariff   (revised   2017   in   light   of   the   new   housing   requirement   of  
17,140   units)   that   will   apply   to   all   new   housing   according   to   the   number   of   dwellings   built   within   the  
district.   The   tariff   is   inextricably   linked   to   the   housing   requirement   for   the   District   for   the   plan   period  
and   will   be   reviewed   if   this   requirement   changes.   The   current   tariff   is   set   in   table   8.  
 
Table   8   -   SAMM   Tariff  
 
Development  
type  Tariff   per   dwelling   -   including   requirement   for   in-perpetuity  
funding  
1   bedroom   unit  £202  
2   bedroom   unit  £320  
3   bedroom   unit  £424  
4+   bedroom   unit  £530  
 
Policy   SP29   -   Strategic   Access   Management   and   Monitoring  
Plan   (SAMM)  
All   proposals   for   new   residential   development   will   be   required   to   comply   with   the  
Strategic   Access   Management   and   Monitoring   Plan   (SAMM)   in   order   to   mitigate   against  
the   in-   combination   effects   of   new   development,   through   the   pathway   of   recreational  
pressure   on   the   Thanet   Coast   SPA   and   Ramsar   site.   A   financial   contribution   based   on   the  
current   tariff   in   table   8   and   any   subsequent   amendments,   is   required   towards   an  
in-perpetuity   access   management   scheme.   This   will   be   collected   via   a   S106   payment.  
 
Developments   for   other   uses   that   would   increase   recreational   activity   causing  
disturbance   to   qualifying   species   will   be   assessed   on   a   case   by   case   basis   under   the  
Habitat   Regulations   and   may   be   required   to   make   full   or   partial   contributions   towards   the  
SAMM   Plan   if   appropriate.  
 
Protection,   Conservation   and   Enhancements   of  
Biodiversity   Assets  
4.52Species   protected   under   the   Wildlife   and   Countryside   Act,   the   Protection   of   Badgers   Act,   the  
Habitats   Directive   or   listed   in   the   Natural   Environment   and   Rural   Communities   Act   (Section   41)   may  
be   present   on   sites   and   would   be   a   material   consideration   in   the   assessment   of   development  
proposals.   Natural   England   have   produced   Standing   Advice   for   protected   species   in   relation   to  
planning   applications   which   provide   details   of   the   potential   existence   of   protected   species,   advice   on  
whether   survey   reports   are   required,   guidance   on   the   survey   requirements   for   protected   species   and  
advice   on   mitigation   proposals.   Developers   should   have   regard   to   this   advice   as   appropriate.  
4.53The   principle   of   net   gain   is   set   out   in   national   planning   policy.    For   the   purposes   of   Policy  
SP30   it   applies   to   all   developments   that   result   in   a   loss   of,   or   degradation   of   habitats   including  
buildings.    Net   gains   in   biodiversity   can   be   delivered   in   a   variety   of   ways   ranging   from   avoiding   the  
loss   of   high   quality   habitats,   to   on   or   off   site   habitat   creation   or   enhancement,   or   a   tariff   system   to  
invest   in   strategically   important   habitats.  
 
63   4.54The   open   countryside   within   Thanet   is   known   to   support   a   number   of   important   species   as   is  
recognised   in   the   international   and   national   designations.   In   addition,   Thanet   is   also   important   for  
farmland   birds   due   to   its   large   areas   of   farmed   countryside.   Farmland   birds   have   declined   over   the  
last   few   decades   and   so   it   is   important   to   ensure   that   remaining   populations   are   protected   and  
allowed   to   increase.   The   Green   Wedges   which   are   a   largely   arable   landscape,   provide   a   dispersal  
route   for   migratory   bird   species   which   are   present   on   the   coast,   especially   during   the   winter   season.  
Changing   farming   practices   within   the   Green   Wedges   would   help   to   increase   populations   of  
farmland   and   migratory   birds   by   enabling   more   ecologically   diverse   habitat   to   be   created.  
 
4.55The  following  policy  seeks  to  protect,  maintain  and  enhance  biodiversity  and  wildlife,  by              
recognising  that  important  species  should  be  protected  and  requires  this  to  be  considered  in               
determining   planning   applications   for   development.  
 
 
Policy   SP30   -   Biodiversity   and   Geodiversity   Assets  
Development   proposals   will,   where   appropriate   ,   be   required   to   make   a   positive  
contribution   to   the   conservation,   enhancement   and   management   of   biodiversity   and  
geodiversity   assets   resulting   in   a   net   gain   for   biodiversity   assets   through   the   following  
measures:  
 
1. the   restoration   /   enhancement   of   existing   habitats,  
2. the   creation   of   wildlife   habitats   where   appropriate,   by   including   opportunities  
for   increasing   biodiversity   in   the   design   of   new   development  
3. the   creation   of   linkages   between   sites   to   create   local   and   regional  
ecological   networks,  
4. the   enhancement   of   significant   features   of   nature   conservation   value  
on   development   sites.  
5. protect   and   enhance   valued   soils,  
6. mitigating   against   the   loss   of   farmland   bird   habitats  
 
Sites   should   be   assessed   for   the   potential   presence   of   biodiversity   assets   and  
protected   species.   For   sites   where   important   biodiversity   assets,   including   protected  
species   and   habitats   including   SPA   functional   land,   or   other   notable   species,   may   be  
affected,   an   ecological   assessment   will   be   required   to   assess   the   impact   of   the  
proposed   development   on   the   relevant   species   or   habitats.   Planning   permission   will   not  
be   granted   for   development   if   it   results   in   significant   harm   to   biodiversity   and  
geodiversity   assets,   which   cannot   be   adequately   mitigated   or   as   a   last   resort  
compensated   for,   to   the   satisfaction   of   the   appropriate   authority.  
 
4.56The   Natural   Environment   and   Rural   Communities   Act   2006   places   a   duty   on   public  
authorities   to   conserve   biodiversity.   The   Council   has   been   working   with   the   Kent   Nature  
Partnership   to   identify   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Areas   (BOAs)   within   the   district   in   response   to  
those   priority   habitats   and   species   identified   through   the   Kent   Biodiversity   Action   Plan.  
 
4.57The   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Areas   identify   where   the   maximum   biodiversity   benefits  
can   be   achieved   and   the   greatest   gains   can   be   made   from   habitat   enhancement,   restoration  
and   recreation.   These   areas   offer   the   best   opportunities   for   establishing   large   habitat   areas  
and/or   networks   or   wildlife   habitats.   Thanet   has   two   BOAs:  
 
●Thanet   Cliffs   and   Shore   -   covers   the   majority   of   the   internationally   and   nationally  
designated   coastal   habitats,   extending   through   Thanet   as   far   as   Whitstable.  
●Lower   Stour   Wetlands   -   The   Lower   Stour   wetlands   extend   from   the   mouth   of   the   old  
Wantsum   channel   across   reclaimed   marshland   to   the   former   mouth   of   the   river   Stour,  
64   and   then   continue   around   the   coast   to   the   Sandwich   mudflats   and   sand   dunes   and   the  
Lydden   Valley.  
 
Map   3:   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Areas   Map  
 
 
4.58As   well   as   these   identified   sites,   there   is   potential   for   habitat   creation   and   enhancement   in  
the   Green   Wedges,   and   sites   designated   for   nature   conservation.   The   Council   will   work   with  
landowners,   developers   and   other   appropriate   organisations   to   improve   the   opportunity   for  
biodiversity.   Developments   should   take   into   account   their   contribution   to   wildlife   and   seek   to  
improve   habitat   connectivity   in   the   wider   area   where   appropriate   through   suitable   landscaping  
schemes   and   new   provision   which   can   help   to   address   the   issues   associated   with   the   impact   of  
climate   change.  
 
4.59The   following   policy   aims   to   meet   the   strategic   objective   of   protecting,   maintaining  
and   enhancing   biodiversity.  
 
 
Policy   SP31   -   Biodiversity   Opportunity   Areas  
The   Council   will   support   proposals   that   enhance,   maintain   and   protect   the   identified  
Biodiversity   Opportunities   Areas,   particularly   where   proposals   increase   the   biodiversity   value  
of   the   site.  
 
Protection   of   Open   Space  
4.60Thanet's   urban   areas   are   interspersed   with   a   variety   of   areas   of   open   space.   These   include  
parks,   informal   recreation   green   space,   natural   and   semi-natural   green   space,   amenity   green   space,  
outdoor   sports   facilities,   play   areas,   cemeteries   and   allotments.   These   form   part   of   Thanet's   Green  
Infrastructure   network   and   are   shown   on   the   Policies   Map.  
65    
4.61The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   existing   open   space,   sports   and  
recreational   buildings   and   land   (including   playing   fields)   should   not   be   built   on   unless   it   can   be  
demonstrated   that   they   are   surplus   to   requirements,   the   loss   would   be   replaced   by   equivalent   or  
better   provision   or   the   development   is   for   alternative   sports   and   recreation   provision.   The   NPPF   also  
states   that   planning   policies   should   protect   and   enhance   public   rights   of   way   (PROW)   and   access.  
Kent   County   Council's   Countryside   and   Coastal   Access   Improvement   Plan   identifies   the   need   for  
planning   policies   to   protect   or   enhance   PROW.  
 
4.62Open   space   is   a   scarce   commodity   within   Thanet's   urban   areas.   Once   such   areas   are   lost   to  
development,   it   is   very   difficult   to   provide   satisfactory   replacements   within   the   immediate   vicinity.  
Open   spaces   can   provide   for   a   wide   variety   of   activities   from   organised   sport   to   simple   relaxation   and  
opportunities   for   walking.   Open   space   and   amenity   areas   are   vital   for   people's   health   and   quality   of  
life   and   their   visual   importance   can   often   contribute   to   the   quality   of   the   local   environment.   Smaller  
areas   of   informal   open   space   on   residential   estates   can   provide   important   local   resource,   particularly  
in   the   more   built   up   areas   where   there   is   less   opportunity   for   larger   open   spaces.   Sometimes   these  
areas   are   too   small   to   be   identified   on   the   policies   map   for   protection,   therefore   any   proposed  
development   on   open   space   areas   of   this   nature   will   need   to   be   justified.  
 
4.63The   Open   Space,   Indoor   and   Outdoor   Sports   Facilities   Strategy   2018   (Open   Space   Strategy)  
has   been   carried   out   and   includes   recommendations   and   action   plans   to   be   implemented   corporately.  
The   draft   strategy   identifies   an   under   provision   in   the   5   typologies   of   open   space   -   amenity   greenspace,  
provision   for   children   and   young   people,   allotments,   natural   and   semi-natural   greenspace   and   public  
parks   and   gardens   -   at   2016   and   also   by   2031.   The   figures   are   set   out   in   table   12   and   are   based   on  
population   figures   of   141,00   at   2016   and   161,500   by   2031.  
 
4.64In   line   with   the   draft   recommendations,   the   Council   will   expect   all   new   developments   to   make  
provision   for   new   open   space   in   line   with   the   Fields   in   Trust   Guidelines   for   provision,   accessibility   and  
equipped   play   space.   Table   12   sets   out   the   provision   guidelines,   table   10   sets   out   the   accessibility  
criteria   and   table   11   sets   out   the   Quantity   Benchmark   Guidelines   for   equipped/designated   play   space.  
This   is   set   out   in   Chapter   12.  
 
4.65For   the   strategic   sites   the   relevant   policies   set   out   the   general   open   space   requirements,   for  
the   specific   typologies   of   open   space   the   Council   will   expect   developers   to   apply   the   Fields   in   Trust  
guidelines   to   determine   the   precise   requirements.  
 
4.66For   other   developments,   where   provision   cannot   be   made   on   site,   or   where   an   existing   play  
space   lies   within   the   walking   distance   guideline   of   a   proposed   development   the   Council   will   seek   a  
financial   contribution   either   towards   new   provision   or   improvement   of   an   existing   facility.   Applicable  
schemes   may   include   the   improvement   of   facilities   at   Hartsdown   and   improved   provision   at   Jackey  
Baker's   sports   ground   and   proposed   expansion.  
 
4.67Allotment   sites   are   a   statutory   requirement   for   the   Council   but   are   usually   managed   by   town  
or   parish   councils.   Allotments   serve   not   only   local   residents   by   offering   them   a   chance   to   grow   their  
own   fruit   and   vegetables   but   also   by   offering   them   physical   activities,   a   healthy   diet,   and   general  
well-being.   Allotments   can   also   be   important   for   their   contribution   to   biodiversity.   The   overall   benefits  
of   allotments   include:  
 
●Providing   a   sustainable   food   supply  
●A   healthy   activity   for   people   of   all   ages  
●Fostering   community   development   and   cohesiveness  
●Acting   as   an   educational   resource  
●Providing   access   to   nature   and   wildlife   and   acting   as   a   resource   for   biodiversity  
●Providing   open   spaces   for   local   communities  
66   ●Reducing   carbon   emissions   through   avoiding   the   long   distance   transport   of   food  
 
4.68The   following   policies   meet   the   objectives   of   promoting   physical   and   mental   well-being,  
safeguarding   and   enhancing   the   geological   and   scenic   value   of   the   coast   and   countryside,  
retaining   the   separation   between   Thanet's   towns   and   villages   and   enhancing   biodiversity   and  
the   natural   environment.  
 
 
Policy   SP32   -   Protection   of   Open   Space   and   Allotments  
Proposals   which   would   result   in   the   loss   of   protected   open   space   or   allotments   as   shown  
on   the   policies   map   either   through   built   development   or   a   change   of   use   will   only   be  
permitted   if:  
 
1) In   relation   to   open   space   It   is   for   an   open   recreation   or   tourism   use   and   is   of  
appropriate   scale   and   design   for   its   setting.   Any   related   built   development   should   be   kept  
to   the   minimum   necessary   to   support   the   open   use,   and   be   sensitively   located;   or  
2) In   relation   to   both   open   space   and   allotments   there   is   an   overriding   a   need   for  
development   that   outweighs   the   need   to   protect   the   open   space   or   allotment   which  
cannot   be   located   elsewhere.   In   this   case   provision   of   alternative   open   space   or  
allotment   of   at   least   an   equivalent   size   and   quality   must   be   provided   in   a   suitable   nearby  
location;   or  
3) an   assessment   has   been   undertaken   which   clearly   shows   that   the   open   space   or  
allotments   are   no   longer   required;   and  
4) In   all   cases,   there   would   be   no   material   harm   to   the   contribution   the   protected  
open   space   makes   to   the   visual   or   recreational   amenity   of   the   area.  
 
New   development   that   is   permitted   by   virtue   of   this   policy   should   make   a   positive  
contribution   to   the   area   in   terms   of   siting,   design,   scale,   use   of   materials   and  
biodiversity.  
 
Local   Green   Space  
4.69Local   Green   Spaces   can   be   designated   by   communities   through   the   local   or  
neighbourhood   planning   processes.   As   set   out   in   the   NPPF,   once   designated,   a   Local   Green  
Space   will   be   afforded   the   same   protection   as   Green   Belts   and   new   development   will   not   be  
permitted   other   than   in   very   special   circumstances.   The   NPPF   sets   out   the   circumstances   under  
which   Local   Green   Spaces   can   only   be   designated:  
 
●The   green   space   is   in   reasonably   close   proximity   to   the   community   it   serves.  
●The   green   area   is   demonstrably   special   to   a   local   community   and   holds   a  
particular   local   significance.  
●The   green   area   concerned   is   local   in   character   and   is   not   an   extensive   tract   of   land.  
 
4.70The   Local   Plan   designates   19   Local   Green   Spaces   which   are   protected   under   policy  
SP30.   This   follows   an   assessment   of   49   proposals   submitted   by   local   groups,   individuals,   town  
and   parish   councils   during   the   Revisions   to   Preferred   Option   consultation   in   2017,   and   only   those  
listed   below   were   found   to   satisfy   the   criteria.   Details   of   the   assessment   can   be   found   in   the  
report   on   Local   Green   Space.   The   Local   Green   Spaces   designated   in   the   Local   Plan   are:  
 
●Kitty's   Green,   Broadstairs  
●Culmer's   Amenity   Land   Broadstairs  
●Holmes   Park,   Broadstairs  
67   ●Pierremont   Park,   Broadstairs  
●Memorial   Recreation   Ground,   Lawn   Road   Broadstairs  
●St   Peter's   Recreation   Ground,   Broadstairs  
●Mocketts   Wood,   Broadstairs  
●Westover   Gardens,   Broadstairs  
●Village   Green,   Foads   Lane,   Cliffsend  
●Meadow,   Cliffs   End   Road   Cliffsend  
●Playground   Foads   Lane,   Cliffsend  
●Earlsmead   Crescent,   Cliffsend  
●Dane   Valley   Woods,   Margate  
●Windermere   Avenue,   Ramsgate  
●Adrian   Square,   Westgate  
●Ethelbert   Square,   Westgate  
●Playing   Field,   Minster   Road,   Westgate  
●Recreation   Ground,   Lymington   Road,   Westgate  
●Local   Park,   Victoria   Avenue/Quex   Road,   Westgate  
 
 
Policy   SP33   -   Local   Green   Space  
The   sites   identified   on   the   Policies   Map   as   Local   Green   Space,   and   identified   in   paragraph  
4.66,   will   be   protected   from   development   in   accordance   with   the   requirements   of   the   National  
Planning   Policy   Framework.   
 
 
Provision   of   accessible   natural   and   semi-natural   green   space  
4.71The  provision  of  larger  areas  of  open  space  will  be  delivered  most  appropriately  through               
strategic  allocations  and  should  be  considered  integral  to  the  masterplanning  of  development             
proposals.  
 
4.72The   Open   Space   Strategy   (2018)   identifies   an   under   provision   of   natural   and   semi-natural  
green   space   based   on   the   fields   in   trust   guidelines   of   1.8ha   per   1,000   population,   of   190.19ha   by  
2031.   New   developments   will   be   required   to   make   provision   in   line   with   the   Fields   in   Trust  
guidelines.  
 
4.73It   can   also   help   to   relieve   some   of   the   recreational   pressure   on   the   coast,   although   this   is   in  
addition   to   any   mitigation   that   may   be   required   through   the   SAMM.   
 
4.74The  following  policy  seeks  to  ensure  the  recommended  provision  of  natural  and  semi              
natural  green  space,  parks,  gardens  and  recreation  grounds  is  provided  for  and  will  contribute  to                
Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure   network.  
 
 
Policy   SP34   -   Provision   of   Accessible   Natural   and   Semi-Natural  
Green   Space,   Parks,   Gardens   and   Recreation   Grounds  
The   Council   will   require   suitably   and   conveniently   located   areas   of   usable   amenity   space,  
adequate   to   accommodate   the   demands   for   passive   recreation   generated   by   residential  
development.   New   greenspace   provision   should,   where   possible,   be   linked   to   existing  
greenspace,   Green   Wedges   and/or   the   wider   countryside   and   public   rights   of   way   network,  
away   from   the   coast,   to   maximise   its   value.   Such   provision   should   seek   to   enhance   the  
68   opportunities   for   biodiversity.  
 
Sites   allocated   as   Strategic   Housing   Sites   will   be   required   to   provide   natural   and  
semi   natural   green   space   and   local   parks,   formal   gardens,   allotments   and   recreation  
grounds   to   meet   the   standards   set   out   in   Table    12.   Natural   and   Semi-natural   green  
space   will   be   expected   to   improve   the   biodiversity   potential   of   the   area  
 
The   Council   will   expect   appropriate   arrangements   for   maintenance   and   management   to  
be   made.   The   responsibility   for   which   will   be   vested   in   a   particular   individual,   or,   subject  
to   commuted   payment   to   meet   such   costs,   in   the   district,   town   or   parish   council.   Such  
arrangements   will   be   secured   by   entering   into   a   planning   agreement.  
 
Any   areas   of   accessible   natural   and   semi   natural   green   space,   parks,   gardens   and  
recreation   grounds   created   by   virtue   of   this   policy   will   be   protected   from   development  
by   policy   SP32   -   Protection   of   Open   Spaces.  
 
Quality   Development  
4.75The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   places   high   importance   on   good   design,  
stating   that   pursuing   sustainable   development   involves   seeking   positive   improvements   in   the   quality  
of   the   built,   natural   and   historic   environment,   as   well   as   in   people's   quality   of   life.   Planning   should  
seek   to   secure   high   quality   design   and   a   good   standard   of   amenity   for   all   existing   and   future  
occupants   of   land   and   buildings.   Permission   should   be   refused   for   development   of   poor   design   that  
fails   to   take   the   opportunity   to   improve   the   character   and   quality   of   an   area.  
 
4.76Thanet's   towns,   villages,   coast   and   countryside   enjoy   a   diverse   and   rich   built   heritage   which  
contributes   significantly   to   Thanet's   unique   sense   of   place   and   identity.   There   are   21   conservation  
areas   and   around   2,000   listed   buildings   (a   large   proportion   of   which   are   in   the   historic   town   centres)   -  
the   highest   concentration   of   listed   buildings   for   a   local   authority   in   the   South   East.   However   there   are  
some   areas   in   the   district   where   the   townscape   quality   needs   improvement   and   the   Council   is   seeking  
developments   of   a   higher   quality.   The   urban   areas   have   been   developed   to   a   high   density,   with   high  
numbers   of   flats   -   largely   due   to   the   availability   of   large   properties   formerly   used   as   hotels   which   lend  
themselves   to   conversion   to   flats,   and   the   subdivision   of   larger   family   homes.   Some   of   the   urban  
areas   boast   a   rich   architectural   heritage   including   attractive   Victorian   terraces   and   Regency   squares  
and   large   and   attractive   art   deco   properties   along   the   coasts.   Some   suburbs   and   the   rural   villages   are  
characterised   by   lower   density   development,   with   large,   well-   spaced   properties   and   a   number   of   tree  
lined   streets.  
 
4.77Good   design   can   help   improve   and   enhance   areas   by   ensuring   high   quality   developments,  
encourage   regeneration   and   can   help   reduce   the   opportunities   for   and   the   fear   of   crime.   The   NPPF  
re-iterates   and   reinforces   the   role   of   Design   Review   in   ensuring   high   standards   of   design.   Design  
Review   is   an   independent   and   impartial   evaluation   process   in   which   a   panel   of   experts   on   the   built  
environment   assesses   the   design   of   a   proposal.   The   projects   that   Design   Review   deals   with   are  
usually   of   public   significance,   and   the   process   is   designed   to   improve   the   quality   of   buildings   and  
places   for   the   benefit   of   the   public.  
 
4.78Developers   proposing   projects   of   public   significance   (such   as   urban   extensions   or   town  
centre   mixed   use   developments)   will   be   required   to   seek   a   Design   Review   by   an   independent  
design   panel.   This   should   be   carried   out   at   an   early   stage   in   the   process.   The   South   East   Regional  
Design   Panel,   (Design   South   East)   can   be   contacted   at   Kent   Architecture   Centre  
www.architecturecentre.org .  
 
4.79Developers   proposing   projects   that   are   of   national   significance   or   that   will   have   a   profound  
impact   on   the   regional   and   local   environment   will   be   required   to   seek   a   National   Design   Review  
69   with   the   CABE   team   at   the   Design   Council,     www.designcouncil.org.uk .   A   design   review   may   be  
required   for   developments   in   significant   locations   such   as   prominent   seafront   locations   or   as   part  
of   large   strategic   allocations.  
 
4.80This   objective   of   this   policy   is   to   ensure   that   new   development   is   built   to   the   highest   attainable  
quality   thereby   improving   the   quality   of   life   for   residents   and   aiding   investment   and   regeneration.  
More   detail   on   the   design   considerations   for   good   quality   development   is   set   out   in   policy   QD01.  
 
 
Policy   SP35   -   Quality   Development  
New   development   will   be   required   to   be   of   a   high   quality   and   inclusive   design   as   set   out  
in   policy   QD01   and   QD02.   Developers   may   be   required   to   seek   an   independent   Design  
Review   for   all    major   development   proposals,   and   any   proposals   regardless   of   size   in  
prominent   locations   or   which   are   likely   to   have   a   significant   visual   impact.  
 
Heritage  
4.81The   National   Planning   Policy   Statement   (NPPF)   states   that   local   plans   should   set   out   'a  
positive   strategy   for   the   conservation   and   enjoyment   of   the   historic   environment'.   It   places   emphasis  
on   putting   heritage   assets   to   viable   uses,   the   wider   benefits   that   can   be   achieved   by   the  
conservation   of   the   historic   environment   and   the   desirability   of   new   development   in   making   a  
positive   contribution   to   local   character   and   distinctiveness.   It   also   includes   criteria   which   would   need  
to   be   fulfilled   for   a   proposed   development   which   would   lead   to   substantial   harm   or   loss   of   a   heritage  
asset.  
 
4.82Thanet's   historic   and   natural   environment   defines   the   character   and   setting   of   the   district,  
and   contributes   significantly   to   residents'   quality   of   life.   It   is   important   to   maintain   and   enhance   the  
historic   and   natural   environment   against   the   background   of   a   successful,   growing   district  
encouraging   investment   and   regeneration.  
 
4.83The   district's   rich   historic   environment   can   trace   its   origins   to   pre-historic   activity   with   the  
remains   of   all   periods   from   the   Palaeolithic   to   Modern   recorded   within   the   area,   consisting   of  
both   burial   and   settlement   archaeology.   Within   the   area   there   are   about   2000   listed   buildings,  
27   conservation   areas,   13   scheduled   monuments,   1   national   registered   park   and   garden   of  
special   historic   interest,   and   a   wealth   of   nationally   and   locally   significant   archaeological  
remains.   In   addition,   there   are   numerous   other   heritage   assets   that,   whilst   not   designated,   are  
considered   to   be   nationally,   regionally   or   locally   significant.  
 
4.84It   is   this   rich   heritage   and   the   close   proximity   to   the   sea   that   gives   the   district   its   special  
character   and   distinctiveness;   this   is   emphasised   by   the   large   number   of   highly   graded   designated  
heritage   assets,   often   connected   to   the   strong   relationship   with   the   sea   either   in   the   form   of  
commerce,   health   or   leisure.   For   example   the   Winter   Gardens,   Margate   built   in   1911   is   the   only  
known   example   of   a   winter   Gardens   constructed   with   a   chalk   cliff   and   is   Grade   II   listed.   In   addition  
the   Lido   complex   Cliftonville   has   various   elements   which   are   Grade   II   listed,   including   the   Clifton  
baths   which   are   one   of   the   earliest   surviving   seawater   bathing   establishments   in   the   Country   being  
constructed   between   1824-8   and   is   the   only   known   example   of   one   being   dug   out   of   the   cliffs.   The  
Lido   complex   has   been   vacant   for   a   number   of   years   and   its   restoration   provides   an   important  
investment   opportunity   for   this   part   of   Cliftonville,   see   policy   SP10.  
 
4.85Dreamland   has   seen   significant   renovation   of   and   investment   in   its   listed   structures   -   cinema  
Grade   II*,   Scenic   Railway   Grade   II   -   and   is   an   important   cultural   and   historic   asset   to   the   Margate  
seafront.   The   recent   renovation   of   the   Grade   II   menagerie   enclosures   and   cages   that   once   housed  
70   lions,   is   an   important   asset   to   the   park.   These   early   animal   cage   structures   are   listed   for   their   rarity  
and   exceptionality.  
 
4.86Ramsgate   Royal   Harbour,   designated   in   1821,   has   a   number   of   Grade   II   and   Grade   II*   listed  
buildings   and   structures   ranging   from   the   Customs   House   and   Clock   tower,   harbour   inner   basin  
walls   and   Jacob's   Ladder   to   rare   seaside   structures   such   as   the   East   Cliff   lift.  
 
4.87Thanet   can   be   described   as   a   district   with   a   diverse   and   vibrant   character.   The   character   of  
the   coastal   areas   owes   much   to   the   juxtaposition   of   grand   seafront   developments   and   the   smaller  
scale   domestic   'vernacular'   buildings   associated   with   working   harbours   and   holiday   resorts.  
 
4.88The   character   of   the   rural   areas   owes   much   to   the   strong   links   with   early   Christianity   with   the  
landing   of   St   Augustine   in   597   at   Ebbsfleet,   and   the   ensuing   development   of   medieval   parishes  
centred   around   the   church.  
 
4.89Some   of   the   special   qualities   of   Thanet's   historic   environment   include:  
●The   richness   of   18th,   19th   and   20th   century   development   linked   to   the   sea,   including  
grand   residential   terraces,   harbours,   leisure   and   health   facilities   as   well   as   defence.  
●The   strong   associations   with   internationally   recognised   people   and   their   significant  
legacies   within   the   built   environment.   These   include   the   renowned   architect   AW   Pugin,  
the   Victorian   financier   and   philanthropist   ,   Sir   Moses   Montefiore   and   the   Victorian  
showman   George   Sanger,   Bleak   House   Broadstairs   Grade   II   listed   and   its   associations  
with   Charles   Dickens  
●The   presence   of   significant   historic   technical   innovation,   including   the   Scenic   Railway  
Grade   II   *,   Clifton   baths   Grade   II,   Albion   Place   Gardens   Grade   II   and   the   Waterloo  
Tower   at   Quex.  
●The   wealth   of   public   and   private   historic   open   spaces   including   many   planned  
squares,   parks,   cemeteries,   chines,   cliff   top   promenades,   coastal   topography   and  
significant   views  
●The   Victorian/Edwardian   suburbs   and   post-war   housing   developments   (including  
Westgate   on   Sea)  
●Locally   distinctive   materials,   flint,   clinker   brick,   Kentish   red   bricks   and   Kent   pegs  
●27   conservation   areas   which   vary   considerably   in   age,   size,   character   and   style.  
●Around   2,000   statutory   listed   buildings   in   Thanet   -   the   highest   concentration   in   the  
South   East.  
●A   number   of   highly   significant   Grade   I   or   II*   listed   buildings,   including   St   Augustine's  
and   Sir   Moses   Montefiore   Synagogue,   Ramsgate;   Scenic   Railway,   Margate.  
●13   Scheduled   Ancient   Monuments   ranging   from   Anglo-Saxon   cemeteries   to   Minster   Abbey.  
●A   designated   Registered   Park   and   Garden;   Albion   Place   Gardens   in   Ramsgate.  
●A   richness   in   archaeological   remains.   The   remains   of   all   periods   from   Paleolithic   to  
Modern   are   recorded   within   the   area   and   consist   of   both   burial   and   settlement  
archaeology.  
 
4.90Thanet's   heritage   assets   including   the   significant   historic   building   stock   and   archaeological  
resource,   are   irreplaceable   and   require   careful   management   as   the   area   evolves   and   undergoes  
significant   growth   and   regeneration.  
 
4.91The   opportunities   to   retain,   enhance   and   improve   Thanet's   historic   environment   include:  
 
● Using   the   income   generated   from   the   growing   local   tourism   economy   to   invest  
in   the   maintenance   and   upkeep   of   historic   assets;  
● Ensuring   development   schemes   enhance   the   setting   of   heritage   assets   and   do   not  
detract   from   their   character   and   the   appearance   of   the   area;  
● Supporting   proposals   for   heritage   led   regeneration,   ensuring   that   heritage  
71   assets   are   conserved,   enhanced   and   their   future   secured.  
 
4.92Where  development  is  proposed  that  may  affect  a  heritage  asset  (designated  or             
non-  designated)  or  its  setting,  the  Council  will  require  the  provision  of  the  following               
information,   proportionate   to   the   asset's   significance,   in   line   with   policy   SP36   (3):  
 
●describe   and   assess   the   significance   of   the   asset,   including   its   setting,   to  
determine   its   architectural,   historical   or   archaeological   interest;   and  
●identify   the   impact   of   the   proposed   works   on   the   significance   and   special  
character   of   the   asset;   and  
●provide   clear   justification   for   the   works,   especially   if   these   would   harm   the  
significance   of   the   asset   or   its   setting,   so   that   the   harm   can   be   weighed  
against   public   benefits.  
 
A   change   of   use   of   the   heritage   asset,   is   likely   to   be   supported   provided:  
 
●the   proposed   use   is   considered   to   be   the   optimum   viable   use,   and   is   compatible  
with   the   fabric,   interior,   character,   appearance   and   setting   of   the   heritage   asset;  
●such   a   change   of   use   will   demonstrably   assist   in   the   maintenance   or   enhancement  
of   the   heritage   asset;   and  
●features   essential   to   the   special   interest   of   the   individual   heritage   asset   are   not   lost  
or   altered   to   facilitate   the   change   of   use.  
 
4.93     A   Heritage   Strategy   is   being   prepared   for   Thanet.   It   is   proposed   that   the   strategy   will  
be   developed   alongside   the   Local   Plan   and   we   have   started   to   develop   an   evidence   base   to  
support   this   strategy   and   the   Local   Plan.   The   evidence   includes   assessing   the   significance   of  
heritage   assets   in   the   area,   including   their   settings,   and   the   contribution   they   make   to   their  
environment.   It   also   involves   assessing   the   potential   of   finding   new   sites   of   archaeological   or  
historic   interest.  
 
4.94The   preservation   of   Thanet's   heritage   is   considered   to   be   an   economic   asset,   and   its  
maintenance   and   protection   plays   an   important   role   in   the   district's   economy   and   aids   in  
regeneration   and   investment.   In   recognition   of   the   array   of   historic   assets,   Ramsgate   has   been  
named   as   Heritage   Action   Zone   in   2016   by   Historic   England.   This   will   provide   necessary  
funding   and   investment   to   restore   a   number   of   heritage   assets   and   regeneration   of   the   area.  
 
4.95The   Council   aims   to   work   with   property   owners   and   other   stakeholders   in   the   historic  
environment   to   both   protect   and   enhance   the   historic   environment   and   ensure   its   economic  
viability   for   future   generations.   One   such   scheme   is   the   Townscape   Heritage   Initiative   at   Dalby  
Square,   Cliftonville   funded   by   the   Heritage   Lottery   Fund   and   the   Council.   This   aims   to   restore   the  
built   environment   to   its   former   grandeur   which   would   then   be   seen   as   an   asset   and   encourage  
further   investment   in   this   area.   The   following   policy   sets   out   how   it   intends   to   achieve   this.  
 
Policy   SP36   -   Conservation   and   Enhancement   of   Thanet's  
Historic   Environment  
The   Council   will   support,   value   and   have   regard   to   the   historic   or  
archaeological   significance   of   Heritage   Assets   by:  
 
1) protecting   the   historic   environment   from   inappropriate   development,  
2) encouraging   new   uses   where   they   bring   listed   buildings   back   into   use,  
encouraging   their   survival   and   maintenance   without   compromising   the  
conservation   of   the   building   or   its   historical   or   archaeological   significance,  
72   3)requiring   the   provision   of   information   describing   the   significance   of   any  
heritage   asset   affected   and   the   impact   of   the   proposed   development   on   this  
significance,  
4)facilitating   the   review   of   Conservation   Areas   and   the   opportunities   for  
new   designations,  
5)recognising   other   local   assets   through   Local   Lists,  
6)offering   help,   advice   and   information   about   the   historic   environment   by  
providing   guidance   to   stakeholders,   producing   new   guidance   leaflets,   reviewing  
existing   guidance   leaflets   and   promoting   events   which   make   the   historic  
environment   accessible   to   all,  
7)issuing   Article   4   Directions   which   will   be   introduced   and   reviewed   as   appropriate,  
8)supporting   development   that   is   of   high   quality   design   and   supports  
sustainable   development.  
 
All   reviews   and   designations   will   be   carried   out   in   consultation   with   the   public   in   order   to  
bring   a   shared   understanding   of   the   reasons   for   the   designation   and   the   importance   of  
the   heritage   asset.  
 
 
Climate   Change  
4.96The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   expects   a   pro-active   approach   against  
climate   change   and   states   that   adapting   to,   and   mitigating   against,   the   effects   of   climate   change  
are   core   planning   principles.   This   can   be   achieved   by   planning   for   new   development   in  
locations   and   in   ways   which   reduce   greenhouse   gas   emissions,   actively   support   energy  
efficiency   improvements   to   existing   buildings,   and   where   appropriate,   support   standards   for  
sustainable   construction.   The   NPPF   lists   expectations   to   improve   energy   efficiency   in   new  
development   in   terms   of   decentralised   energy   and   sustainable   design,   and   ways   of   increasing  
the   use   and   supply   of   renewable   and   low   carbon   energy.   It   stresses   the   importance   of  
addressing   longer   term   factors   such   as   flood   risk,   coastal   change,   water   supply   and   changes   to  
biodiversity   and   landscape.  
 
4.97Climate   change   is   a   change   in   weather   patterns   caused   by   the   increased   levels   of  
carbon   dioxide   in   the   atmosphere   produced   by   the   use   of   fossil   fuels.   Planning   can   help  
increase   resilience   to   climate   change   impact   through   the   location,   mix   and   design   of  
development.  
 
4.98The   effects   of   climate   change   are   already   being   seen   in   Kent,   and   include:  
 
●more   erratic   weather   conditions   including   an   increase   in   the   number   of   'hot   weather'  
events,   storms   and   also   freezing   temperature   events;  
●increase   in   sea   levels   and   wave   crest;  
●increase   in   coastal   water   temperature;  
●length   of   growing   season   has   extended   by   one   month   since   1990;   and  
●increases   in   flooding   and   droughts.  
 
4.99The   Climate   Change   Act   2008   sets   a   target   to   reduce   the   UK's   greenhouse   gas  
emissions   by   at   least   80%   in   2050   from   1990   levels.   There   are   many   opportunities   to   integrate  
climate   change   mitigation   and   adaptation.   Planning   can   mitigate   climate   change   through  
reducing   emissions   by   reducing   the   need   to   travel   and   providing   sustainable   modes   of   transport;  
providing   opportunities   for   renewable   and   low   carbon   energy   technologies;   providing  
opportunities   for   decentralised   energy   and   heating   and   promoting   low   carbon   design   approaches  
to   reduce   energy   consumption   in   buildings   such   as   passive   solar   design.  
73    
4.100The   Council   has   adopted   the   Climate   Local   Kent   commitment   for   Thanet.   Climate   Local  
is   a   Local   Government   Association   initiative   to   drive,   inspire   and   support   council   action   on   a  
changing   climate.   The   initiative   supports   councils'   efforts   both   to   reduce   carbon   emissions   and  
also   to   improve   their   resilience   to   the   effects   of   our   changing   climate   and   extreme   weather.   The  
Climate   Local   Kent   Commitment   sets   aims   which   include:  
 
●34%   reduction   in   emissions   by   2020   (2.6%   reduction   per   year).  
●Retrofitting   to   existing   homes.  
●Reduce   water   consumption   from   160   to   140   litres   per   person   per   day   by   2016.  
●Increase   renewable   energy   deployment   in   Kent   by   10%   by   2020.  
 
4.101The   following   policy   aims   to   ensure   new   development   minimises   the   impacts   of   climate  
change   through   mitigation   and   adaptation   measures,   and   reduce   Thanet's   carbon   footprint.  
 
 
Policy   SP37   -   Climate   Change  
New   development   must   take   account   of   the   need   to   respond   to   climate   change:  
 
1)  by   minimising   vulnerability   and   providing   resilience   to   the   impacts   of   climate  
change   through   the   use   of   up   to   date   technologies,   efficient   design   and  
appropriate   siting   and   positioning   of   buildings ;  
2)Mitigating   against   climate   change   by   reducing   emissions   and   energy   demands   through  
the   use   of   up   to   date   technologies;  
3)realise   and   make   best   use   of   available   opportunities   to   reduce   the   impact   of   climate  
change   on   biodiversity   and   the   natural   environment   by   providing   space   for   habitats   and  
species   to   move   through   the   landscape   and   for   the   operation   of   natural   processes,  
particularly   at   the   coast.  
  
74    
5   -   Community   Strategy  
 
Healthy   and   Inclusive   Communities  
5.1 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   acknowledges   the   link   between   planning  
and   healthy   communities   and   states   that   the   planning   system   should   support   strategies   to   improve  
health   and   cultural   well-being,   promote   healthy   communities   and   identify   policies   that   will   deliver   the  
provision   of   health   facilities.   It   encourages   policies   that   will   facilitate   social   interaction   and   healthy  
inclusive   communities.  
 
5.2 Greener   neighbourhoods   and   improved   access   to   nature   will   improve   public   health   and   quality  
of   life   and   reduce   environmental   inequalities.   Urban   green   spaces   will   provide   varied   ecosystems   and  
will   contribute   to   coherent   and   resilient   ecological   networks.  
 
5.3 The   NEA   &   Marmot   Review   (2010)   demonstrate   the   positive   impact   that   nature   has   on   mental  
and   physical   health.   High   quality   natural   environments   foster   healthy   neighbourhoods;   green   spaces  
encourage   social   activity   and   reduce   crime.   The   natural   environment   can   help   children's   learning.  
Health   issues   are   addressed   in   this   plan   in   the   following   policy   areas:  
 
●Housing   quality   and   design  
●Transport  
●Economic   development,   employment   skills   and   training  
●Access   to   and   provision   of   local   services  
●Community   safety   and   crime  
●Access   to   fresh   food  
●Access   to   the   natural   environment  
 
5.4The   following   policy   sets   out   how   the   Plan   will   contribute   towards   a   healthier   community.    Further  
detail   on   active   design   is   set   out   in   paragraph   13.13  
 
Policy   SP38   -   Healthy   and   Inclusive   Communities  
The   Council   will   work   with   relevant   organisations,   communities   and   developers   to  
promote,   protect   and   improve   the   health   of   Thanet's   residents,   and   reduce   health  
inequalities.  
 
Proposals   will   be   supported   that:  
 
1)Bring   forward   accessible   community   services   and   facilities,   including   new   health  
facilities,  
2)Safeguard   existing   community   services   and   facilities,  
3)Safeguard   or   provide   open   space,   sport   and   recreation  
4)Promote   healthier   options   for   transport   including   cycling   and   walking,  
5)Improve   or   increase   access   to   a   healthy   food   supply   such   as   allotments,   farmers'  
markets   and   farm   shops,  
6)Create   social   interaction   and   safe   environments   through   mixed   uses   and   the   design  
and   layout   of   development,  
7)Create   greener   neighbourhoods   and   improve   biodiversity   and   access   to   nature.  
 
 
75   QEQM   Hospital   Margate  
5.5 Land   is   identified   on   the   policies   map   for   the   future   expansion   of   the   hospital   to   meet   future  
needs   to   the   south-east   of   the   existing   hospital.   Part   of   this   land   was   previously   designated   as  
Green   Wedge   land,   but   has   been   released   exceptionally   to   meet   the   health   and   social   needs   of  
local   people.   However,   in   order   to   safeguard   the   Green   Wedge   in   the   longer   term,   new  
development   at   the   hospital   should   involve   the   minimum   fresh   land-take   necessary.   Accordingly  
the   Council   will   expect   all   elements   of   detailed   expansion   proposals   to   make   the   most   efficient   use  
of   the   existing   and   allocated   site.   This   should   include   appropriate   use   of   multi-storey   development  
as   far   as   is   compatible   with   the   effective   working   of   the   site   and   the   creation   of   a   pleasant  
environment   for   both   patients   and   staff,   and   limiting   visual   impact   on   the   Green   Wedge.  
 
5.6 To   minimise   the   visual   impact   of   new   development   on   the   Green   Wedge,   it   would   be  
desirable   for   open   uses,   such   as   car   parking,   to   be   located   on   this   site   rather   than   amongst   the  
high-density   development   within   the   existing   hospital.   Existing   tree   screens   along   Ramsgate   Road  
and   along   the   footpath   should   be   retained   wherever   possible.   In   the   interests   of   sustainable  
pedestrian   and   cycle   movement   it   is   desirable   that   a   route   as   direct   as   possible   is   retained   for   the  
existing   footpath   connecting   Ramsgate   Road   with   St   Peter's   Road.  
 
5.7 The   hospital   has   frontages   to   Ramsgate   Road   and   St   Peter's   Road,   both   of   which   are  
Primary   Distributors   in   the   local   road   hierarchy   and   where   it   is   important   to   maintain   free   flow   of  
cross-town   and   longer   distance   traffic.   In   supporting   improvement   and   expansion   of   the   hospital   it   is  
essential   that   the   opportunity   be   taken   to   rationalise   and   improve   current   access   arrangements.  
Specific   proposals   will   be   required   to   reflect   a   traffic   impact   assessment   of   such   proposals   and   to  
incorporate   suitable   access   improvements   to   accommodate   any   resultant   increases   in   traffic   and  
appropriate   access   for   'Blue   Light'   vehicles.  
 
5.8 The   hospital   is   already   a   major   generator   of   traffic   in   the   area,   and   the   Council   will   wish   to  
see   the   implementation   of   a   Travel   Plan   for   the   hospital,   which   can   be   implemented   in   parallel   with  
development   permitted   by   this   Policy.   An   essential   element   of   this   Plan   should   be   to   encourage   the  
greater   use   of   public   transport   by   staff   and   visitors.   The   creation   of   new   staff   accommodation   on   site  
should   help   to   work   towards   this   objective.  
 
Policy   SP39   -   QEQM   Hospital,   Margate  
Land   to   the   south-east   of   the   existing   QEQM   Hospital,   Margate,   is   identified   for   release   for  
expansion   of   the   hospital.   No   other   development   will   be   permitted   on   this   site.   Development  
for   hospital   purposes   should   meet   the   following   criteria:  
 
1)Proposals   should   be   designed   to   involve   the   most   efficient   use   of   land,   consistent  
with   the   need   to   provide   a   pleasant   environment   for   patients   and   staff;  
2)Development   proposals   should   demonstrate   how   they   will   integrate   with    the   hospital  
site   as   a   whole;  
3)Proposals   should   incorporate   the   retention   of   the   existing   footpath   and   provision   of   a  
substantial   landscaping   screen;  
4)Proposals   should   incorporate   a   comprehensive   review   of   access   arrangements  
associated   with   the   hospital   and   access   provision   should   reflect   the   findings   of   a  
specific   traffic   impact   assessment;  
5)Proposals   should   be   supported   by   a   Travel   Plan;  
6)The   level   of   car   parking   associated   with   new   development   should   be   limited   to   the  
minimum   necessary.  
 
 
76   5.9 In   addition   to   the   hospital   allocation   the   Thanet   Clinical   Commissioning   Group   (CCG)   has  
identified   a   need   for   a   new   medical   centre   at   Westwood.   There   are   a   number   of   strategic  
allocations   in   the   Westwood   area   and   a   new   medical   centre   is   required   to   meet   the   needs   of   the  
new   community   arising   out   of   these   developments.  
 
Policy   SP40   -   New   Medical   Facilities   at   Westwood  
New   medical   facilities   are    required   at   Westwood   to   meet   the   needs   generated   by   the  
strategic   allocations.   The   Council   will   work   with   the   CCG,   developers   and   other   appropriate  
organisations   to   identify   a   suitable   site.  
 
 
Community   and   Utility   Infrastructure  
5.10The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   requires   local   plans   to   make   provision   for  
infrastructure   for   transport,   telecommunications,   waste   management,   water   supply,   wastewater,  
flood   risk   and   coastal   change.   It   also   requires   the   provision   of   health,   community   and   cultural  
infrastructure,   together   with   utility   infrastructure   such   as   gas,   electricity,   emergency   services   and  
fibre-optic   cables.  
 
5.11It   is   important   that   there   is   sufficient   community   infrastructure   to   support   new   development.  
This   includes   provision   of   adult   social   services,   education,   health   facilities,   libraries,   childcare   and  
youth   services.   This   is   dealt   with   more   fully   in   policy   CM01   and   supporting   text.  
 
5.12Advanced   high   quality   communications   infrastructure   is   essential   for   sustainable   economic  
growth.   The   development   of   high   speed   broadband   technology   and   other   communications   networks  
also   plays   a   vital   role   in   enhancing   the   provision   of   local   community   facilities   and   services.  
 
5.13The   Council   is   working   with   Kent   County   Council   and   other   services   providers   to   ensure  
sufficient   infrastructure   is   provided   for.   An   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan   has   been   prepared   alongside  
the   Local   Plan   to   identify   infrastructure   requirements.   Further   guidance   is   set   out   in   the  
implementation   policy   SP02.  
 
5.14The   following   policies   seek   to   achieve   the   objectives   of   accommodating   the   development  
needed   whilst   providing   and   improving   access   to   community   and   utility   infrastructure.  
 
 
Policy   SP41   -   Community   Infrastructure  
Development   will   only   be   permitted   when   provision   is   made   to   ensure   delivery   of   relevant  
and   sufficient   community   and   utility   infrastructure.   Where   appropriate,   development   will   be  
expected   to   contribute   to   the   provision   of   new,   improved,   upgraded   or   replacement  
infrastructure   and   facilities.  
 
Provision   of   Schools  
New   and   Expanded   School   provision  
5.15Kent   County   Council,   as   education   authority,   has   identified   from   the   population   and   growth  
forecasts   set   out   in   this   plan   that   Thanet's   primary   and   secondary   schools   will   need   to   expand  
through   both   onsite   expansion   and   new   provision.   The   Council   will   work   with   KCC   and   developers   to  
identify   and   safeguard   land   to   accommodate   any   required   expansions.   There   is   a   requirement   for   a  
new   secondary   school   at   Westwood   to   meet   the   needs   of   the   strategic   allocations.   The   Council   will  
77   work   with   KCC   and   developers   on   the   identification   of   a   suitable   site.  
 
Policy   SP42   -   Primary   and   Secondary   Schools  
The   Council   will   support   the   expansion   of   existing   and   development   of   new   primary   and  
secondary   schools   in   Thanet   to   meet   identified   needs   and   will   work   with   Kent   County  
Council   in   identifying,   allocating   and   safeguarding   other   sites    as   required   .  
 
As   a   result   of   identified   future   growth,   provision   is   made   in   the   plan   for   additional   schools   at:   
 
Birchington:   2FE   primary   school   (Policy   SP16)  
Westgate:   2FE   primary   school   (Policy   SP17)  
Westwood:   equivalent   6FE   primary   school   (Policies   SP18,   SP19   and   SP20);   6FE   secondary  
school   (Policy   SP20)  
Ramsgate   (Manston   Green):   2FE   primary   school   (Policy   SP15)  
  
78   6-   Transport   Strategy  
 
Safe   and   Sustainable   Travel  
6.1 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   transport   policies   have   an  
important   role   to   play   in   facilitating   sustainable   development   and   in   contributing   to   wider  
sustainability   and   health   objectives.   Key   messages   include   that   the   transport   system   needs   to   be  
balanced   in   favour   of   sustainable   transport   modes,   giving   people   real   choice   about   how   they  
travel.   Local   Plan   policies   are   expected   to   aim   for   a   balance   of   land   uses   to   encourage   people   to  
minimise   journey   length   for   employment,   shopping,   leisure,   education   and   other   activities.  
 
6.2 Transport   is   a   critical   factor   to   Thanet's   aspirations   for   sustainable   economic  
regeneration.   Thanet's   residents   need   to   go   to   work,   school,   shops   and   to   access   other   services  
as   part   of   their   daily   lives.   Goods   need   to   be   moved   to   support   employment   and   economic  
growth.   Thanet   does   not   at   present   suffer   significant   levels   of   congestion,   traffic   noise,   pollution  
and   delays   such   as   experienced   in   urban   centres   elsewhere   in   Kent.   A   high   proportion   of  
Thanet's   population   has   no   access   to   a   car.   However   this   has   potential   to   change   and   some  
traffic   congestion   already   occurs   at   certain   junctions   at   peak   times.   Thanet   has   an   attractive  
environment   and   is   a   pleasant   place   to   live   and   work.   Its   environment   is   also   a   potential   asset   in  
attracting   investment.   The   intention   is   to   maintain   that   situation   while   attracting   and  
accommodating   appropriate   development   in   support   of   regeneration.   Accordingly,   key   actions  
will   be   to   manage   mobility   by   putting   in   place   an   efficient   and   effective,   sustainable   transport  
system.  
 
6.3 With   Port   Ramsgate,   Thanet   has   a   potentially   significant   international   Gateway   function  
important   for   economic   development   across   the   region.   The   introduction   of   high   speed   trains  
connecting   Thanet   with   the   High   Speed   1   (HS1)   service   has   reduced   journey   times   from  
Ramsgate   to   London   by   over   30   minutes.   Manston   Business   Park   is   a   location   of   strategic  
importance.   A   travel   plan   will   be   required   alongside   planned   growth   to   promote   sustainable  
travel,   particularly   by   the   workforce.  
 
6.4 Kent   County   Council's   Local   Transport   Plan   (Delivering   Growth   without   Gridlock,  
2016-2031)   identifies   strategic   transport   projects   to   support   Kent's   sustainable   economic  
growth.   One   of   the   identified   strategic   priorities   is   journey   time   improvements   and   Thanet  
Parkway   Railway   Station.   It   also   identifies   a   number   of   local   priorities   for   Thanet:  
 
●Inner   circuit   of   new   and   improved   highway   routes,   including   improved   links   to   Westwood  
Cross  
●Bus   priority   measures  
●Improve   sustainable   transport   options   in   Westwood  
●Westwood   Relief   Strategy   -   Westwood   Road   to   Margate   Road   Link  
●Margate   junction   improvements  
●Ramsgate   Port   investment  
●Public   realm   improvements   in   the   coastal   towns  
 
6.5 The   Council   is   also   working   with   Kent   County   Council   to   prepare   a   Transport   Strategy  
for   the   district   which   supports   the   development   proposed   through   the   draft   Local   Plan.  
 
6.6 The   draft   Transport   Strategy   is   informed   by   transport   modelling   of   the   draft   Plan  
proposals,   and   seeks   to   address   key   transport   issues,   including   those   related   to   the   development  
identified   in   this   Plan.   It   includes   proposals   for   cars,   public   transport,   walking   and   cycling.   The  
key   new   road   infrastructure   is   set   out   under   Policy   SP47.  
79   6.7 Thanet's   services   and   most   employment   sites   are   clustered   in   and   around   the   coastal  
centres   and   Westwood.   These   are   close   to   Thanet's   existing   communities,   including   the  
deprived   neighbourhoods,   and   highly   accessible   by   public   transport   including   the   frequent  
"Loop"   bus.  
 
6.8 An   efficient   and   convenient   public   transport   system   and   direct   walking   and   cycling   routes  
need   to   be   at   the   heart   of   the   transport   network   to   reduce   the   risk   that   growth   may   cause   traffic  
congestion,   noise   and   air   pollution,   or   isolate   disadvantaged   communities.  
 
6.9 Within   the   context   of   an   established   development   pattern,   the   most   significant   change  
likely   to   generate   demand   for   travel   will   result   from   new   housing   development.   It   is   necessary,  
therefore,   to   consider   the   location   of   development   in   areas   accessible   to   a   range   of   services   on  
foot   and   by   public   transport,   preventing   urban   sprawl   and   improving   local   high   streets   and   town  
centres.   Methods   such   as   providing   showers   and   changing   facilities   in   employment   related  
development   and   locating   cycle   parking   close   to   town   centres/entrances   will   also   help   reduce   the  
need   to   travel   by   car.  
 
6.10Thanet   and   Kent   County   Council   are   jointly   preparing   a   Thanet   Transport   Strategy   to  
help   increase   the   efficiency   and   effectiveness   of   the   transport   system,   achieve   a   shift   to   more  
sustainable   travel   patterns   and   modes   and   to   identify   the   transport   infrastructure   and  
improvements   required   to   support   implementation   of   the   Local   Plan.   The   following   sections  
address   challenges   identified   in   the   draft   Strategy.  
 
Policy   SP43   -   Safe   and   Sustainable   Travel  
The   Council   will   work   with   developers,   transport   service   providers,   and   the   local  
community   to   manage   travel   demand,   by   promoting   and   facilitating   walking,   cycling   and  
use   of   public   transport   as   safe   and   convenient   means   of   transport.   Development  
applications   will   be   expected   to   take   account   of   the   need   to   promote   safe   and  
sustainable   travel.   New   developments   must   provide   safe   and   attractive   cycling   and  
walking   opportunities   to   reduce   the   need   to   travel   by   car.  
 
Accessible   Locations  
6.11Guiding   the   location,   scale   and   density   of   new   development   is   an   important   way   of  
reducing   the   need   to   travel,   reducing   travel   distances,   and   making   it   safer   for   people   to   use  
alternatives   to   the   car.   Consistent   policies   directing   location   of   travel   generating   uses   will   also  
guide   infrastructure   investment   further   supporting   integration   of   transport   and   land   use.  
 
Policy   SP44   -   Accessible   locations  
Development   generating   a   significant   number   of   trips   will   be   expected   to   be   located   where  
a   range   of   services   are   or   will   be   conveniently   accessible   on   foot,   by   cycle   or   public  
transport.   The   Council   will   seek   to   approve   proposals   to   cluster   or   co-locate   services   at  
centres   accessible   to   local   communities   by   public   transport   and   on   foot.  
 
Transport   Infrastructure  
6.12The   draft   Transport   Strategy   aims   to   promote   walking,   cycling   and   use   of   public   transport  
as   well   as   improvements   to   the   road   network   to   facilitate   sustainable   choice   and   safe   and  
convenient   travel.   Where   the   need   for   improvements   arises   wholly   or   largely   from   proposed  
development   the   developer   will   be   expected   to   contribute   towards   required   improvements   as   set  
80   out   in   the   draft   Transport   Strategy   and   the   draft   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan   (IDP).  
 
6.13While   this   Plan   seeks   to   increase   use   of   sustainable   modes   of   transport,   people   will  
continue   to   make   use   of   private   cars   and   planned   growth   will   increase   travel   demand.   There   are  
a   number   of   locations   where   traffic   flow   issues   need   to   be   addressed.   These   are   "Victoria"   traffic  
lights   Margate,   Coffin   House   Corner   Margate,   Marine   Terrace   Margate,   Dane   Court   Roundabout  
Broadstairs   and   the   "Spitfire"   junction.   Any   new   transport   links   also   need   to   serve   new  
development   and   relieve   the   pressure   on   the   urban   route   network.  
 
6.14The   Council,   together   with   Kent   County   Council,   is   proposing   a   new   Inner   Circuit,   which  
is   set   out   under   the   Strategic   Routes   Policy   SP47.  
 
Policy   SP45   -   Transport   Infrastructure  
Development   proposals   will   be   assessed   in   terms   of   the   type   and   level   of   travel   demand  
likely   to   be   generated.   Development   will   be   permitted   only   at   such   time   as   proper  
provision   is   made   to   ensure   delivery   of   relevant   transport   infrastructure.   Where  
appropriate,   development   will   be   expected   to   make   a   proportionate   contribution   to   the  
provision,   extension   or   improvement,   of   walking   and   cycling   routes   and   facilities   and   to  
highway   improvements.  
 
Subject   to   individual   assessments,   schemes   may   be   required   to   provide   or   contribute   to:  
 
1)Capacity   improvements/connections   to   the   cycle   network  
2)Provision   of   pedestrian   links   with   public   transport   routes/interchanges  
3)Improvements   to   passenger   waiting   facilities  
4)Facilities   for   display   of   approach   time   information   at   bus   stops   along   identified  
quality   bus   corridors  
5)Improvement   and   expansion   of   public   transport   services  
6)Improvements   to   the   road   network   in   line   with   schemes   identified   through   the  
Transport   Strategy  
7)  Provision   of   electric   vehicle   char ging   points,   in   accor dance   with   Policy SP14.  
 
Connectivity  
6.15Thanet's   location   in   the   south   east   corner   of   England   has   previously   been   seen   as   a  
disincentive   to   investors,   but   now   the   transport   infrastructure   in   place   offers   attractive   business  
opportunities   with   an   integrated   transport   hub,   maximising   on   the   potential   of   HS1   from  
Ramsgate   and   the   port.   Recent   years   have   seen   the   completion   of   the   A299   Thanet   Way   and  
its   new   connection   to   the   now   completed   A299/A256   improvements.   This   road   infrastructure  
gives   direct   connectivity   between   the   ports   of   Dover   and   Ramsgate,   and   the   rest   of   Britain's  
strategic   road   network.  
6.16Prospective   investments   in   line   speeds   along   the   domestic   link   to   HS1   will   result   in  
further   significant   reduction   in   journey   times   between   Thanet   and   London.   The   Council   will  
continue   to   lobby   for   investments   to   secure   further   improvements   to   rail   journey   times   for   CTRL  
including   domestic   services   between   Ashford   and   Ramsgate.  
 
 
 
81   New   Railway   Station  
6.17The   introduction   of   faster   trains   on   the   Ramsgate   to   St   Pancras   route,   utilising   the   High  
Speed   rail   link   (HS1)   means   that   Ramsgate   is   only   76   minutes   from   London   for   much   of   the   day.  
As   a   result,   Thanet   has   the   potential   to   become   a   more   attractive   location   for   people   employed   in  
London   seeking   to   live   in   a   more   pleasant   environment.  
 
6.18  Kent   County   Council,   through   its   Local   Transport   Plan   'Growth   without   Gridlock',   and   the  
South   East   Local   Enterprise   Partnership,   through   its   Strategic   Economic   Plan   support   the  
provision   of   a   new   Parkway   railway   station   to   the   west   of   Ramsgate   close   to   Cliffsend   village.   In  
promoting   delivery   of   the   project,   Kent   County   Council   has   identified   a   preferred   location   west   of  
Cliffsend.  
 
6.19Thanet   District   Council   supports   the   principle   of   a   new   railway   station   at   a   suitable  
location   along   the   rail-side   area   west   of   Ramsgate.   The   following   policy   safeguards   land   at   the  
preferred   location   west   of   Cliffsend   for   the   Parkway   project   including   an   area   for   car   parking  
and   a   road   access   to   the   A299/A256   roads.   In   addition   the   Council   will   continue   to   investigate  
and   press   for   improvements   to   the   running   times   of   trains   between   Thanet   and   Ashford   with   a  
view   to   reducing   the   journey   time   from   the   Parkway   to   less   than   60   minutes   to   London.  
 
6.20In   supporting   the   principle   of   a   new   railway   station,   emphasis   will   be   placed   on   its  
accessibility   by   public   transport   and   road   (including   sufficient   car   parking)   for   established   and  
planned   residential   areas.   New   housing   development   is   proposed   on   the   edge   of   Ramsgate   and  
at   the   village   of   Cliffsend   in   close   proximity   to   the   new   railway   station.  
 
Policy   SP46   -   New   Railway   Station  
Land   west   of   Cliffsend   (as   shown   on   the   Policies   Map)   is   safeguarded    for   a   new   railway  
station.   Proposals   will   be   required   to   specifically   demonstrate   all   of   the   following:  
 
1) Satisfactory   vehicular   access   arrangements   from   the   A299  
2) Suitable   level   of   car   parking  
3) Integration   with   wider   public   transport   services  
4) Mitigation   of   any   noise   impacts   on   sensitive   receptors  
5) Compatibility   with   the   landscape   character   of   its   location  
6) Located   to   minimise   the   loss   of   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land  
 
Strategic   Road   Network  
6.21The   Council,   with   KCC,   has   carried   out   a   high-level   assessment   of   the   potential   of   the  
Local   Plan   proposals   on   the   strategic   road   network,   to   a   methodology   agreed   with   Highways  
England,   notably   in   relation   to   the   Brenley   Corner   junction   with   the   M2,   and   the   junctions   of   the  
A256   with   the   A2   near   Dover.  
 
6.22This   work   has   concluded   that   the   potential   impact   is   very   limited,   and   not   significant  
in   the   context   of   wider   traffic   patterns   at   these   junctions.  
 
6.23Kent   County   Council   and   Thanet   District   Council   are   preparing   a   new   Transport   Strategy  
for   the   District,   which   includes   proposals   for   new   and   improved   roads   and   junctions;  
enhancements   to   bus   and   train   services   and   an   expansion   of   the   cycling/walking   network.  
 
82     
Strategic   Routes  
6.24The   key   element   of   the   emerging   Strategy   is   the   development   of   a   proposed   "Inner  
Circuit"   to   serve   new   development   and   reduce   pressure   on   the   existing   network.   This  
incorporates   a   new   bypass   for   Birchington;   a   relief   road   for   Westgate;   connections   to   Westwood  
from   the   north-west   and   south;   and   improved   connections   to   Manston   Business   Park,   and  
should   bring   benefits   to   the   wider   road   network.   It   is   intended   that   the   Inner   Circuit   schemes   will  
incorporate   provision   for   buses   and   cycling.  
 
6.25These   road   proposals   are   required   to   support   proposed   new   development   in   the   area,  
and   the   routes   are   safeguarded   in   this   draft   Local   Plan   to   ensure   that   they   can   be   completed   in  
due   course   alongside   the   development   set   out   in   the   draft   Local   Plan.   As   set   out   in   the   working  
draft   of   the   Infrastructure   Delivery   Plan,   this   infrastructure   is   regarded   as   critical   to   support   the  
development   proposed   in   the   draft   Local   Plan,   and   it   is   expected   that   all   new   development   will  
contribute   to   the   provision   of   all   key   infrastructure   in   a   proportionate   and   appropriate   way.   The  
Council,   with   its   partners,   will   also   seek   other   forms   of   funding,   to   support   infrastructure   provision.  
 
 
6.26 The   exact   routes   identified   in   Policy   SP47   may   vary   as   detailed   plans   for   the   strategic   urban  
extensions   come   forward   and   more   detailed   transport   evidence   becomes   available.    The   review   of   the  
Local   Plan   will   need   to   respond   to   the   decision   on   the   Development   Consent   Order   for   Manston   Airport,  
and   this   may   result   in   a   variation   of   the   alignment   identified   in   relation   to   the   B2050   Manston   Road  
(from   Manston   Court   Road   to   Spitfire   Junction).  
 
 
Policy   SP47   -   Strategic   Routes  
The   following   areas,   as   shown   on   the   Policies   Map,   are   safeguarded   for   the   provision   of  
key   road   schemes   and   junction   improvements,   to   support   the   implementation   of   the  
Thanet   Transport   Strategy,   including   land   at:  
 
1)Birchington   strategic   housing   site  
2)B2050   Manston   Road,   Birchington  
3)Shottendane   Road   (from   Birchington   to   Margate)  
4)Shottendane   Road-Manston   Road   -   Hartsdown   Road   housing   site  
5)Nash   Road-Manston   Road   housing   site  
6)Nash   Road,   Margate  
7)Nash   Road-Westwood   strategic   housing   site  
8)Manston   Court   Road/Star   Lane   (from   Haine   Road,   Westwood   to   B2050  
Manston   Road)  
9)From   Columbus   Way   to   Manston   Road,   Birchington  
 
The   following   strategic   routes   are   sufficient   in   their   existing   form   to   provide   for   the   growth  
envisaged   in   the   Plan)(subject   to   the   Local   Plan   review   process   set   out   in   Policy   SP03).  
However,   if   further   development   is   permitted,   including   further   development   at   Manston   Airport,  
which   has   a   material   impact   on   the   capacity   or   operation   of   these   routes,   the   Council   will  
require   alternative   on-site   highway   provision   where   appropriate   and/or   proportionate  
contributions   towards   any   improvements   or   changes   to   the   existing   routes   which   is   thereby  
necessitated:  
 
1)   B2050   Manston   Road   (from   Manston   Court   Road   to   Spitfire   Junction  
2)   B2190   Spitfire   Way   (from   Spitfire   Junction   to   Columbus   Avenue   junction).  
83    
Junction/traffic   management   improvements   are   required   at   the   following   junctions   to   ensure   the  
fully   effective   functioning   of   the   Inner   Circuit.   Development   that   compromises   the   ability   to  
deliver   such   improvements   will   not   be   permitted:  
 
1)   Victoria   Traffic   Lights  
2)   Coffin   House   Corner   Traffic   Lights  
 
The   Council   expects   all   new   development   to   make   a   proportionate   contribution   to   the   provision  
of   this   key   infrastructure.  
 
In   the   event   that   there   is   any   delay   in   site   acquisition   or   assembly   in   relation   to   any   of   the  
schemes   identified   in   Policy   SP47,   the   Council   will,   in   conjunction   with   the   County   Council,  
make   interim   highway   arrangements   to   enable   allocated   development   schemes   to   proceed.  
 
 
6.26 The   Council   is   confident   that,   working   with   Kent   County   Council,   the   full   Inner   Circuit   can   be  
delivered   during   the   Plan   period   alongside   the   proposed   development   in   the   Plan.   The   Council   will   work  
with   developers   and   KCC   to   ensure   that   the   requirements   for   the   Inner   Circuit   are   applied   reasonably  
so   that   there   is   no   delay   to   the   delivery   of   development   across   the   Plan   period.  
 
6.27 Potential   measures   to   manage   interim   traffic   impacts   include:  
 
● Localised   widening   within   existing   verge   areas  
● Localised   narrowing   and   priority   working   systems   to   manage   traffic   flow  
● Alternative   routes  
● Localised   weight   restrictions   for   HGVs,   linked   to   positive   signing   strategies   for   routeing   larger  
vehicles  
 
  
84   7-   Economy  
 
Retention   of   existing   employment   sites  
7.1 The   Council   considers   that   it   is   essential   to   retain   employment   premises   in   order   to  
conserve   stock   for   future   use.   Sites   have   been   assessed   for   their   compatibility   with   the   plan's  
employment   land   strategy.   The   sites   listed   below   contribute   positively   and   are   retained   and  
protected   for   employment   purposes   accordingly.  
 
7.2 Some   sites   have   been   identified   as   suitable   for   flexible   uses.   Flexible   uses   will   be  
restricted   to   these   areas.   It   is   important   that   traditional   employment   uses   on   retained   sites   are  
not   compromised   by   incompatible   flexible   uses   that   lead   to   conflicts   such   as   statutory   noise   and  
nuisance   complaints   and   highway   safety   issues.  
 
 
Policy   E01   -   Retention   of   existing   employment   sites  
 
 
The   following   sites   will   be   retained   as   employment   sites   and   the   Council   will   support   uses  
falling   within   Use   Classes   B1,   B2   and   B8   where   they   would   not   harm   the   living   conditions   of  
neighbouring   occupiers   of   land   or   buildings:  
 
 
1)All   sites   specifically   identified   under   Policy   SP05;   and  
2)Existing   business   sites   and   premises   identified   set   out   below:  
○Cromptons   site,   Poorhole   Lane,   Broadstairs  
○Pysons   Road   Industrial   Estate,   Broadstairs  
○Thanet   Reach   Business   Park   (part),   Broadstairs  
○Dane   Valley   Industrial   Estate   St.Peters,   Broadstairs*  
○Northdown   Industrial   Estate   St.Peters,   Broadstairs  
○Manston   Business   Park   (part),   Manston  
○Manston   Green,   Manston  
○Manston   Road   Depot,   Margate  
○Westwood   Industrial   Estate,   Margate*(part)  
○Fullers   Yard,   Victoria   Road,   Margate  
○All   Saints   Industrial   Estate,   Margate  
○Laundry   Road   Industrial   Estate   Minster  
○Eurokent   (part),   Ramsgate*  
○Leigh   Road   Industrial   Estate,   Ramsgate  
○St.   Lawrence   Industrial   Estate,   Ramsgate  
○Princes   Road   Depot/Pioneer   Business   Park,   Ramsgate  
○Whitehall   Road   Industrial   Estate,   Ramsgate  
○Hedgend   Industrial   Estate,   Thanet   Way,   St.Nicholas-at-Wade  
○Tivoli   Industrial   Estate,   Margate  
○Manston   Road   Industrial   Estate   (part),   Ramsgate  
 
Proposals   for   alternative   uses   on   sites   identified   under   Policy   E01   (1)   and   (2),   and   other  
buildings   and   land   currently   used   for   employment,   will   only   be   permitted   where:  
 
85   ○It   has   been   demonstrated   that   the   site   is   no   longer   suitable   or   viable   for   employment  
purposes   following   an   active   and   exhaustive   marketing   process   for   a   minimum   of   12  
months;  
○The   proposal   would   not   undermine   economic   growth   and   employment   opportunities  
in   the   area;  
○The   proposal   would   not   result   in   a   significant,   or   harmful   reduction   in   the   supply   of  
land   available   for   employment   purposes   for   the  
remainder   of   the   plan   period,   having   regard   to   the   type   of   employment   land   proposed  
for   reuse   and   its   location;  
○The   proposal   would   not   prejudice   the   ongoing   operation   of   remaining   businesses  
nearby;   and  
○The   proposal   would   result   in   a   good   standard   of   amenity   for   existing   and   future  
occupants.  
 
* these   are   flexible   employment   sites,   where   wider   employment   generating   uses  
will   be   allowed   in   addition   to   B1,   B2   and   B8   uses.   Development   must   be   compatible  
with   neighbouring   uses.   Proposals   for   main   town   centre   uses   should   also   comply  
with   Policy   E05   -   the   sequential   test    where   necessary .   These   uses   will   be   expected   to  
contribute   towards   the   Local   Employment   and   Training   Fund.  
 
Flexible   uses   include   leisure,   tourism   and   other   town   centre   uses   which,   due   to   scale  
and   format   cannot   be   accommodated   within   town   centres.   They   also   include   uses  
known   as   sui   generis   which   do   not   fall   into   a   category   in   the   Use   Classes   Order.  
These   include   uses   such   as   car   showrooms   and   crèches  
 
 
  Home   Working,   Digital   Infrastructure   and   Community  
Business   Space  
7.3 The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   the   Council   to   plan   for  
flexible   working   practices   such   as   the   integration   of   residential   and   commercial   uses   within   the  
same   unit.  
 
7.4 The   proportion   of   people   that   are   home   working   is   relatively   high   in   Thanet   according   to  
the   Economic   and   Employment   Assessment   2012.   It   is   not   clear   from   the   evidence   whether  
these   are   small   local   business   starting   up   from   home   or   employees   of   companies   potentially  
located   outside   the   district.   In   either   case   this   is   considered   beneficial   to   Thanet's   economy   as  
a   result   of   money   spent   in   the   district.   The   co-location   of   home   and   work   can   reduce   car   use,  
and   is   therefore   environmentally   sustainable,   particularly   bearing   in   mind   the   growth   of   fast  
broadband.   It   is   therefore   considered   important   that   improvements   to   digital   infrastructure   are  
supported.  
 
7.5 Flexible   office   space   (workhubs)   with   professional   equipment   and   meeting   space   that  
can   be   hired   and   used   in   an   ad   hoc   manner   by   home   based   workers   can   also   support   home  
working.   Business   advice   may   also   be   important.   It   is   considered   that   these   facilities   can   be  
accommodated   on   identified   business   parks   or   in   the   town   centres.  
 
7.6 Some   small   scale   home   working   may   not   require   planning   permission.   However,   where  
home-   working   does   require   planning   permission,   consideration   should   be   given   to   the   impacts  
upon   the   neighbourhood,   including   for   example   traffic,   noise   and   disturbance.  
 
The   Council   supports   home   working   proposals   but   wishes   to   ensure   that   any   potential  
86   impact   is   acceptable,   as   set   out   in   the   following   policies.  
 
 
Policy   E02   -   Home   Working  
Proposals   for   the   establishment   of   a   business   operating   from   a   residential   property   will  
be   permitted,   provided   that   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   proposed   use   would   not  
result   in:  
 
1) Detrimental   impacts   on   residential   amenity   by   reason   of   dust,   noise,   light,  
smell,   fumes   or   other   emissions;  
2) Additional   traffic   flows   or   vehicle   parking   in   the   vicinity,   at   a   level   that   would  
be   harmful   to   residential   amenity   or   highway   safety;   or  
3) The   erosion   of   the   residential   character   of   the   area.  
 
 
7.7 The   Council   strongly   supports   the   installation   of   digital   infrastructure   and   considers   that   an  
appropriate   balance   needs   to   be   struck   when   considering   impacts   on   heritage   assets,   conservation  
areas   and   historic   landscapes.  
 
 
 
Policy   E03   -   Digital   Infrastructure  
Proposals   for   the   installation   of   digital   infrastructure   will   be   required   on   allocated  
sites   in   this   plan.  
 
Retro-fitting   in   existing   urban   areas   and   villages   will   be   supported,   subject   to   no  
unacceptable   harm   on   listed   buildings   and   their   settings,   the   character   or  
appearance   of   conservation   areas   and   their   settings,   and   historic   landscapes  
  
87    
8-   Town   and   District   Centres  
 
Primary   and   Secondary   Frontages  
8.1 The  National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF)  requires  local  planning  authorities  to            
define  the  extent  of  primary  and  secondary  frontages  within  town  centres  and  set  policies  to                
make   clear   which   uses   will   be   permitted   in   such   locations.  
 
8.2 Healthy   shopping   centres   rely   on   control   over   the   number   and   location   of   non-retail  
premises   within   the   main   shopping   area.   The   success   of   any   particular   centre   is   dependent,   at  
least   in   part,   upon   retaining   a   reasonably   close   grouping   of   shops   selling   a   wide   range   of  
products.   This   allows   customers   to   fulfil   the   majority   of   their   shopping   needs   in   one   trip,   as  
well   as   providing   the   opportunity   for   comparing   the   price   and   availability   of   less   frequently  
purchased   goods.   The   existence   of   non-retail   businesses   in   primary   shopping   areas   can  
inhibit   these   activities   by   reducing   the   range   of   shops,   and   thereby   potentially   reducing   the  
number   of   people   visiting   the   centre,   as   well   as   making   the   centre   less   compact   and   therefore  
less   convenient.   However   town   centres   perform   a   greater   function   than   just   retail   centres.  
They   are   hubs   of   the   community   and   encompass   cultural,   leisure,   arts   and   heritage   uses   that  
in   turn   support   the   tourism   industry.   Therefore   in   line   with   the   strategy   for   the   town   centres  
outlined   earlier   it   is   considered   appropriate   to   provide   a   generous   secondary   frontage   in   the  
coastal   town   centres   in   order   to   maintain   and   support   this   trend.  
 
 
Policy   E04   -   Primary   and   Secondary   Frontages  
Primary   and   Secondary   Frontages   are   defined   for   Westwood,   Margate,   Ramsgate  
and   Broadstairs.  
 
Within   the   Primary   Frontages   the   following   development   will   be   permitted:  
 
1)Use   Classes   falling   within   A1,   A2,   A3,   A4   and   A5.   (see   glossary   –   Appendix   D)  
2)Residential   and   other   main   town   centre   uses    will   be   permitted   above   ground   floor  
level   only.  
 
Within   the   Secondary   Frontages    the   uses   referred   to   in   the   preceding   clauses   will   be  
permitted   at   ground   and   upper   floor   level    where   this   would   not   fragment   or   erode   the  
active   frontages   to   a   degree   that   would   undermine   the   function   of   the   centre.  
 
Sequential   and   Impact   Test  
 
8.3 Local   planning   authorities   are   required   by   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework  
(NPPF)   to   apply   a   sequential   test   to   planning   applications   for   main   town   centre   uses   that   are  
not   in   an   existing   centre   and   are   not   in   accordance   with   an   up   to   date   Local   Plan.   Applications  
for   main   town   centre   uses   should   be   located   in   town   centres,   then   in   edge   of   centre   locations  
and   only   if   suitable   sites   are   not   available   should   out   of   centre   sites   be   considered.   When  
considering   edge   of   centre   and   out   of   centre   proposals,   preference   should   be   given   to  
accessible   sites   that   are   well   connected   to   the   town   centre.   Applicants   and   local   planning  
authorities   should   demonstrate   flexibility   on   issues   such   as   format   and   scale.  
 
8.4 The   NPPF   requires   that   town   centre   development   takes   place   on   sites   within   designated  
88   town   centres   and   only   where   there   are   no   suitable,   viable   or   available   sites.   Should   edge   of  
centre   or   out   of   centre   locations   be   considered,   the   reasons   for   rejecting   more   central   sites  
should   be   clearly   explained.  
8.5     This   sequential   approach   should   not   be   applied   to   applications   for   small   scale   rural  
offices   or   other   small   scale   rural   development.  
 
8.6 The   NPPF   also   requires   that   applications   for   town   centre   development   outside   of   the  
defined   town   centres   above   a   certain   threshold   are   accompanied   by   an   impact   test   in   order   to  
assess   the   impact   on   vitality   and   viability   of   the   town   centres.   The   thresholds   for   Thanet   are  
set   out   in   policy   below.  
 
 
Policy   E05   -   Sequential   and   Impact   Test  
Proposals   for   main   town   centre   uses   should   be   located   within   the   designated   town  
centres   of   Margate,   Ramsgate,   Broadstairs   and   Westwood,    as   shown   on   the   policies  
map.   Where   this   is   not   possible   due   to   size,   format   and   layout   town   centre   uses   should  
be   located   on   the   edge   of   town   centres   or   on   employment   land   designated   for   flexible  
uses.   Outside   these   defined   centres    applicants   should   demonstrate   that   there   is   no  
sequentially   preferable   location   within   the   catchment   of   the   proposed   development.  
 
Applications   for   development   above   the   following   thresholds   outside   town   centres  
should   be   accompanied   by   an   impact   assessment:  
 
1)Urban   area*   -   1,000   square   metres  
2)Rural   area*   -   400   square   metres  
 
The   impact   assessment   should   include:  
 
●the   impact   of   the   proposal   on   existing,   committed   and   planned   public   and  
private   investment   in   a   town   centre   or   town   centres   in   the   catchment   area   of  
the   proposal;   and  
●the   impact   of   the   proposal   on   town   centre   vitality   and   viability,   including   local  
consumer   choice   and   trade   in   the   town   centre   and   wider   area,   up   to   five   years  
from   the   time   the   application   is   made.   For   major   schemes   where   the   full   impact  
will   not   be   realised   in   five   years,   the   impact   should   also   be   assessed   up   to   ten  
years   from   the   time   the   application   is   made.  
 
Applicants   should   demonstrate   flexibility   on   issues   such   as   format   and   scale   and   will  
be   expected   to   provide   the   Council   with   robust   evidence   of   this.  
 
Where   an   application   fails   to   satisfy   the   sequential   test   or   is   likely   to   have   an  
adverse   impact   on   one   or   more   of   the   above   factors,   it   will   be   refused.  
 
*As   defined   by   the   Boundary   of   Urban   Area   (SP24)   on   the   Policies   Map.   The   Villages   are   in   the  
rural   area.  
 
District   and   Local   Centres  
 
8.7 District   and   Local   Centres   perform   an   important   role   in   the   retail   hierarchy   catering   for  
basket   and   top   up   shopping   located   in   sustainable   locations   often   walkable   from   residential  
areas.   Developments   in   local   parades   and   centres   should   primarily   serve   the   community   within  
which   they   are   located   with   catchment   areas   of   not   more   than   800   metres.  
89    
8.8 Thanet's   District   Centres   consist   of   Cliftonville,   Birchington,   Westgate   and   Minster.  
There   are   number   of   smaller   local   centres   throughout   the   district.  
 
8.9 The   important   function   of   District   and   Local   Centres,   particularly   the   services   they  
provide   for   the   elderly   and   infirm   should   not   be   compromised   by   an   overconcentration   of  
residential   accommodation.  
  
 
Policy   E06   -   District   and   Local   Centres  
Proposals   for   additional   shopping   provision   at   traditional   District   Centres   (as   defined   on  
the   Policies   Map)     and   Local   Centres*   will   be   permitted   where   the   proposals   serve   the  
local   population     and   are   of   a   scale   appropriate   to   the   particular   centre.  
 
Residential   accommodation   will   be   permitted   in   District   and   Local   Centres   where   this  
would   not   fragment   or   erode   the   active    frontages   of   such   locations   to   a   degree   that  
undermines   the   function   of   the   centre.  
 
*The   Local   Centres   are   located   at:-   (as   indicated   on   the   Policies   Map)  
● Minnis   Road,   Minnis   Bay,   Birchington  
● Cambourne   Avenue/Lymington   Road,   Westgate   on   Sea  
● Canterbury   Road,   Garlinge  
● Canterbury   Road,   Westbrook  
● Ramsgate   Road,   Margate   (Victoria   Lights)  
● Holly   Lane/Northdown   Road,   Margate  
● Summerfield   Road,   Palm   Bay,   Margate  
● St   Peter’s,   Broadstairs  
● Margate   Road/Northwood   Road,   Ramsgate  
● High   Street,   St   Lawrence,   Ramsgate  
● Hereson   Road,   Ramsgate  
● Grange   Road,   Ramsgate  
  
90   9  -   Tourism  
 
Tourist   Accommodation  
9.1 A   strategic   priority   of   this   Plan   is   the   provision   of   sufficient   quality   tourist  
accommodation   necessary   to   increase   tourist   spend   and   help   to   extend   the   tourist  
season.  
 
9.2 Existing   hotel   provision   in   the   district   caters   well   for   the   budget   hotel   market   and   this  
has   been   increasing   in   recent   years,   but   Thanet   is   lacking   in   hotels   at   the   top   end   of   the  
market.   There   is   also   a   shortage   of   family   holiday   accommodation.   Hotel   facilities   must   be  
attractive   to   tourists   to   capitalise   on   the   trend   for   shorter   breaks   in   the   UK   and   demand   for  
better   overall   quality   and   service.   There   is   increasing   demand   for   boutique   and   designer   hotels  
fuelled   by   more   sophisticated   tastes.  
 
9.3 Other   than   caravan   accommodation   Thanet   has   relatively   few   self-catering   facilities.  
Touring   and   camping   is   a   popular   choice   of   tourist   accommodation   and   is   an   up   and   coming  
market.   Thanet   is   currently   underprovided   with   these   types   of   facilities   and   the   Council   aims  
to   take   advantage   of   this   high   demand.  
 
9.4 It   is   therefore   important   to   provide   for   new,   and   to   protect   tourist   accommodation   of  
all   types   and   for   all   budgets   to   attract   a   range   of   staying   visitors   to   the   area,   which   the  
following   policies   seek   to   achieve.  
 
Policy   E07   -   Serviced   Tourist   Accommodation   (Hotels,   Guest  
Houses   and   B&Bs)  
The  Council  will  permit  the  development  of  new  serviced  tourist  accommodation,            
including  extensions  and  improvements  to  existing  accommodation,  in  appropriate          
locations   such   that:    
 
1) It   is   of   form,   scale   and   design   appropriate   to   its   surroundings;  
2) It   does   not   cause   unacceptable   impact   on   the   road   network   or   highway   safety;  
3) It   is    accessible   by   a   range   of   means   of   transport   (wherever   possible   in   rural   areas);   .  
4) If   it   is   located   in   a   rural   area,   that   it   respects   the   character   of   the   local   countryside   and  
is   sensitive   to   its   defining   characteristics;   Outside   of   the   urban   area   development  
should   respect   landscape   character   and   nature   conservation   value,   and  
5) Sufficient   mitigation   should   be   provided   to   prevent   against   any   material  
increase   in   recreational   pressure   on   designated   nature   conservation   sites.  
 
Policy   E08   -   Self   Catering   Tourist   Accommodation  
Proposals   for   the   development,   diversification,   upgrade   or   improvement   of  
self-catering   accommodation   will   be   permitted   provided   that:  
 
1)it   is   sustainably   located;   
2)it   is   of   a   form,   scale   and   design   appropriate   to   its   surroundings;   
3)in   relation   to   a   caravan   and   camping   park,   that   it   does   not   cause   unacceptable  
impact   on   the   local   road   network   or   highway   safety,   and   wherever   possible   is   well  
related   to   the   primary   and   secondary   road   network;   and   
4)if   it   is   located   in   a   rural   area,   that   it   respects   the   character   of   the   local   countryside  
 and   is   sensitive   to   its   defining   characteristics.  
5)Sufficient   mitigation   should   be   provided   to   prevent   any   material   increase   in  
recreational   pressure   on   designated   nature   conservation   sites  
  
 
Policy   E09   -   Protection   of   Existing   Tourist   Accommodation  
Proposals   that   would   result   in   the   loss   of   existing    tourist   accommodation   with   10   or  
more   bedrooms   will   not   be   permitted   unless   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the  
hotel/guesthouse   or   self-catering   accommodation   is   no   longer   viable*   for   such   use.  
 
* In   order   to   demonstrate   that   the   existing   tourist   accommodation   is   not   viable,  
evidence   will   be   required   to   show   that   the   facility   has   been   marketed   extensively   for   at  
least   a   year   and   at   an   open   market   value   which   is   attributable   to   its   use   as   tourist  
accommodation   with    consideration   given    to   alternative   forms   of   holiday  
accommodation.   Evidence   will   also   be   required   of   occupancy   rates   for   the   previous   3  
years,   and   any   other   relevant   factors   such   as   previous   marketing   or   business   plans,  
locational   factors   and   ease   of   access   for   visitors   by   a   range   of   means   of   transport.   In  
assessing   whether   the   accommodation   is    not   viable   the   Council   may   seek   the  
independent   views   of   industry   experts.  
 
Thanet's   Beaches  
9.5 Thanet   possesses   a   large   number   of   sandy   beaches,   whose   characters   range   from  
intensively   holiday-oriented   beaches   (eg:   Main   Sands,   Margate)   to   undeveloped   beaches   with  
a   natural   character   and   appearance   (eg:   Grenham   Bay,   Birchington).   The   different   types   of  
beach   offer   opportunities   for   different   types   of   recreational   activity.   In   the   interests   of   choice,   the  
Council   believes   that   it   is   desirable   to   ensure   that   the   differences   of   character   are   maintained,  
and   where   appropriate,   enhanced.   Most   beaches   along   the   Thanet   coast   are   internationally  
important   for   their   wintering   bird   populations.  
 
9.6 The   Council's   Destination   Management   Plan   is   considering   potential   locations   for  
additional   beach   development,   including   accommodation,   where   it   would   be   appropriate   and  
viable.   It   is   also   investigating   ways   to   improve   the   management   of   the   beaches   for   the   benefit  
of   the   tourism   economy.  
 
9.7 The   following   policies   divide   the   beaches   into   three   broad   categories,   in   order   to   direct  
and   restrict   development   appropriately   to   maintain   and   enhance   their   individual   function   and  
character,   and   to   protect   the   designated   nature   conservation   sites.  
 
9.8 It   should   be   noted   that   the   intermediate   category   includes   beaches   which   have   scope  
for   some   further   development,   as   well   as   those   which   are   fully   developed   within   the   terms   of  
the   policy.  
 
9.9 To  provide  for  a  variety  of  tastes  and  choice  in  the  type  of  recreational  activities,                
associated  service  facilities  and  degree  of  solitude  on  Thanet's  coastline,  the  following             
policies   will   apply   to   beach   development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy   E10   –   Thanet’s   Beaches  
 
Major   Holiday   Beaches  
 
On   those   beaches   identified   as   major   holiday   beaches   below,   the   Council   will   support  
proposals   for   the   provision   and   upgrading   of   a   wide   range   of   recreational   facilities   and  
services   including   tourist   accommodation:  
 
1)   Main   Sands,   Margate  
2)   Ramsgate   Main   Sands  
3)   Viking   Bay,   Broadstairs  
 
Proposals   must   also   comply   with   the   heritage   policies   of   this   plan   and   the   National   Planning  
Policy   Framework.  
 
At   Margate   Main   Sands   recreational   facilities   will   be   concentrated   on   that   part   of   the   beach   at  
the   junction   of   Marine   Terrace   and   Marine   Drive   and   the   built   form   shall   not   project   above   the  
level   of   the   seafront   promenade.  
 
Development   proposals   must   avoid   or   fully   mitigate   against   any   impact   upon   the   designated  
nature   conservation   sites,   and   will   be   subject   to   the   Habitats   Regulations.  
 
Intermediate   Beaches  
 
On   those   beaches   identified   as   intermediate   beaches   below,   and   where     scope   exists   for   such  
development,   the   Council   will   support   proposals   for   small   scale   tourism   and   leisure  
development   (e.g.   tourist   accommodation,   kiosks   supplying   food   and   refreshments,   beach  
huts   and   beach   furniture),   subject   to   the   scale   of   provision   being   consistent   with   the  
intermediate   status   of   the   beach   and   satisfactory   design   and   siting   of   development:  
 
1)   Dumpton   Gap   (part)  
2)   Joss   Bay  
3)   Louisa   Bay  
4)   Minnis   Bay   (part)  
5)   St   Mildred's   Bay  
6)   Stone   Bay  
7)   Walpole   Bay  
8)   Westbrook   Bay  
9)   Western   Undercliff,   Ramsgate  
10)   West   Bay  
 
Development   proposals   must   avoid   or   fully   mitigate   against   any   impact   upon   the   designated  
nature   conservation   sites,   and   will   be   subject   to   the   Habitats   Regulations.  
 
Undeveloped   Beaches  
 
On,   or   adjacent   to   undeveloped   beaches   identified   on   the   Policies   Map,   priority   will   be   given   to  
the   maintenance   and   enhancement   of   their   natural,   remote   and   undeveloped   character.     New  
development   including   new   built   facilities,   the   provision   of   public   car   parking   facilities   and  
new   or   improved   vehicular   access   to   serve   such   beaches   will   not   be   permitted.   In   the   event  
that   there   is   an   overriding   need   for   development/necessary   infrastructure   that   cannot   be   met  
or   located   elsewhere,   such   proposals   must   avoid   or   fully   mitigate   against   any   impact   upon   the  
designated   nature   conservation   sites,   and   will   be   subject   to   the   Habitats   Regulations.  
 
 Language   Schools  
9.10Thanet   contains   a   considerable   number   of   language   schools   and   a   large   percentage   of  
students   using   these   services   stay   with   Thanet   families   or   as   paying   guests.   In   2013   language  
schools   turnover   was   an   estimated   £19.7   million   with   approximately   £6.3   million   paid   to   an  
estimated   2,800   host   families   in   the   district.   Students'   total   spend   in   Thanet   was   an   estimated  
£33.6   million   and   language   schools   created   around   1,000   jobs.   (TDC   -   Economic   Impact   of  
Language   Schools/EFL   Providers   2013   -   Final   Report)  
 
9.11English   language   schools   in   Thanet   are   therefore   a   major   contributor   to   the   local  
economy,   and   offer   potential   for   encouraging   the   next   generation   of   visitors   to   this   part   of  
Kent.   The   Council   wishes   to   encourage   growth   in   this   sector   of   the   economy.  
9.12    However   language   schools   can   cause   issues   with   noise   and   disturbance   particularly  
where   there   are   concentrations   of   such   facilities   in   an   area   potentially   resulting   in   large  
gatherings   of   young   people.   These   issues   need   to   be   balanced   with   the   benefit   to   the   local  
economy,   as   set   out   in   the   following   policy.  
 
 
Policy   E11   -   Language   Schools  
Language   schools   will   be   permitted   subject   to:  
 
1) The   number   of   students   to   be   accommodated,   the   hours   of   operation,   the  
range   of   facilities   provided   and   the   relationship   with   adjoining   properties   not  
resulting   in   an   unacceptable   impact   on   the    living   conditions   of   adjacent  
occupiers    through   noise,   additional   on-street   parking   or   general   disturbance;  
2) The   use   of   the   property   as   a   language   school   not   resulting   in   an  
over-concentration   of   such   uses   in   a   particular   locality   to   a   level   which   is  
harmful   to   the   character   and   appearance   of   the   area.   
 
Quex   Park  
9.13Quex   Park   Estate   is   set   in   250   acres   of   parkland   and   trees   in   Thanet's   otherwise   wide  
open   landscapes.  
 
9.14The   major   attraction   and   point   of   interest   is   the   Powell   Cotton   Museum   which   is   one  
of   the   finest   collections   of   natural   history   and   ethnographic   artefacts   in   existence.  
 
9.15The   Quex   Park   Estate   contains   a   wealth   of   heritage   assets.   The   Mansion   House   dates  
back   to   the   early   1400s   but   this   was   demolished   between   1769   and   1849   by   John   Powell   who  
replaced   it   with   an   elegant   Regency   home.   There   are   also   acres   of   historic   gardens   and  
natural   woodland   with   traditional   Victorian   layout   and   landscaping   which   includes   built   heritage  
of   a   walled   garden   and   green   houses.  
 
9.16Other   heritage   assets   at   Quex   Park   include   the   Three   Towers   -   the   Round   Tower   built  
in   1814,   the   Waterloo   Tower   built   in   1819   and   the   clock   tower   above   the   listed   coach   house.  
The   turret   clock,   by   Benjamin   Lewis   Vulliamy,   was   installed   in   1837   and   chimes   the   quarters  
and   the   hour.  
 
9.17Quex   Park   farms   607   hectares   in-house   plus   a   further   607   hectares   under   contract  
agreements   with   other   local   farmers.   The   profitability   of   farming   alone   was   not   able   to   provide  
for   the   upkeep   of   the   historic   buildings   and   parkland   despite   registration   for   charitable   status.  
 As   a   result   the   Estate   has   diversified   its   many   redundant   buildings.  
 
9.18Therefore   as   well   as   the   museum,   house   and   gardens,   Quex   Estate   incorporates   Quex  
Barn   farmers'   market   and   restaurant,   Jungle   Jims   children's   indoor   and   outdoor   play   area,   the  
Secret   Garden   centre,   a   paintballing   arena,   the   Quex   Maize   Maze,   the   Craft   Village,   Build   a  
Base   (an   indoor   games   arena)   and   Mama   Feelgoods   Boutique   café.   In   addition   to   these  
individually   managed   enterprises   the   Estate   also   hosts   weddings.   The   Estate   as   a   whole  
employs   in   the   region   of   140   people.  
 
The   following   policy   seeks   to   promote   further   development   of   the   Quex   Park   Estate   to   support  
its   diversification   as   a   local   enterprise,   providing   valuable   economic   and   tourism   benefits  
whilst   protecting   the   Parks   character,   heritage   and   biodiversity.  
 
Policy   E12   -   Quex   Park  
Farm  diversification  projects  and  tourism  and  leisure  development  at  Quex  Park  Estate             
will  be  supported  where  they  contribute  to  the  upkeep  of  the  Quex  House  and  Gardens                
and  the  Powell-Cotton  Museum  and  promote  the  Estate  as  a  destination  for  tourism  and               
leisure.  
 
Projects   should   be   in   keeping   with   the   parkland   character   of   the   Estate,   conserve  
and   enhance   the   heritage   assets   and   their   settings,    the   Park's   biodiversity ,   and  
meet   the   requirements   of   Policy   SP26 .  
 
Applications   that   are   likely   to   have   a   significant   impact   on   the   highway  
network   must   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   in   accordance  
with   Policy   TP01.    In   other   cases   a   transport   statement   may   be   required.  
 
 
  
 10-   The   Rural   Economy  
10.1The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   that   Local   Plans   support   the  
sustainable   growth   and   expansion   of   all   types   of   business   and   enterprise   in   the   rural   areas,  
promote   the   development   and   diversification   of   agricultural   and   other   land   based   rural  
businesses,   support   sustainable   rural   tourism   and   leisure   developments   that   benefits  
businesses   in   the   rural   area   and   promote   the   retention   and   development   of   local   services   and  
community   facilities.   There   is   also   the   requirement   for   the   Local   Plan   to   address   the   needs   of  
the   food   production   industry   and   any   barriers   to   investment   that   planning   can   resolve.   The  
Council   wishes   to   support   a   sustainable   rural   economy   and   rural   economic   development   of   an  
appropriate   scale   and   the   following   policies   seek   to   address   this.  
 
New   build   development   for   economic   development   purposes   in   the   rural   area  
 
10.2The   NPPF   states   that   planning   policies   should   support   economic   growth   in   rural   areas  
in   order   to   create   jobs   and   prosperity   by   supporting   sustainable   growth   and   expansion   of   all  
types   of   business   and   enterprise   in   rural   areas,   through   well   designed   new   buildings.  
 
Development   should   have   regard   to   the   Kent   Downs   AONB   Farmstead   Guidance   produced  
by   English   Heritage   (now   known   as   Historic   England),   Kent   Downs   AONB,   KCC   and   Kent  
Design.  
 
 
Policy   E13   -   Development   for   new   business      in   the  
countryside  
Well-designed   new   development   for   economic   development   purposes   for   new  
businesses      will   be   permitted   in   sustainable   locations,    at   a   scale   and   form   compatible  
with   their   rural   location.  
 
Conversion   of   rural   buildings  
10.3An   important   consideration   for   the   rural   economy   and   rural   diversification   is   the  
reuse   of   redundant   buildings.   The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that  
planning   authorities   should   support   the   expansion   of   all   types   of   business   and   enterprise  
in   rural   areas   through   the   conversion   of   existing   buildings.  
 
10.4Such   conversions   might   be   particularly   desirable   where   buildings   are   listed,   or   have  
other   landscape   value,   and   their   long-term   retention   may   be   sought   for   these   reasons.  
 
 
10.5Disused   rural   buildings   may   hold   species   such   as   bats   or   barn   owls,   protected   by   the  
Wildlife   and   Countryside   Act   1981   (as   amended)   and    Conservation   of   Habitats   and   Species  
regulations   2017.   The   conversion   of   such   buildings   should   make   provision   for   their   continued  
use   by   protected   species   which   are   present.   If   this   is   not   possible,   mitigation   should   be  
provided   nearby.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy   E14   -   Conversion   of   rural   buildings   for  
economic   development   purposes  
Where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   building   is   not   needed   for   agricultural   use   the  
conversion   of   rural   buildings   to   other   uses   for   economic   development   purposes   will  
be   permitted   where   all   the   following   criteria   are   met:  
 
1)Their   form,   bulk   and   general   design   are   in   keeping   with   the   character   of   the  
surrounding   countryside.  
2)The   proposed   use   is   acceptable   in   terms   of   its   impact   on   the   surrounding   area  
and   the   local   highway   network.  
3)It   can   be   demonstrated   through   a   structural   survey   that   the   building   is  
capable   of   conversion.  
4)Any   alterations   associated   with   the   conversion   would   not   be  
detrimental   to   the   distinctive   character   of   the   building   (or   its   setting),  
its   historic   fabric   or   features.  
5)If   the   building   forms   part   of   a   complex   of   agricultural   or   industrial   buildings,   a  
comprehensive   strategy   is   put   forward   which   shows   the   effects   on   the   use   of   the  
remaining   complex.  
6)Where   the   building   contains   protected   species   any   negative   impacts   should   be   fully  
addressed   following   the   “avoid,   mitigate   and   compensate”   hierarchy.  
 
Farm   Diversification  
10.6The   NPPF   requires   that   planning   policy   should   promote   the   development   and  
diversification   of   agricultural   and   other   land-based   rural   businesses.  
 
10.7The   Council   wishes   to   support   proposals   for   diversification   that   will   strengthen   and  
protect   the   productive   base   of   the   farm   unit   that   allows   the   farmer   to   continue   to   farm.   The  
Council   will   expect   an   outline   farm   plan   to   be   submitted   with   any   planning   application,   indicating  
how   the   new   diversification   schemes   integrates   with   and   contributes   to   the   overall   business  
plan   for   the   farm.   By   granting   planning   consent   for   acceptable   diversification   projects,   the  
Council   is   indicating   its   long   term   support   for   a   continuing   viable   agricultural   community   in  
Thanet.  
 
10.8However,   farm   diversification   projects   have   the   potential   to   result   in   adverse   effects,  
for   example,   traffic   and   landscape   impacts,   and   the   depletion   of   financial   and   land   resources.  
Applicants   will   therefore   need   to   carefully   assess   the   implications   of   new   proposals,   both   for  
their   own   benefit,   and   to   enable   the   Council   to   give   support   to   acceptable   and   viable  
schemes.  
 
The   following   policy   seeks   to   achieve   this   balance:  
 
 
Policy   E15   -   Farm   Diversification  
Proposals   to   diversify   the   range   of   economic   activities   on   a   farm   will   be   permitted   if   all  
the   following   criteria   are   met:  
 
1)The   proposal   is   compatible   with   the   agricultural   operations   on   the   farm,   and   is  
operated   as   part   of   the   farm   holding.  
2)The   loss   of   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land   is   minimised.  
 3)The   likely   traffic   generation   could   be   safely   accommodated   on   the   local   highway  
network.  
 
Proposals   should   where   possible   utilise   available   existing   farm   buildings.  
  
 
Best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land  
 
10.9The   Agricultural   Land   Classification   system   (ALC)   provides   a   method   for   assessing   the  
quality   of   farmland   to   enable   informed   choices   to   be   made   about   its   future   use   within   the  
planning   system   and   the   presence   of   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land   should   be   taken  
into   account   alongside   other   sustainability   considerations   when   determining   planning  
applications.  
 
10.10The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   that   planning   authorities  
should   take   into   account   the   economic   and   other   benefits   of   best   and   most   versatile   land.  
Where   significant   development   of   agricultural   land   is   demonstrated   to   be   necessary,   local  
planning   authorities   should   seek   to   use   areas   of   poorer   quality.    For   the   purposes   of   Policy   E18  
significant   development   is   considered   to   be   any   planning   application   that   is   “major  
development”   as   defined   by   The   Town   and   Country   Planning   (Development   Management  
Procedure)   (England)   Order   2015.   The   majority   of   agricultural   land   in   Thanet   is   best   and   most  
versatile   and   therefore   the   following   policy   applies.  
 
Policy   E16   -   Best   and   Most   Versatile   Agricultural   Land  
Except  on  sites  allocated  for  development  by  virtue  of  other  policies  in  this  Plan,               
planning  permission  will  not  be  granted  for  significant  development  which  would  result             
in  the  irreversible  loss  of  best  and  most  versatile  agricultural  land  unless  it  can  be                
clearly   demonstrated   that:  
 
1)the   benefits   of   the   proposed   development   outweigh   the   harm   resulting   from  
the   loss   of   agricultural   land,  
2)there   are   no   otherwise   suitable   sites   of   poorer   agricultural   quality   that   can  
accommodate   the   development,   and  
3)the   development   will   not   result   in   the   remainder   of   the   agricultural   holding  
becoming   not   viable   or   lead   to   likely   accumulated   and   significant   losses   of   high  
quality   agricultural   land.  
 
Applications   for   solar   parks   on   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land   should   comply  
with   Policy   CC06   -   Solar   Parks  
 
 
10.11The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   also   states   that   the   planning   system   should   protect  
and   enhance   valued   soils   and   prevent   the   adverse   effects   of   unacceptable   levels   of   pollution.   This   is  
because   soil   is   an   essential   finite   resource   that   provides   important   ‘ecosystem   services’,   for   example  
as   a   growing   medium   for   food,   timber   and   other   crops,   as   a   store   for   carbon   and   water,   as   a   reservoir  
of   biodiversity   and   as   a   buffer   against   pollution.   As   part   of   the   government’s   ‘Safeguarding   our   Soils’  
strategy,   Defra   has   published   a   Code   of   practice   for   the   sustainable   use   of   soils   on   construction   sites.  
The   Council   would   encourage   developers   to   have   regard   to   this.  
10.12The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   that   Local   Plans   support   the  
needs   of   the   food   production   industry.   Agricultural   related   businesses   are   those   that   are   not   part  
of   a   farm   business,   such   as   producing   and   packing   operations.   These   value   adding   operations  
 are   an   important   part   of   the   rural   economy   but   their   scale   and   location   should   respect   the  
character   and   appearance   of   the   rural   area   as   set   out   in   SP02..  
 
 
  
  
 
11  -   Housing  
 
Identification   and   Release   of   Housing   Land   for   Development  
Allocated   sites  
 
11.1Sites   allocated   for   housing   (including   strategic   site   allocations)   are   shown   on   the   maps  
and   featured   in   a   list   of   housing   site   allocations   in   Appendix   B.   Notional   dwelling   unit   capacities  
indicated   are   for   the   purposes   of   illustrating   total   land   supply   and   do   not   signify   that   consent   will  
be   granted   for   particular   numbers   of   dwellings   at   any   site.   Capacity   on   individual   sites   will   be  
considered   in   light   of   planning   policy   and   usual   development   management   considerations.  
 
11.2The   geographical   extent   indicated   for   site   allocations   affecting   greenfield   land  
represents   the   anticipated   maximum   land   requirement.   Proposals   will   be   expected   to   consider,  
and   where   possible   accommodate,   notional   maximum   dwelling   capacities   indicated   together  
with   all   other   relevant   policy   requirements   within   a   lower   level   of   greenfield   land   take.  
 
11.3Sites   will   be   released   for   development   over   specific   time   periods.   The   purpose   of   this   is  
to   ensure   that   the   rate   of   release   and   take   up   is   reasonably   related   to   expected   need   and  
demand,   taking   account   of   the   economic   strategy   and   geared   to   planned   infrastructure  
provision.   Indicative   phasing   is   shown   as   "notional   delivery   period"   in   the   list   at   Appendix   B.  
 
11.4This   Local   Plan   does   not   identify   or   allocate   potential   housing   sites   likely   to  
accommodate   four   or   less   dwellings.   Such   proposals   will   be   assessed   in   relation   to   policy  
HO1.  
 
11.5Land   allocated   for   residential   use   will   be   safeguarded   for   that   purpose   in   the   interest  
of   maintaining   a   suitable,   sustainable   and   sufficient   land   supply   and   reducing   the   need   to  
find   less   sustainable   alternatives.  
 
Unidentified   housing   sites  
 
11.6Sites   not   previously   identified   and   allocated   in   Local   Plans   (sometimes   referred   to   as  
"windfall"   sites")   have   contributed   significantly   in   recent   years   to   housing   delivery   in   the   district.  
It   is   anticipated   that   these   will   continue   to   come   forward.   Such   opportunities   can   serve   to   make  
effective   use   of   previously   developed   land   and   contribute   towards   the   housing   land   supply.   For  
the   purposes   of   the   following   policy,   previously   developed   land   is   as   defined   in   the   National  
Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   and   does   not   include   residential   gardens.  
 
11.7In   the   case   of   any   allocation   or   unidentified   housing   site   affecting   a   site   within   defined  
town   centre   primary   frontages,   within   Margate   seafront   and   harbour   arm   or   Margate   Old  
Town,   residential   development   will   be   restricted   to   above   ground   floor   level   (in   accordance  
with   policies   E04   and   SP10)  
 
Policy   HO1-   Housing   Development  
Permission   for   new   housing   development   will   be   granted   on:  
 
1)Sites   allocated   for   this    purpose,   as   listed   below   and   shown   on   the   Policies   Map   
  
 
Site   address  Capacity  
Queens   Arms   Yard,   Margate  24  
Cottage   Car   Park,   New   Street,   Margate  32  
Margate   Town   Centre   (south   of   New   Street),   Margate  27  
Adjacent   to   9   Minnis   Road,   Birchington  11  
End   of   Seafield   Road,   Ramsgate  16  
Adjacent   to   21   Royal   Road   &   9   Townley   Street,   Ramsgate  18  
Gas   works,   Boundary   Road,   Ramsgate  96  
Land   at   Wilderness   Hill   and   Dane   Road  14  
79-85   High   Street,   Ramsgate  14  
Gas   Holder   Station,   Addington   Street,   Margate  22  
WW   Martin,   Dane   Park   Road,   Ramsgate  14  
10   Cliff   Street,   Ramsgate  11  
Complete   Car   Sales,   Willsons   Road,   Ramsgate  10  
Highfield   Road,   Ramsgate  25  
Land   at   Victoria   Road   &   Dane   Road,   Margate  35  
Haine   Farm,   Haine   Road,   Ramsgate  35  
Land   off   Northwood   Road,   Ramsgate  45  
Dane   Valley   Arms,   Dane   Valley   Road,   Margate  13  
Builders   Yard,   The   Avenue,   Margate  10  
Land   at   Waterside   Drive,   Westgate  12  
Suffolk   Avenue,   Westgate  23  
r/o   Cecilia   Road,   Ramsgate  23  
Margate   Delivery   Office,   12-18   Addington   Street,   Margate  10  
Industrial   Units,   Marlborough   Road,   Margate  10  
Gap   House   School,   1   Southcliff   Parade,   Broadstairs  10  
Foreland   School,   Lanthorne   Road,   Broadstairs  14  
Thanet   Reach   southern   part,   Broadstairs  80  
Part   of   Pysons   Road,   Broadstairs  26  
Lanthorne   Court,   Broadstairs  56  
Former   Club   Union   Convalescent   Home,   Reading   Street,   Broadstairs  24  
Adj   to   60   Harold   Road   and   r/o   40-56   Harold   Road,   Cliftonville  14  
Adj   to   14   Harold   Road,   Cliftonville  10  
Part   of   allotment   gardens,   Manston   Road  80  
 
2)Non-allocated   sites   within   the   confines   of   the   urban   area   and   villages   as   shown   on   the  
policies   map,   subject   to   meeting   other   relevant   Local   Plan   policies   
 
All   development   proposals   should   also:   
3)comply   with   the   relevant   requirements   of   SP14  
4)demonstrate   that   adequate   infrastructure   will   be   in   place   to   serve   each   unit   
 
Alternative   development   on   non-strategic   sites   allocated   for   residential   development   will   not  
be   permitted.  
 
11.8Housing   delivery   will   be   monitored   annually,   and   a   housing   implementation   strategy  
will   be   put   in   place   to   facilitate   delivery   across   the   plan   period   including   action   that   may   be  
taken   if   necessary   to   maintain   a   rolling   5   year   supply   of   deliverable   housing   sites.  
 
 
 Non-strategic   Housing   Allocations  
 
Policy   HO2   -   Land   on   west   side   of   Old   Haine   Road,   Ramsgate  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   100   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average    density   of  
35   dwellings   per   hectare   (net)   at   the   west   of   Old   Haine   Road,   Ramsgate.   Proposals   will  
be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a    masterplan   for   the   whole   site   which  
should   include:   
1)pre-design   archaeological   evaluation  
2)appropriate   landscape   treatment   that   also   ensures   an   appropriate   transition   between   the  
development   and   the   adjacent   open   countryside;  
3)a   proportionate   contribution   to   necessary   off-site   highway    improvements   in   accordance   with  
Policy   SP47  
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment   which   shall:  
1)assess   the   impact   on   the   local   road   network  
 
 
Policy   HO3   -   Land   fronting   Nash   Road   and   Manston   Road,  
Margate  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   250   new   dwellings    with   an   approximate   average   density   of  
35   dwellings   per   hectare   (net)   at   Nash   Road   and   Manston   Road   Margate.   
Proposals   will   be   judged   and   permitted   only   in   accordance   with   a    masterplan   for   the  
whole   site,   which   should   include:   -  
1)any   necessary   upgrade   of   utility   services;  
2)linkages   to   new   and   existing   public   transport   infrastructure,   including   bus   and   rail  
services.  
3)the   provision   of   a   local   distributor   link   road   between   Nash   Road   and   Manston   Road,  
including   a   new   roundabout   junction   at   Manston   Road  
4)appropriate   arrangements   for   surface   water   management.  
 
All   development    proposals   must   include   a   phasing   and   implementation   plan   to   include   the  
phasing   of   development,   infrastructure   and   landscaping  
 
Masterplanning   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1)the   provision   of   landscaping   that   also   ensures   an   appropriate   transition   between   the  
development   and   the   adjacent   open   countryside,  
2)pre-design   archaeological   assessment;  
3)the   preservation   or   enhancement   of   the   setting   of   the   listed   building   Salmestone   Grange   and  
the   scheduled   ancient   monument;   and  
4)a   design   and   layout   that   respects   the   presence   of   the   crematorium   on   the   adjoining   site  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Assessment  
 
 
 
Policy   HO4   -   Land   south   of   Brooke   Avenue   Garlinge  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   34   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average  
density   of   35   dwellings   per   hectare   (net)   south   of   Brooke   Avenue,   Garlinge.   
 Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1) an   archaeological   evaluation   and  
2) a   landscaping   scheme   that   also   ensures   an   appropriate   transition   between   the  
development   and   the   adjacent   open   countryside.  
 
 
 
Policy   HO5   -   Land   at   Haine   Road   and   Spratling  
Street,   Ramsgate  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   100   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average  
density   of   35   dwellings   per   hectare   net   at   Haine   Road   and   Spratling   Street,  
Ramsgate.  
 
Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1)suitable   access   arrangements   together   with   suitable   footway   connections  
2)the   provision   of   a   priority   junction   including   a   dedicated   right   turn   lane   for   vehicular   access  
to   the   site;  
3)appropriate   landscaping   treatment   that   also   ensures   an   appropriate   transition   between   the  
development   and   the   adjacent   open   countryside  
4)any   necessary   upgrading   of   utility   services   on   site  
 
 
 
Policy   HO6   -   Land   south   of   Canterbury   Road   East,   Ramsgate  
 
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   27   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   net   on   the   south   side   of   Canterbury   Road   East..  
 
Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1) an   archaeological   evaluation  
2) an   ecological   evaluation  
3) appropriate   landscaping   which   addresses   the   desirability   to   retain   hedgerows   and   trees  
for   their   landscape   and   biodiversity   value.  
 
 
Policy   HO7   -   Land   at   Melbourne   Avenue,   Ramsgate  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   49   new   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   net   at   the   former   Newington   Nursery   and   Infant   School,  
Melbourne   Avenue,   Ramsgate.   
 
Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address   
1)an   ecological   assessment   
2)the   retention   of   the   existing   area   of   woodland   in   the   south   western   part   of   the   site   known   as  
“The   Copse”for   community   use;  
3)appropriate   landscaping  
 
Proposals   will   be   accompanied   by   a   Transport   Statement  
 
 
 Cliftonville   and   Margate  
11.9The   adjoining   wards   of   Cliftonville   West   and   Margate   Central   contain   Thanet's   most  
deprived   neighbourhoods.   This   is   manifested   in   high   levels   of   economic   dependency,   and   a  
fragmented   community.   The   area   has   a   predominance   of   cheap   and   poor   quality   rented  
accommodation   often   attracting   vulnerable   and   transient   people.   The   Cliftonville   Development  
Plan   Document   (DPD)   contains   planning   policies   restricting   additional   accommodation   in   forms  
likely   to   fuel   or   perpetuate   these   problems.  
 
11.10The   Council   and   its   partners   including   Kent   County   Council   and   the   Homes   and  
Communities   Agency   are   implementing   a   concerted   programme   "Live   Margate"   to   focus   and  
stimulate   further   investment   in   making   Margate   and,   in   particular,   these   two   wards,   an   area  
where   people   aspire   to   live.   A   central   feature   of   the   programme   is   purchasing   existing  
properties   and   turning   them   into   quality   family   homes.   Many   properties   in   these   wards   have   3-4  
storeys   and   would   be   suited   to   multigenerational   living   (with   two   or   more   generations   living  
under   the   same   roof).   If   house   prices   continue   to   rise   there   may   be   an   increase   in   demand   for  
multigenerational   houses.   The   following   policy   supports   proposals   resulting   from   or   compatible  
with   the   Live   Margate   initiative.   In   addition   to   relevant   policies   in   the   Cliftonville   DPD,   the  
following   policy   will   apply    within   the   DPD   area   as   shown   on   the   Policies   Map .  
 
 
Policy   HO8   -   Cliftonville   West   and   Margate   Central  
Proposals   to   provide   residential   accommodation   in   those   parts   of   Cliftonville   West   and  
Margate   Central   (as   identified   on   the   Policies   Map)   will   be   expected   to:  
 
1) provide   high   quality   homes   in   accordance   with   good   design   principles;  
2) Increase   the   number   of   family   homes.  
3) Contribute   to   the   creation   of   mixed   settled   communities    in   which   families   and  
individuals   will   want   to   live.  
4) Make   a   positive   contribution   to   the   street   scene   and    environmental   quality   of   the   area.  
 
 
Housing   in   Rural   Settlements  
11.11Most   of   Thanet's   villages   consist   of   freestanding   rural   settlements.   These   comprise  
Acol,   Cliffsend,   Manston,   Minster,   Monkton,   Sarre   and   St   Nicholas   at   Wade.   Each   makes   its  
own   contribution   to   the   character   and   diversity   of   the   Thanet   countryside,   and   the   Council  
considers    that   it   is   essential   for   them   to   retain   their   separate   physical   identity   and   vibrant  
communities.   There   are   some   settlements   that,   due   to   their   mutual   proximity,   are   potentially  
vulnerable   to   coalescence   through   the   development   along   the   road   frontages   that   link   them;  
for   example,   Minster   to   Monkton   and   Manston   to   Ramsgate.   Policies   protecting   the   open  
countryside   provide   appropriate   safeguards   for   this.  
 
11.12The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   notes   that   to   promote   sustainable  
development   in   rural   areas,   housing   should   be   located   where   it   will   enhance   or   maintain   the  
vitality   of   rural   communities.   In   support   of   the   Local   Plan's   housing   objectives   the   rural  
settlements   are   considered   to   have   some   scope   for   new   housing   development   in   order   to   meet  
local   needs   and   increase   locational   choice   within   overall   objectively   assessed   need.   A   separate  
housing   topic   paper   considers   the   scale   of   housing   that   could   be   accommodated   at   each   of  
Thanet's   rural   settlements.   This   has   helped   to   inform   the   following   policy.  
 
11.13Appendix   B   allocates   specific   sites   for   housing   development   including   at   some   of   the  
 rural   villages.   These   are   listed   below.  
 
11.14The   following   policy   indicates   the   scale   of   housing   development   that   may   also   be  
permitted   on   other   sites   in   the   rural   settlements   of   Minster,   Cliffsend,   St   Nicholas   at   Wade,  
Monkton,   Manston,   Acol   and   Sarre.  
 
Policy   HO9   -   Housing    in   Rural   Settlements  
Housing   development   will   be   permitted   within   the   confines   of   the   rural   settlements  
subject   to   the   provisions   of   policy   HO1   and   the   criteria   below:  
1)The   proposal   being   compatible   with   the   size,   form,    character   and   scale   of   the  
settlement,   and  
2)In   the   case   of   major   development   proposals    accessible   community   services   will   be  
available.  
 
The   sites   listed   below   are   specifically   allocated   for   residential   development  
 
Table   9   -   Sites   allocated   for   residential   development   at   Rural   Settlements  
 
Site  Capacity  
Tothill   Street,   Minster  250  
Land   at   Manor   Road,   St   Nicholas  10  
Land   at   Walter’s   Hall   Farm,   Monkton  20  
Land   south   side   of   A253,   Cliffsend  62  
Land   north   of   Cottington   Road,   Cliffsend  
Builders   Yard   south   of   116-124   Monkton   Street,  
Monkton  41  
20  
Former   Jentex   site   Canterbury   Road   West,  
Cliffsend  56  
 
Foxborough   Lane   (South   Side),   Minster  35  
Land   at   The   Length,   St.   Nicholas  25  
Young’s   Nursery,   Arundel   Road,   Cliffsend  12  
 
In   addition   to   the   requirements   set   out   in   Policies   HO10-HO15,   the   following   development  
principles   also   apply:  
●Former   Jentex   site,   Canterbury   Road   West,   Cliffsend.    Allocated   for   up   to   56   dwellings.    Early  
consultation   with   Environment   Agency   and   an   assessment   of   potential   contamination   of  
ground   and   groundwater   together   with   appropriate   remedial   measures   required.   
●Builder’s   Yard   south   of   116-124   Monkton   Street,   Monkton.    Allocated   for   up   to   20   dwellings.  
In   light   of   former   builder’s   yard   use   an   assessment   of   potential   contamination   together   with  
appropriate   remedial   measures   may   be   required.   
●Land   at   south   side   of   Foxborough   Lane,   Minster.    Allocated   for   up   to   35   dwellings.    Potential  
for   bat   and   reptile   presence   will   require   further   investigation   and   mitigation   may   be   required.   
●Land   at   The   Length,   St.   Nicholas.    Allocated   for   up   to   25   dwellings.   
●Young’s   Nursery,   Arundel   Road,   Cliffsend.    Allocated   for   up   to   12   dwellings.  
 
Policy   HO10   -   Land   at   Tothill   Street,   Minster  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   250   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35   dwellings  
per   hectare   at   Tothill   Street,   Minster  
Proposals    for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address  
 1)the   provision,   location   and   type   of   the   requisite   open   space;  
2)provide   vehicular   access   to   Tothill   Street   and   links   southwards   with   existing   development  
restricted   to   pedestrian   and   cycle   routes   in   order   to   limit   additional   traffic   movement   in   the  
vicinity   of   Monkton   Road   and   High   Street;  
3)provide   an   emergency   access  
4)Provide    improvements   to   the   Tothill   Street/A299   Roundabout   and   a   proportionate  
contribution   to   off-site    junction   improvements   at   Spitfire   Way.  
 
In   light   of   the   site's   proximity   to   the   cemetery   and   former   transport   depot,   and   its  
location   in   an   area   with   sensitive   groundwater   requiring   continued   protection,  
consultation   with   the   Environment   Agency   and   contamination   assessment   is   likely   to   be  
required .  
 
 
Policy   HO11   -   Land   at   Manor   Road,   St   Nicholas   at   Wade  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   36   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35   dwellings  
per   hectare   at   Manor   Road,   St   Nicholas   at   Wade  
Proposals    for   the   development   of   the   site   will    address   the   provision,   location   and   type   of   the  
requisite   open   space  
 
 
 
Policy   HO12   -   Land   at   Walter's   Hall   Farm,   Monkton  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   18   dwellings   at   an   approximate   average   density   of   35  
dwellings   per   hectare   at   Walter’s   Hall   Farm,   Monkton.  
Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
1) archaeological   evaluation   and   
2) respect   the   setting   of   the   listed   building   at   Walters   Hall   Farmhouse.  
 
  Policy   HO13   -   Land   south   side   of   A253,   Cliffsend  
 
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   62   dwellings   at   an   approximate   average   density   of   35   dwellings   per  
hectare on   the   south   side   of   the   A253,   Cliffsend  
 
Proposals   for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address  
1)a   pre-design   archaeological   evaluation.  
2)where   possible,   provide    footpaths   and   cycleways   to   the   proposed   Parkway   station.  
3)a   contamination   assessment   to   investigate   potential   pollution   in   light   of   the   site's   proximity  
to   the   former   Jentex   site.  
4)access   arrangements   onto   the   A253   and   avoid   access   or   additional   traffic   onto   Foad's   Lane.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy   HO14   -   Land   north   of   Cottington   Rd,   Cliffsend  
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   40   dwellings   with   an   approximate   average   density   of   35   dwellings  
per   hectare   north   of   Cottington   Road,   Cliffsend.  
Proposals    for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address:  
 
1) further   archaeological   assessment   including   fieldwork  
2) a   targeted   assessment   of   the   impact   of   development   on   the   setting   of   St.   Augustine's  
Cross.  
3) a   transport   statement   will   be   needed   to   take   account   of   traffic   impacts   onto   Foad's   Lane  
area,   and   proposals   will   be   expected   to    where   possible,   provide   footpaths   and  
cycleways   to   the   proposed   Parkway   station.  
 
 
Policy   HO15   -   Land   south   side   of   Cottington   Rd,   Cliffsend  
 
Land   is   allocated   for   up   to   23   dwellings   at   an   approximate   average   density   of   35   dwellings   per  
hectare   on   the   south   side   of   Cottington   Road,   Cliffsend  
 
Proposals    for   the   development   of   the   site   will   be   informed   by   and   address  
1)further   archaeological   assessment   including   fieldwork  
2)a   targeted   assessment   of   the   impact   of   development   on   the   setting   of   St.   Augustine's   Cross  
3)a   flood   risk   assessment.  
 
A   transport   statement   will   be   needed   to   take   account   of   traffic   impacts   onto   Foad's  
Lane   area,   and   proposals   will   be   expected   to   where   possible,    provide   footpaths   and  
cycleways   to   the   proposed   Parkway   station.  
 
Rural   Housing   Need  
11.15The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   expects   a   responsive   approach   to  
local   housing   needs   in   rural   areas,   and   indicates   that   release   of   rural   exception   sites   may   be  
an   appropriate   means   of   responding   to   local   need   for   affordable   homes.  
 
11.16Any   such   release   would   be   conditional   upon   the   first   and   all   subsequent   occupiers   being  
first   time   buyers   who   are   already   village   residents   or   their   children,   village   residents   living   in  
unsuitable   accommodation,   dependents   of   village   residents,   people   whose   work   is   based   in   the  
village,   or   people   with   local   connections   who   have   been   forced   to   move   away   from   the   village  
due   to   a   lack   of   affordable   or   suitable   housing.  
 
11.17Provision   for   some   new   village   housing   is   made   through   other   policies.   Proposals   on  
exception   sites   which   include   market   housing   or   low   cost   housing   will   only   be   permitted   where  
they   form   a   small   element   of   the   scheme   and   it   would   provide   significant   additional   affordable  
housing   to   meet   local   needs.  
 
11.18Any   consent   will   be   subject   to   a   legal   agreement   to   ensure   the   housing   is   available   to  
meet   local   needs   in   the   long   term.  
 
 
 
 Policy   HO16   -   Rural   Housing   Need     and   Exception   Sites  
Planning   permission   will   be   granted   for   affordable   housing   development   adjacent   to  
rural   settlements   that:  
 
1)is   of   a   scale   and   size   appropriate   to   its   location   and   the   level   of   services   available   to   its  
residents,   is   of   a   type   and   mix   that   meets   local   needs   as   identified   in   a   verified   local   needs  
survey   and  
2)the   location,   size   and   form   of   which   is   sensitive   to   its   setting   and   the   defining   characteristics  
of   the   area.  
 
Permission   will   be   granted   for   an   element   of   market   housing   within   any   such  
development   provided   that   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   is   the   minimum   necessary   to  
facilitate   the   provision   of   the   affordable   housing.  
 
Planning   permission   will   be   subject   to   a   planning   obligation   that   secures   priority   occupation  
of   the   affordable   housing   by   persons   already   resident   in   the   relevant   settlement   or   who   have  
local   family   connections  
 
Agricultural   dwellings  
11.19The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   the   development   of  
isolated   homes   in   the   countryside   should   be   avoided   unless   there   are   special   circumstances  
such   as   the   essential   need   for   a   rural   worker   to   live   permanently   at   or   near   their   place   of  
work   in   the   countryside.  
 
11.20Much   of   Thanet's   countryside   is   in   agricultural   use.   Planning   permission   will   only   be  
granted   for   a   farm   dwelling   where   an   agricultural   need   has   been   demonstrated.   In   this   context,  
need   means   the   need   of   the   particular   farm   business,   rather   than   the   owner   or   occupier   of   the  
farm   or   holding.  
 
11.21The  Council  takes  the  view  that,  in  Thanet,  agricultural  need  is  directly  related  to  the                
security  of  certain  types  of  livestock,  and  horticultural  produce.  Thanet's  agricultural  land  is              
largely  in  arable  production  which,  by  its  nature,  is  not  as  susceptible  to  damage  as  other  forms                  
of   agriculture.  
 
11.22   The   pattern   of   agricultural   holdings   in   Thanet   is   well-established   and   stable,   and  
the   agricultural   area   is   generally   in   close   proximity   to   the   urban   areas.   In   view   of   this,   the  
Council   believes   that   there   is   little   justification   for   new   agricultural   dwellings.   Proposals   for  
agricultural   dwellings   required   for   security   purposes   will   be   expected   to   be   supported   by  
information   demonstrating   that   alternative   measures   such   as   CCTV   have   been  
considered.  
 
 
Policy   HO17   -   New   Dwellings   for   Rural   Workers  
The   provision   of   a   new   dwelling   for   rural   workers   in   the   district   will   be   permitted   only  
where   it   is   demonstrated   that   there   is   an   essential   need   for   them   to   live   at   or   near   their  
place   of   work   and   the   proposal   is   acceptable   in   terms   of   access,   design   and   location.:  
 
Where   planning   permission   for   a   new   dwelling   is   granted   on   the   basis   of   agricultural  
requirements,   a   condition   or   legal   agreement   will   be   required   to   restrict   occupation   of  
 the   dwelling   to   agricultural   workers   and   their   dependents,   or   persons   last   employed   in  
agriculture.  
 
Care   and   Supported   Housing  
11.23The   range   of   accommodation   needed   by   various   groups   in   the   community   extends  
beyond   conventional   dwellings   to   more   specialised   forms   of   accommodation   such   as   sheltered  
housing   (specialist   accommodation   typically   individual   apartments   with   on-site   support   in  
secure   surroundings),   extra   care   housing   (typically   individual   apartments   for   older   people   with  
varying   levels   of   care   need   and   benefiting   from   shared   facilities   such   as   laundry,   lounges   or  
garden),   residential   care   homes   and   nursing   homes   providing   24/7   care.   Kent   County   Council  
has   prepared   a   strategy   (Kent   Social   Care   Accommodation   Strategy)   to   help   deliver   choice   and  
access   to   high   quality   accommodation   to   vulnerable   adults   eligible   for   care   and   support.   A   key  
principle   of   this   is   to   ensure   people   are   not   isolated   from   their   communities   and   are   able   to   live  
healthily   and   safely   in   their   own   homes.   The   accommodation   strategy   is   informed   by   estimates  
of   projected   demand   for   need   for   particular   types   of   accommodation.   However,   gaps   in  
provision   will   be   identified   and   addressed   to   reflect   the   objective   of   independent   living   and  
promoting   appropriate   housing   and   support   to   reduce   reliance   on   residential   and   nursing   care.  
 
11.24There   is   a   growing   need   for   specialist   housing   for   older   persons,   as   identified   in   the  
SHMA.   In   order   to   meet   the   forecast   change   in   population   of   people   aged   75   and   over,   the  
SHMA   identifies   a   potential   need   for   1,522   units   of   specialised   accommodation   for   older  
persons   over   the   plan   period   (76   units   per   annum).  
 
11.25Thanet   has   historically   been   overprovided   with   some   forms   of   accommodation   which   has  
caused   concerns   regarding   importation   and   concentration   of   vulnerable   and   dependent   people.  
For   example   in   spring   2013   it   was   estimated   that   nearly   two   thirds   of   the   525   looked   after  
children   in   Thanet   were   placed   from   areas   outside   the   district;   the   majority   of   placed   children  
being   from   outside   Kent.   While   sympathetic   to   the   needs   of   such   people,   the   Council   does   not  
regard   this   overprovision   of   accommodation   to   meet   demand   arising   outside   the   local   area   as  
sustainable   or   conducive   to   a   balanced   community.   Therefore   in   considering   individual  
proposals   the   Council   will   have   regard   to   evidence   of   local   need   and,   where   applicable,   the  
potential   contribution   development   could   make   to   the   accommodation   strategy   for   adult   social  
care   clients   in   Kent   (Kent   County   Council).  
 
11.26The   needs   of   the   district   for   supported   housing   are   an   important   consideration,  
and   proposals   meeting   such   need   and   in   line   with   the   Accommodation   Strategy   will   be  
supported.    Sheltered   housing   proposals   will   be   supported   where   it   is   demonstrated   that  
proposals   would   accommodate   expected   needs   arising   within   the   district.  
 
11.27For   the   purposes   of   planning   policy,   proposals   for   retirement   homes,   sheltered   housing  
and   extra   care   housing   will,   unless   circumstances   indicate   otherwise,   be   regarded   as   residential  
dwellings   and   subject   to   usual   planning   policies   for   residential   development.   Household  
projections   indicate   an   increase   of   591   people   living   in   registered   care   accommodation   over   the  
plan   period   (30   per   annum).   Where   accommodation   provides   a   higher   level   of   care,   such   as  
nursing   homes,   then   such   uses   will   be   regarded   as   Class   C2   and   specifically   subject   to   clause  
2   of   the   following   policy.  
 
11.28The   following   policy   seeks   to   facilitate   an   appropriate   level   of   provision   of   good   quality  
accommodation   in   line   with   the   objective   of   supporting   a   balanced   and   inclusive   community,  
and   enabling   independent   living   as   far   as   possible.  
 
 
 Policy   HO18   -   Care   and   Supported   Housing  
The   Council   will   seek   to   approve   applications   that   provide    accommodation   for   those  
in   the   community   with   care   needs    (including   the   provision   of   facilities   and   services  
which   will   support   independent   living).  
 
Where   such   accommodation   falls   within   Use   Class   C2   proposals   will   be   expected   to  
demonstrate   they   are   suitably   located   to   meet   the   needs   of   the   occupiers   including  
proximity   and   ease   of   access   to   community   facilities   and   services.  
 
 
Houses   in   Multiple   Occupation   including  
student   accommodation  
11.29Accommodation   within   a   building   can   be   regarded   as   non-self-contained   where  
unrelated   households   share   one   or   more   facilities   such   as   a   bathroom   or   kitchen.   Houses   in  
Multiple   Occupation   (HMOs)   are   an   example   where   a   high   degree   of   sharing   of   facilities   is  
typical,   and   where   living   arrangements,   being   more   intense   than   single   family   occupation,  
can   give   rise   to   noise,   nuisance,   more   callers,   a   higher   parking   requirement   and   visual  
deterioration   of   buildings   and   gardens.  
 
11.30While   the   Council   does   not   wish   to   encourage   proliferation   of   HMOs   as   a   permanent  
measure,   it   does   recognise   that   such   sharing   arrangements   can   provide   a   source   of   cheap  
rented   accommodation,   including   affordable   accommodation   for   students   and   supported  
housing.   The   previous   Local   Plan   applied   a   criteria   based   policy,   the   principles   of   which   are  
considered   to   remain   valid.  
 
11.31In   2010   the   Government   introduced   new   legislation   signifying   that   planning   permission  
would   no   longer   be   required   for   change   of   use   of   a   dwelling   house   to   a   house   in   multiple  
occupations   for   up   to   6   unrelated   people.   The   Council   subsequently   approved   an   Article   4  
direction   so   that   planning   permission   would   still   be   required   for   such   change   of   use   in   Thanet.  
 
11.32The   extent   to   which   non-self-contained   accommodation   may   generate   the   problems  
referred   to   above   depends   not   only   on   intensity   of   occupation,   sharing   of   facilities   and  
management   of   the   building,   but   also   the   nature   of   the   area   in   which   it   is   situated,   the   type   of  
building,   and   the   concentration   of   similar   uses   in   its   vicinity.  
 
11.33Alternative   use   of   family   homes   as   private   student   accommodation   in   the   form   of  
multiple   occupations   has   caused   local   concerns   focused   on   the   neighbourhood   around   the  
Broadstairs    University   campus.   Christ   Church   University   and   East   Kent   College   are   highly  
important   for   delivering   skills   required   by   the   workforce,   meeting   the   expectations   of   existing  
and   potential   employers   and   stemming   out   migration   of   young   people.   Supporting   the  
functions   of   our   higher   and   further   education   establishments   includes   the   need   to   recognise  
demand   arising   for   suitably   located   decent   accommodation   for   students.   At   the   same   time   it  
is   essential   to   ensure   that   satisfying   such   demand   does   not   result   in   undue   concentration   of  
non   self-contained   accommodation   in   order   to   avoid   local   disturbance   and   to   maintain   a  
mixed   and   settled   community.  
 
11.34In   2014   the   percentage   of   properties   in   use   as   private   sector   student   accommodation   in  
the   form   of   HMOs   at   the   residential   estate   adjoining   the   campus   was   estimated   at   2.4%.   While  
such   uses   have   generated   local   concern,   including   that   recent   changes   of   use   might   signal   an  
ongoing   trend,   the   Council   does   not   consider   that   restriction   on   further   change   of   use   is  
currently   justified   in   principle.   Nonetheless,   these   concerns   point   to   the   need   to   incorporate  
 within   policy   an   indicative   ceiling   level   of   cumulative   impact   in   order   to   maintain   mixed   and  
settled   communities.   Having   assessed   the   circumstances   in   the   district   and   approaches   applied  
in   other   locations,   the   Council   considers   5%   represents   an   appropriate   level.   Bearing   in   mind  
the   potential   for   displacement   pressure   that   such   restriction   may   generate,   this   level   is  
considered   appropriate   across   the   district.   In   order   to   address   potential   for   localised  
concentration   within   this   headroom,   the   5%   is   applied   on   the   basis   of   a   50   metre   radius   or  
exceed   or   further   exceed   1   HMO   in   any   group   frontage   of   20   dwellings   houses.  
 
11.35The   Cliftonville   Development   Plan   Document   (DPD)   imposes   a   restriction   on   HMOs,  
and   in   the   area   it   applies   to   that   DPD   takes   precedence   over   the   following   policy.  
 
Policy   HO19   -    House   in   Multiple   Occupation  
 
Proposals   for   Houses   in   Multiple   Occupation   (HMO’s),   either   through   conversion   of   existing  
buildings   or   new   built   development,   will   not   be   permitted   in   those   parts   of   the   Cliftonville   and  
Margate   Central   Wards   as   illustrated   on   the   policies   map.   
 
Elsewhere   proposals   will   be   permitted   where   the   development:  
 
1)Does   not   give   rise   to   an   unacceptable   impact   on   the   living   conditions   of  
neighbouring   residents   through   noise   or   general   disturbance;  
2)Does   not   result    in   an   intensification   or   concentration   of   such   uses    which   is  
detrimental   to   the   amenity   and   character   of   the   neighbourhood   (having   regard   to  
the   criteria   set   out   in   para   11.34   by   way   of   guidance)   
3)Provides   suitable   arrangements   for   car   parking,   or   adequate   on-street   parking   is  
available   within   the   vicinity   of   the   site   and  
4)Provides   suitable   arrangements   for   the   storage   and   collection   of   waste   
 
  
Gypsy   and   Travelling   Communities  
 
11.36The   2011   Census   identified   a   total   of   69   households   in   Thanet   with   a   White:   Gypsy   or  
Irish   Traveller’   ethnicity.   Of   these,   1   households   lived   in   a   caravan   or   other   mobile   or  
temporary   structure   and   68   households   lived   in   bricks   and   mortar   (house,   bungalow,   flat,  
maisonette   or   apartment).   The   bi-annual   DCLG   Traveller   caravan   count   identified   no   caravans  
over   the   last   six   counts   up   to   July   2017.   Likewise,   the   annual   Travelling   Showperson   caravan  
count   (undertaken   each   January)   also   found   no   Travelling   Showpeople   caravans   in   Thanet  
during   the   past   four   counts   (2014-2017).   There   are   no   authorised   Gypsy   and   Traveller   sites   or  
Travelling   Showpeople   yards   in   Thanet.  
 
11.37The   Thanet   Gypsy   and   Traveller   Accommodation   Assessment   (GTAA)   2017/18   has  
become   available   since   the   publication   and   submission   of   the   Reg.19   Plan.   It   analyses   the  
latest   available   evidence   to   identify   the   accommodation   needs   of   Gypsies   and   Travellers,  
Travelling   Showpeople   and   houseboat   dwellers   from   across   the   area.   This   data   has   been  
analysed   to   provide   a   picture   of   current   provision   and   activity   across   the   Thanet   District   and  
an   assessment   of   future   need.  
 
11.38The   GTAA   2017/18   has   found   evidence   of   Gypsy   and   Traveller   pitch   need   over   the  
next   five   years   (2018/18   to   2021/22)   equating   to   5   pitches   under   the   cultural   definition,   or   1  
pitch   under   the   PPTS   2015   definition   of   Gypsy/Traveller.   This   takes   account   of   existing  
evidenced   need   (one   household   who   is   PPTS-compliant)   and   an   estimate   of   need   arising  
from   households   currently   living   in   bricks   and   mortar   accommodation   (assumed   not   to   fulfil   the  
 PPTS   definition).  
 
11.39For   the   remainder   of   the   Local   Plan   Period   (up   to   2030/31)   the   GTAA   has   identified   a  
cultural   need   for   2   pitches   and   a   PPTS   need   for   2   pitches.   This   takes   account   of   a   longer-term  
projection   of   need   based   on   demographic   modelling.   The   need   over   the   total   Plan   Period   is   7  
permanent   and   5   transit   pitches.   There   is   thus   a   need   to   identify   pitches   for   the   plan   period  
and   this   work   will   have   begun   before   the   adoption   of   the   Plan   but   will   not   be   completed   before  
then.   In   light   of   the   early   review   of   the   plan   to   commence   within   6   months   of   adoption   in  
accordance   with   the   Secretary   of   State’s   direction,   it   is   intended   to   identify   and   allocate   the  
necessary   number   of   permanent   sites   within   the   review   process.   Until   then   the   Council   will   act  
proactively   to   accommodate   emerging   needs   on   a   temporary   and,   if   possible,   permanent  
basis.  
 
 
Policy   HO20   -   Accommodation   for   Gypsy   and   Travelling  
Communities  
 
The   need   over   the   total   Plan   Period   is   for   7   permanent   pitches   and   5   transit   pitches.   The  
change   of   use   of   land   to   provide   accommodation   for   Gypsy   and   Travelling   communities   will   be  
permitted   provided   the   proposed   site   is   
 
1)suitable   for   its   intended   use   (including   any   associated   business   activity)   and   can   be  
accommodated   without   unacceptable   impact   on   its   surroundings   and   surrounding   land   uses  
and   the   living   conditions   of   persons   living   in   the   vicinity   of   the   site;  
2)has   reasonable   access   to   local   facilities   and   services,   particularly   schools,   employment   and  
healthcare,   and   
3)not   within   a   flood   risk   area;   and  
4)will   not   have   an   unacceptably   detrimental   impact   on   local   environmental   quality   including  
Green   Wedges   or   sensitive   landscape   areas.  
 
Pending   the   next   review   of   the   Plan   the   Council   will   take   proactive   steps   to   accommodate   all  
emerging   needs   of   Gypsy   and   Travelling   communities   within   the   District   on   temporary   sites  
and,   wherever   possible,   permanent   sites   which   meet   the   above   criteria.   The   Council   shall  
address   the   identified   need   and   monitor   need   in   three   stages:   to   continue   to   work   with   families  
to   identify   suitable   short   term   sites;   to   commence   immediately   to   identify   suitable   long   term  
sites   and   to   grant   permission   for   them;   and,   to   identify   additional   sites   required   to   meet   total  
provision   in   the   next   plan   review  
 
Making   best   use   of   the   existing   stock  
11.40The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   expects   empty   housing   and   empty  
buildings   to   be   identified   and   brought   back   into   use   in   line   with   local   housing   and   empty  
homes   strategies.   As   indicated   in   the   Council's   housing   strategy,   the   Council   is   committed  
to   bringing   empty   properties   back   into   use.  
 
11.41Thanet   has   a   substantial   stock   of   empty   property   and   vacant   dwellings   and   has   an  
active   and   robust   programme   for   bringing   those   properties   back   into   use.   The   Local   Plan  
identifies   an   allowance   of   540   housing   units   to   come   from   empty   properties   being   brought   back  
into   use.   This   is   based   on   the   position   that   the   properties   in   question   have   been   empty   for   a  
period   of   4   years   or   more.   Over   that   period   it   can   be   argued   that   those   properties   have   been  
vacant   and   unused   for   such   a   long   period   that   they   are   no   longer   available   in   the   housing  
market   and   therefore   not   part   of   the   active   housing   stock.   Such   properties   brought   back   into  
use   are   returned   to   the   market,   so   can   be   included   as   new   housing   stock.   This   will   need   to   be  
 regularly   monitored,   and   is   dependent   on   the   Council's   Empty   Homes   programme   continuing  
through   the   plan   period.  
 
 
Policy   HO21   -   Residential   use   of   empty   property  
Proposals   to   bring   vacant   property   into   residential   use   will   be   approved   where:  
 
1) It   is   compatible   with   nearby   uses,   and  
2) the   proposal   would   not   conflict   with   any   other   policy.  
 
11.42To   complement   policies   aimed   at   increasing   the   overall   housing   stock   it   is   important   to  
retain   the   existing   housing   stock   in   such   use.  
 
 
Policy   HO22   -   Retention   of   existing   housing   stock  
Proposals   which   would   lead   to   the   net   loss   of   existing   housing   (class   C3)   will    be  
permitted   only   where:  
1)the   proposal   relates   to   the   provision   of   community   facilities   for   which   there   is   a  
genuine   local   need;   or   
2)the   residential   use   is   not   appropriately   located;   or  
3)the   building   is   unsuitable   for   residential   use   in   its   present   form   and   is   not   capable  
of   being   readily   improved   or   altered   to   make   it   suitable;   or  
4)subject   to   the   heritage   policies   of   the   Plan,   the   proposal   provides   a   way   of  
protecting   or   utilising   an   important   heritage   asset.  
 
Proposals   for   tourism   or   retail   uses   may   be   permitted   if   any   of   the   above   criterion  
can   be   satisfied   and   there   is    conformity   with   policies   E07,   or   E08   (as   applicable).   
 
In   all   cases   the   proposed   use   should   be   compatible   with,   and   cause   no   harm   to,   the   character  
and   appearance   of   the   area   and   the   living   conditions   of   neighbouring   residents  
 
 
Ancillary   accommodation   for   a   family   member  
11.43Residential   annexes   are   a   common   form   of   development   that   is   generally   proposed   in  
order   to   allow   relatives   to   live   with   their   family   with   a   degree   of   independence.   The   benefits   of  
this   include:  
 
●Allows   family   members   to   provide   the   care   and   support   required  
●Reduces   the   stress   and   impact   on   local   services,   ie   nursing   homes,   home   visits   from   care  
professionals   etc.  
●Cost   effective   and   affordable   solution   to   supported   living  
●Provides   a   measure   of   independence,   while   still   being   close   to   support  
●Can   provide   accommodation   for   family   members   unable   to   purchase   a   house   through   the   open  
market  
 
In   many   cases,   such   proposals   are   considered   to   be   acceptable   by   the   Council.  
 
11.44However,   such   annexes   would   rarely   be   suited   for   occupation   as   separate   living  
accommodation   unrelated   to   the   household   occupying   the   main   dwelling   for   a   number   of  
 reasons   including   lack   of   self-containment,   inadequate   separate   access,   amenity   space   and  
lack   of   privacy.  
 
11.45Planning   permission   will   therefore   normally   be   subject   to   a   condition   to   ensure  
that   the   occupation   of   the   unit   remains   ancillary   to   the   main   dwelling.  
 
Policy   HO23   -   Ancillary   Accommodation   for   a   Family   Member  
Proposals   to   provide   an   annexe   for   ancillary   accommodation   will   permitted   where  
the   proposed   annexe   is:  
 
●Within   the   curtilage   of   the   principal   dwelling   and   shares   its   vehicular   access  
●Is   occupied   only   in    connection   with   the   main   dwelling   in   single   family   use  
●Is   in   the   same   ownership   as   the   main   dwelling  
●Designed   in   such   a   way   as   to   easily   allow   the   annexe   to   be   used   as   an   integral   part   of   the  
main   dwelling   when   it   is   no   longer   needed   for   independent   occupation  
●Has   no   boundary   demarcation   or   sub   division   of   the   land   between   the   main   dwelling   and  
the   annexe  
●Of   a   scale   subservient   to   the   principal   dwelling   and   complies   with   the   Council's   design  
policies  
 
Fostering   and   Child   Care   Accommodation  
 
11.46The   Council,   with   its   key   partners,   is   concerned   about   the   impact   of   new   foster  
homes,   or   similar   facilities,   being   located   in   the   district,   and   in   particular,   in   the   Cliftonville  
West   Ward,   where   there   is   already   a   very   high   concentration   of   foster   homes.     Parts   of  
Margate   and   Cliftonville   experience   multiple   layers   of   risk   and   significant   deprivation,   and  
are   the   subject   of   substantial   inter-agency   efforts   to   improve   the   environment   and   lives   of  
people   already   resident   in   the   area.  
 
11.47The   Margate   Task   Force   was   set   up   in   2010,   and   is   a   multi-award-winning,   integrated  
team,   co-located   at   the   Council’s   offices,   made   up   of   14   different   agencies   and   30   staff,  
working   in   two   of   the   most   deprived   wards   in   Kent   (Margate   Central   and   Cliftonville   West).   MTF  
aims   to   identify   the   most   complex   social   issues   and   deliver   a   joint   ‘street   level’   service   to  
respond   to   risk   and   vulnerabilities.  
 
11.48There   is   evidence   from   Kent   Police,   the   Clinical   Commissioning   Group,   Kent   County  
Council   and   others   to   suggest   that   the   concentration   of   these   premises   in   this   area   causes   a  
range   of   problems,   including:  
 
●children   placed   in   these   facilities   being   at   increased   risk;  
●a   significant   impact   on,   and   diversion   of,   the   resources   of   key   agencies,   undermining   the  
delivery   of   core   services   in   the   area;   and  
●Harm   to   the   area   in   which   these   homes   are   located.  
 
 
11.49Until   the   profile   of   these   areas   change   positively,   through   ongoing   management   and  
planning   initiatives   and   intervention,   they   are   not   areas   which   currently   possess   the   necessary  
characteristics   conducive   to   a   positive   fostering   environment.    This    approach   is   supported   by  
Kent   Police,   the   Clinical   Commissioning   Group   and   Kent   County   Council.   The   policy   applies   to  
proposals   which   include   more   than   6   residents   (including   staff).  
 
 Policy   HO24   –   Fostering   Homes   &   Childcare   Facilities  
Proposals   for   new   foster   homes,   or   similar   childcare   facilities,   requiring   planning  
permission,   will   not   be   permitted   within   the   Cliftonville   West   Ward   as   identified   on   the  
Policies   Map.   
 
Proposals   for   foster   homes,   or   similar   childcare   facilities,   requiring   planning   permission,  
elsewhere   in   the   district   will   be   supported   where   the   Council   is   satisfied,   in   consultation   with  
Kent   Police,   the   Clinical   Commissioning   Group   and   Kent   County   Council,   that:  
 
●The   location   of   the   proposal   will   not   lead   to   an    increased   risk   to   the   personal   safety   and  
welfare   of   children   placed   in   these   facilities  
●There   is   no   significant   impact   on,   and   diversion   of,   resources   of   key   agencies   through  
increasing   intervention,   undermining   the   delivery   of   core   services   in   the   area   generally   and  
weakening   the   availability   of   resources   for   all   those   in   need  
●Proposals   do   not   result   in   harm   to   the   character    of   the   neighbourhood   and   the   living  
conditions   of   local   residents  
  
  
12   -   Natural   Environment   and   Green  
Infrastructure  
12.1Designated   sites   of   international,   national   and   local   value   and   extensive   areas   of  
wetland   and   farmland   habitat   harbour   both   protected   and   priority   species.   Diagram   1   shows   the  
hierarchy   of   these   designations   from   international,   national   to   local   importance.   International  
and   European   designations   and   protected   species   are   addressed   in   policies   (SP27   and   SP30).  
 
Diagram   1   -   Hierarchy   of   Nature   Conservation   Designations  
  
International   Designations  
Thanet   Coast   Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC)  
Sandwich   Bay   Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC)  
Thanet   Coast   and   Sandwich   Bay   Special   Protection   Area   (SPA)  
Ramsar    site  
Margate   and   Long   Sands   Special   Area   of   Conservation   (SAC)  
Outer   Thames   Estuary   Marine   Special   Protection   Area   (SPA)  
National   Designations  
Sandwich   Bay   &   Hacklinge   Marshes   Site   of   Special   Scientific  
Interest   (SSSI)   
Thanet   Coast   SSSI  
Thanet   Coast   Marine   Conservation   Zone  
Pegwell   Bay   National   Nature   Reserve   (NNR)  
Local   Designations  
Local   Wildlife   Sites   (LWS):    Monkton   Chalk   Pit,   St   Peters  
Churchyard,   Golf   Course   Roughs   Kingsgate,   Minster   Marshes,  
Ash   Level   &   South   Richborough   Pasture,   Churchyard   St  
Nicholas   at   Wade,   Churchyard   St   Mary   Magdalene   Monkton,  
Ramsgate   Cemetery .  
Monkton   Local   Nature   Reserve   (LNR)  
Roadside   Nature   Reserves   (RNR):    Cliff   Promenade   North  
Foreland,   Stonelees   A256,   Monkton   Chalk   Pit,   Chalkhole   Farm  
Flete  
 
  
12.2Sites   of   Special   Scientific   Interest   (SSSI)   are   nationally   designated   sites   under   Section  
28   of   the   Wildlife   and   Countryside   Act   1981,   which   have   important   wildlife   or   geological   value.  
This   Act   as   amended   by   the   Countryside   and   Rights   of   Way   Act   2000   imposes   a   duty   on   public  
bodies   exercising   statutory   functions   which   may   affect   SSSIs,   to   take   reasonable   steps   to  
further   enhance   the   features   for   which   the   site   is   designated.   The   nationally   designated   sites  
(SSSI   and   National   Nature   Reserve),   also   cover   the   coastline,   and   have   similar   features   to   the  
international   sites,   including   over   30   nationally   rare   species   of   terrestrial   and   marine   plants,   19  
nationally   rare   and   149   nationally   scarce   invertebrate   species   and   roost   sites   for   migrating   and  
wintering   birds.   Thanet   has   two   SSSIs   which   are   Thanet   Coast   SSSI   and   the   Sandwich   Bay  
and   Hacklinge   Marshes,   one   National   Nature   Reserve   at   Pegwell   Bay   which   straddles   the  
District   boundary   with   Dover.   The   Thanet   Coast   is   also   a   designated   Marine   Conservation  
Zone.  
 
Protection   of   Nationally   Designated   Sites   (SSSI),   National  
Nature   Reserve   (NNR)   and   Marine   Conservation   Zones  
(MCZ)  
 
 
Policy   GI01-   Protection   of   Nationally   Designated   Sites  
(SSSI)   and   Marine   Conservation   Zones   (MCZ)  
Development  which  would  materially  harm  either  directly,  indirectly  or  cumulatively,           
or  detract  from  the  scientific  or  nature  conservation  interest  of  a  Site  of  Special               
Scientific  Interest,  National  Nature  Reserve  or  Marine  Conservation  Zone  will  not  be             
permitted.  
 
Exceptionally,   where   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   need   for   the   proposed   development  
is   compelling   and   overrides   the   national   importance   of   the   site,   and   it   has   been  
demonstrated   that   no   suitable   alternative   site   exists,   mitigating   measures   will   be  
required   to   maintain   the   integrity   of   the   site,   to   the   satisfaction   of   the   appropriate  
authority.  
 
The   proposed   development   will,   wherever   possible   and   appropriate,   include   measures   to  
enhance   and   improve   connectivity   to   designated   sites.  
 
 
Locally   Designated   Wildlife   Sites  
12.3The   District   has   habitats   and   geological   features   which   are   of   local   significance.   These   are  
designated   as   Local   Nature   Reserves,   Local   Wildlife   Sites   and   Regionally   Important   Geological  
Sites.   Thanet   has   two   Local   Nature   Reserves   located   at   Monkton   and   Pegwell   Bay,   and   eight  
Local   Wildlife   Sites:   TH01   Monkton   Chalk   Pit,   TH07   St   Peter   in   Thanet   Churchyard,   TH09   Golf  
Course   Roughs   Kingsgate,   TH12   Woods   and   Grasslands   Minster   Marshes,   TH13   St   Nicholas-at-  
Wade   Churchyard,   TH14   St   Mary   Magdalene   Churchyard   Monkton,   TH15   Ramsgate   Cemetery,  
TH16   Cliftonville   Grassland   Foreness   Point.   These   sites   host   locally   important   habitats.  
 
12.4There   are   also   four   Roadside   Nature   Reserves   which   have   been   identified   for   their  
habitats   and   connections   to   areas   of   rich   biodiversity,   and   include   important   features   such   as  
calcareous   grassland,   lizard   orchids   and   diverse   populations   of   butterflies   and   dragon   flies.  
These   are   TH01   Cliff   Promenade   North   Foreland,   TH02   Stonelees   A256,   Pegwell   Bay,   TH03  
 Monkton   Chalk   Pit,   Monkton,   TH04   Chalk   Farm   Flete,   Margate.  
 
12.5The   Council   considers   it   important   to   protect   locally   designated   wildlife   sites   and   the  
following   policy   seeks   to   maintain   the   biodiversity   and   wildlife   at   these   locally   designated   sites.  
 
 
Policy   GI02   -   Locally   Designated   Wildlife   Sites  
Development   which   would   have   a   detrimental   impact   on   locally   designated   wildlife   sites  
will   not   be   permitted   unless   suitable   mitigation   can   be   provided   either   on   or   off   site  
within   Thanet.   Exceptionally,   where   a   strategic   need   for   a   proposed   development   is  
identified   which   outweighs   the   importance   of   the   locally   designated   sites   and   cannot   be  
located   elsewhere,   an   equivalent   area   of   habitat   will   be   created   elsewhere   at   a   suitable  
location   well   related   to   other   existing   habitats.  
 
Wherever   possible   and   appropriate,   new   developments   will   provide   a   net  
environmental   gain   in   accordance   with   Policy   SP30,   and   include   measures   to   enhance  
and   improve   wildlife   connectivity   to   designated   wildlife   sites.  
 
Regionally   Important   Geological   Sites   (RIGS)  
12.6Regionally   Important   Geological   /   Geomorphological   Sites   (RIGS)   are   non-statutory  
Earth   Science   sites   designated   by   locally   based   RIGS   groups.   Thanet   has   three   Regionally  
Important   Geological   Sites   (RIGS)   that   are   important   for   historical,   scientific   research   or  
educational   reasons.   These   are   located   at   Monkton   Nature   Reserve,   Pegwell   Bay   and   St  
Peters   Quarry.   There   designation   is   a   way   of   recognising   and   protecting   features   for   the   future.  
The   importance   and   significance   of   these   sites   are   acknowledged   through   the   following   policy.  
 
Policy   GI03   -   Regionally   Important   Geological   Sites   (RIGS)  
At   RIGS   sites,   development   which   would   result   in   the   loss   or   obstruction   of  
geological   features   of   importance   will   not   be   permitted   where   a   strategic   need   for  
the   proposed   development   is   identified   which   outweighs   the   importance   of   the  
locally   designated   sites   and   cannot   be   located   elsewhere.  
 
Requirements   for   New   Open   Space  
12.7An   Open   Space   Strategy   was   carried   out   in   2018   which   assessed   Thanet's   open  
space   provision.   The   results   and   recommendations   are   set   out   in   Table   12   which   show   a  
deficit   in   all   typologies   against   the   Field   in   Trust   guidelines.   The   following   policies   seek   to  
deliver   these  
   recommendations   for   open   space   provision   in   new   development.   Further   advice   is   given   in  
Chapter   4   Environment   Strategy.   This   sets   out   the   intention   of   the   Council   to   apply   the   Fields   in  
Trust   Guidelines   to   new   developments   in   line   with   the   draft   recommendations   in   the   strategy.  
 
12.8Table   12   sets   out   the   provision   guidelines,   tables   10   and   11,   set   out   the   accessibility  
criteria   and   the   Quantity   Benchmark   Guidelines   for   equipped/designated   play   space,  
respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 Table   10:   Fields   in   Trust   Accessibility   Criteria  
 
Open   Space   typology  Walking   guideline   (Walking   distance   metre   from   dwellings)*  
Parks   and   Gardens  710m   (approximately   10   minutes)  
Natural   and   semi   natural   greenspace  720m   (approximately   10   minutes)  
Amenity   greenspace  480m   (approximately   a   6   minute   walk)  
Equipped/designated   play   areas  LAPs   100m  
LEAPs   400m  
NEAPs   1,000m  
Other   Outdoor   provision  
MUGAs   and   skateboard   parks  700m  
 
*Accessibility   guidelines   are   provided   as   walking   distance   from   dwellings.   Indicative  
walking   distances   can   be   determined   from   the   accessibility   guidelines   as   set   out   below.  
 
●250m   =   2   -   3   minutes'   walk  
●400m   =   5   minutes'   walk  
●800m   =   10   minutes'   walk  
●1,200m   =   15   minutes'   walk  
●1,600m   =   20   minutes'   walk  
 
Table   11:   Recommended   Application   of   Quantity   Benchmark   Guidelines   -   Equipped   /  
Designated   Play   Space  
 
Scale   of   development  
no.   of   dwellings  LAP  LEAP  NEAP  MUGA  
5-10  Y  
10-200  Y  Y  Contribution  
201-500  Y  Y  Contribution  Y  
501+  Y  Y  Y  Y  
 
Source:   Fields   In   Trust   -   Guidance   for   Outdoor   Sport   and   Play   Oct   2015  
 
  
 Table   12:   Requirements   for   New   Open   Space  
 
Open   Space  
typology  Existing  
provision  
Total   no.  
of   sites  Ha  Current  
provision  
ha/1000  Fields   in  
Trust  
guidelines  Requirement  
by   2031  Projected  
Deficit   /  
oversupply  
2031  
Amenity  
Greenspace  137  67.11  0.52  0.6ha   per  
1,000   per  
population  96.9  -29.79  
Provision   for  
children  
and   young   people  31  3.61  0.03  0.25ha   per  
1,000  
population  40.38  -76.77  
Allotments  16  24.46  0.17  0.2ha   per  
1,000  
population  32.3  -7.84  
Natural   and   semi-  
natural  
greenspace  14  100.51  0.71  1.8ha   per  
1,000  
population  290.7  -190.19  
Public   parks  
and   gardens  26  74.54  0.53  0.8ha   per  
1,000  
population  129.2  -54.66  
 
 
Amenity   Green   Space   and   Equipped   Play   Areas  
12.9Thanet's   three   main   coastal   towns   each   have   a   'flagship'   playground,   as   well   as  
other   standard   playgrounds.   There   are   currently   also   five   skate   parks   in   Thanet.  
 
12.10The   cumulative   impact   of   smaller   housing   developments   and   population   increase   will  
put   pressure   upon   existing   amenity   green   spaces   and   existing   play   facilities.   With   the   drive   to  
provide   more   housing   on   brownfield   land   in   urban   areas,   whether   it   is   new   build   or   conversion,  
'smaller'   sites   are   likely   to   be   developed.   New   family   housing   should   provide   gardens   to  
ensure   the   provision   of   "doorstep"   playspace.   High   quality   areas   of   amenity   space   and  
children's   play   areas   will   contribute   to   quality   of   life   and   help   social   interaction.  
 
12.11Children's   playspace   should   be   adequately   equipped   and   safely   and   conveniently  
available   to   all   new   residential   developments   of   a   size   and   type   likely   to   meet   the   new   demand.  
The   location   of   facilities   should,   however,   take   into   account   the   potential   impact   of   noise   and  
other   disturbance   on   neighbouring   properties.   In   addition   to   play   space   for   younger   children,  
facilities   for   teenagers   should   also   be   considered.   New   development   will   be   expected   to   make  
provision   for   amenity   green   space   and   equipped   play   areas   in   line   with   the   Fields   in   Trust  
guidelines   as   set   out   in   tables   10,   11   and   12   and   the   approach   set   out   in   chapter   4.   Provision  
will   also   need   to   be   made   for   the   continued   maintenance   of   such   facilities.  
 
12.12The   provision   of   open   spaces   should   be   considered   at   an   early   stage   in   the   design  
process   and   consider:  
 
●accessibility   in   terms   of   highway   safety   and   proximity   to   dwellings   served  
●security   of   children   using   amenity   space   and   play   areas   (including   whether  
the   site   and   access   to   it   is   overlooked   by   dwellings)   and  
●Convenience   of   siting   in   relation   to   noise   sensitive   development   (e.g.  
dwelling   units   designed   for,   or   particularly   suited   to,   occupation   by   the  
elderly).  
 ●Making   provision   for   biodiversity   through   appropriate   landscaping   schemes  
●Addressing   climate   change   for   example,   considering   the   effects   of   extreme  
temperatures   through   the   provision   of   shaded   areas   by   planting   trees  
 
12.13The   Planning   Obligations   &   Developer   Contributions   Supplementary   Planning  
Document   (SPD)   gives   details   of   how   financial   contributions   can   be   made   towards   the   upkeep  
and   maintenance   of   existing   play   areas   if   on   site   provision   is   not   possible.   The   SPD   will   be  
subject   to   review   if   the   Council   implements   the   Community   Infrastructure   Levy.   The   following  
policy   seeks   to   ensure   the   recommended   provision   of   amenity   and   children's   play   space   is  
provided   for.  
 
Policy   GI04   -   Amenity   Green   Space   and   Equipped   Play   Areas  
New   residential   development   will   make   provision   for   appropriate   amenity   green   space  
and   equipped   play   areas   to   meet   the   standards   set   in   tables   10,   11   and   12.   The   type   and  
amount   of   open   space   to   be   provided   will   depend   on:  
1)    The   size   and   location   of   the   development,  
2)Existing   open   space   provision   near   the   development   site,   and  
3)The   number   of   people   likely   to   live   in   the   proposed   development.  
 
New   family   dwellings*   will   be   expected   to   incorporate   garden   space   in   order   to  
provide   a   safe   "doorstep"**   play   area   for   young   children.  
 
In   exceptional   circumstances   where   it   would   be   impractical   to   provide   adequate   and  
suitably   located   playspace   as   part   of   the   development,   then   a   financial   contribution  
may   instead   be   acceptable   to   offset   the   costs   resulting   from   the   additional   use   and  
need   for   increased   maintenance   and   play   equipment   at   suitably   located   existing  
playspaces   and   amenity   areas.  
 
The   developer   will   be   responsible   for   the   funding   and   arrangement   of   the   ongoing  
maintenance   and   management   of   amenity   and   play   areas   which   will   be   secured  
through   a   legal   agreement.  
 
*Family   dwellings   are   considered   to   be   those   having   two   or   more   bedrooms.  
 
**   Doorstep   playspace   is   defined   as   playspace   for   young   children   which   is   immediately  
adjacent   to,   closely   visible   and   safely   accessible   from   the   dwellings   served.  
 
Outdoor   Sports   Facilities  
12.14The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   planning   policies   should  
plan   positively   for   the   provision   of   sports   venues,   guard   against   the   unnecessary   loss   of  
facilities   and   that   access   to   high   quality   open   spaces   and   opportunities   for   sport   and  
recreation   can   make   an   important   contribution   to   the   health   and   well-being   of   communities.  
 
12.15Outdoor   sports   facilities   include   pitches,   greens,   courts,   athletics   tracks   and  
miscellaneous   sites   such   as   croquet   lawns   and   training   areas.   These   also   include   facilities  
owned   by   the   local   authority,   education   authorities   or   facilities   within   the   voluntary,   private   or  
commercial   sectors   that   serve   the   outdoor   leisure   needs   for   their   members   or   the   public.  
 
12.16The   Open   Space   Strategy   (2018)   includes   a   more   up   to   date   assessment   of   the  
current   provision   of   sports   facilities   and   sets   out   the   requirements   for   future   provision.  
 
 12.17The   Council   will   seek   financial   contributions   from   developers   for   the   provision   of   new  
facilities   or   the   upgrade   or   renewal   of   existing   facilities   where   on   site   provision   of   outdoor  
sports   facilities   is   not   possible.    For   new   provision,   the   Council   have   regard   to   the   Sport  
England   Sports   Facility   Calculator   when   preparing   proposals   to   determine   the   need  
generated   by   their   development.    The   Planning   Obligations   &   Developer   Contributions  
Supplementary   Planning   Document   gives   details   of   how   financial   contributions   can   be   made  
and   how   they   will   be   calculated.  
 
Protection   of   Playing   Fields   and   Outdoor   Sports   Facilities  
 
12.18The   important   contribution   that   sport   and   recreation,   as   well   as   community   facilities,  
can   make   in   improving   people's   quality   of   life   is   now   widely   accepted.   Participation   in   sport  
and   recreation   can   improve   the   health   and   well-being   of   an   individual,   whilst   sports   clubs  
and   community   facilities   can   improve   social   interaction   and   provide   a   sense   of   community  
pride.  
 
Policy   GI05   -   Protection   of   Playing   Fields   and   Outdoor  
Sports   Facilities   
Built   development   will   not   be   permitted   on   playing   fields   or   on   land   last   used   as   a  
playing   field   unless   one   or   more   of   the   following   applies:  
 
1)It   is   demonstrated   that   there   is   an   excess   of   playing   field   provision   in   the   area,  
for   current   and   future   uses   of   both   the   school   and   the   community;   or  
2)The   proposed   use   is   ancillary   to   the   primary   use   as   a   playing   field   and   does  
not   affect   the   quantity   or   quality   of   pitches   or   adversely   affect   their   use;   or  
3)The   proposed   development   is   on   land   incapable   of   forming   a   pitch   or   part   of   a  
pitch   and   does   not   result   in   the   loss   of,   or   inability   to   make   use   of,   a   pitch;   or  
4)The   playing   field   or   fields   that   would   be   lost   as   a   consequence   of   the   proposed  
development   would   be   replaced,   prior   to   the   commencement   of   the   development,  
by   a   playing   field   or   fields   of   at   least   a   similar   or   improved   quality   and   size   in   a  
suitable   nearby   location   and   subject   to   equivalent   or   improved   management  
arrangements;   or  
5)The   proposed   development   is   for   an   indoor   or   outdoor   sports   facility,   the  
provision   of   which   would   be   of   sufficient   benefit   to   sport   and   recreation   as   to  
outweigh   the   detriment   caused   by   the   loss   of   the   playing   field   or   playing   fields  
 
In   each   case   the   playing   field   should   not   make   an   important   visual   contribution   to   the   amenity  
of   the   area    and   its   loss   should   not   be   detrimental   to   the   character   of   the   area.  
 
Landscaping   and   Green   Infrastructure   in  
New   Developments  
12.19A   positive   natural   environment   can   have   economic   benefits   by   making   the   area   a  
place   where   people   want   to   live.   New   developments   should   contribute   to   and   enhance   the  
natural   environment.  
 
12.20Green   infrastructure   can   be   created   through   landscaping   and   design   by   providing  
wildlife   corridors   and   stepping   stones   in   new   developments,   creating   links   between   existing  
habitats.   This   can   contribute   to   people's   health   and   well-being   by   keeping   people   in   touch   with  
their   natural   environment,   providing   opportunities   for   residents   to   manage   their   local  
environment   and   reinforce   a   sense   of   community.  
  
12.21Landscaping   can   create   a   pleasant   setting   for   development,   provide   shade   from   the   sun  
and   pollution   attenuation   as   trees   and   shrubs   absorb   water   and   dust.   It   should   be   an   integral  
part   of   the   design   of   a   development,   rather   than   consisting   of   'offcuts'   of   leftover   land   or   as   a  
way   of   camouflaging   poor   design.  
 
12.22Landscaping   designs   should,   in   the   first   instance,   be   related   to   each   plot   of   land   so   that  
each   future   owner   would   be   responsible   for   its   upkeep,   reducing   the   burden   on   Council  
resources.   If   this   is   not   possible   or   desirable,   commuted   payments   through   legal   agreements  
may   be   negotiated   in   appropriate   circumstances.   Accordingly,   landscaping   matters   should   be  
considered   at   the   earliest   stages   of   the   design   process.   For   developments   that   fall   within   the  
identified   landscape   character   areas,   further   guidance   is   available   within   the   landscape   strategy  
for   each   character   areas   in   the   2017   assessment.  
 
12.23Thanet   has   relatively   few   trees.   The   Council   will   therefore   seek   to   retain   existing   trees  
as   part   of   any   proposed   developments   through   the   making   of   Tree   Preservation   Orders   and  
through   use   of   planning   conditions   where   appropriate.   British   Standard   BS5837:   2012   (Guide  
for   Trees   in   Relation   to   Design,   Demolition   and   Construction)   gives   guidance   regarding   the  
best   approach   to   new   site   development   in   relation   to   existing   trees.  
12.24   The   Council   seeks   to   retain   hedges   and   other   semi-natural   habitat,   such   as   ponds   and  
species-rich   grassland,   together   with   new   planting,   as   they   lend   maturity   to   a   development   and  
can   enhance   biodiversity   and   wildlife   habitats,   through   the   following   policy.  
 
 
Policy   GI06   -   Landscaping   and   Green   Infrastructure  
Major    development   proposal   and   all   other   proposals   which   are   likely   to   have   significant  
landscape   implications   shall   be   supported   by      a   landscape   survey.   The   landscape   survey  
should   describe   the   current   landscape   features   on   the   application   site,   and   demonstrate  
how   the   proposed   development   will   provide   landscaping   and   Green   Infrastructure   to  
enhance   the   setting   of   the   development,   where   possible   and   appropriate,   to:  
 
●Create   an   attractive   environment   for   users   and   occupiers  
●Establish   a   sense   of   enclosure   with   hedges   and   trees  
●Soften   hard   building   lines   and   the   impact   of   new   buildings  
●Provide   screening   from   noise   and   sun  
●Create   new   wildlife   corridors   and   stepping   stones  
●Createnew   wildlife   habitats   and   improve   biodiversity   including   the   integration   with  
surface   water   management  
●Retain   historic   features   including   boundaries   and   layouts  
●Improve   connectivity   between   new   and   existing   features  
 
The   developer   will   need   to   satisfy   the   Council   that   adequate   arrangements   to   ensure  
continued   maintenance   of   landscaping   has   been   made.   The   Council   may   seek   to  
secure   arrangements   for   this   purpose   through   a   planning   agreement.  
 
12.25Jackey   Bakers   sports   ground   is   Thanet's   main   area   for   sports   and   recreation   purposes.  
The   site   provides   the   best   opportunity   to   both   enhance   existing   facilities,   and   in   the   longer  
term,   to   increase   the   level   of   facilities.  
 
12.26Any   new   sports   development   may   be   supported   by   a   limited   development   of   D2   (leisure  
facilities)   or   A3   (restaurants)   or   D1   (community   facilities)   uses   to   subsidise   the   sporting   use   and  
ensure   it   is   viable.   Any   such   proposal   will   need   to   be   subject   to   a   full   justification   being   made  
when   any   application   is   submitted   and   will   be   judged   against   the   amount   of   land   retained   for  
 open   sporting   purposes.   There   are   current   proposals   for   a   new   astro-turf   pitch   and   pavilion   with  
changing   facilities.  
 
 
Policy   GI07   -   Jackey   Bakers  
Jackey   Bakers   sports   ground   will   be   promoted   as   the   long-term   primary   sports   venue  
for   Thanet.   Proposals   which   will   provide   a   3G   pitch   and   improve   the   facilities   for  
football,   rugby,   hockey   and   other   sports   will   be   supported.   Proposals   will   need   to  
include   a   new   clubhouse   with   improved   changing   and   social   facilities.  
Where   fully   justified,   the   Council   will   permit   ancillary   development   on   order   to    maintain  
the   sports   use.   This   could   include   limited   development   of   D2   (leisure   facilities),   D1  
(community   facilities)   and   A3   (restaurant   facilities).  
  
 13-   Quality   Development  
 
Sustainable   Design  
13.1Sustainable   design   can   make   an   important   contribution   to   sustainable   development   and  
aid   a   reduction   in   carbon   emissions.   The   Government   has   put   on   hold,   its   Zero   Carbon   Initiative  
and   is   likely   to   review   its   approach   to   reducing   carbon   emissions.   There   are   a   number   of  
measures   that   can   be   considered   in   the   design   of   new   development   that   will   help   reduce   energy  
consumption   and   provide   resilience   to   increased   temperatures,   such   as:  
 
●the   use   of   landform  
●layout  
●provision   of   adequate   space   for   recycling   and   composting  
●building   orientation   to   maximise   summer   cooling   through   natural   ventilation   in  
buildings   and   increasing   passive   solar   gain  
●tree   planting  
●landscaping  
 
13.2Landscaping   can   be   particularly   beneficial   as   it   can   provide   stepping   stones,   wildlife  
corridors   or   new   habitats,   and   contribute   to   Thanet's   Green   Infrastructure   network.   In   terms   of  
adapting   to   climate   change,   integrating   vegetation   (i.e.   planting   on   building   walls   and   roofs)   can  
help   to   reduce   solar   gain   as   vegetation   has   a   much   higher   reflective   capacity   than   masonry,   as  
well   as   providing   a   cooling   effect   through   evapo-transpiration.   Planting   can   also   help   mitigate  
against   poor   air   quality   by   presenting   a   large   surface   area   for   filtering   air.   A   large   tree   can  
deliver   the   same   cooling   capacity   as   five   large   air   conditioning   units   running   for   20   hours   a   day  
during   hot   weather.   New   planting   can   help   provide   more   comfortable,   cooler   spaces   via   summer  
shading.  
 
13.3Within   the   context   of   an   established   development   pattern,   the   most   significant   change  
likely   to   generate   demand   for   travel   will   result   from   new   housing   development.   It   is   necessary,  
therefore,   to   consider   the   location   of   development   in   areas   accessible   to   a   range   of   services   on  
foot   and   by   public   transport,   preventing   urban   sprawl   and   improving   local   high   streets   and   town  
centres.   Methods   such   as   providing   showers   and   changing   facilities   in   employment   related  
development   and   locating   cycle   parking   close   to   town   centres/entrances   will   also   help   reduce  
the   need   to   travel   by   car.  
 
13.4Building   insulation   is   a   simple   way   of   maximising   energy   efficiency   and   thereby  
reducing   energy   demands.   Poor   insulation   is   one   of   the   leading   causes   of   energy   wastage   in  
homes.   In   areas   of   deprivation   this   can   lead   to   households   being   in   fuel   poverty.   The   definition  
of   Fuel   Poverty   is   when   a   household   has   to   spend   10%   or   more   of   its   income   on   energy   to  
maintain   acceptable   levels   of   warmth.   This   is   considered   to   be   a   temperature   of   21 o C-   23 o C   in  
the   main   living   area   of   a   home   and   18 o C   in   other   areas.   Fuel   poverty   is   influenced   by   three   key  
factors   -   the   cost   of   fuel,   the   income   of   the   household   and   the   energy   efficiency   of   the   home.  
The   energy   efficiency   of   the   home   is   one   area   that   planning   can   influence   through   policy.  
 
13.5The   latest   figures   from   Department   for   Business,   Energy   and   Industrial   Strategy   2015  
(updated   2017)   for   Thanet   show   that   11.3%   households   in   Thanet   were   defined   as   being   fuel  
poor   which   has   increased   from   10.3%   in   2013   (DECC   figures)   Source:   DECC   Fuel   Poverty  
Statistic   2013   (Low   Income   High   Cost   model   indicator)  
( https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/fuel-   poverty-statistics#2013-statistics )  
 
13.6In   addition,   since   the   introduction   of   Energy   Performance   Certificates   in   2007,   The  
 District   is   still   only   achieving   low   levels   of   A   to   C   energy   efficiency   in   new   builds   for   example,  
0.4%   of   EPCs   lodged   in   2016   achieving   an   "A"   energy   rating,   7%   achieving   EPC   rating   B   and  
22%   achieving   energy   rating   C.   Source:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-  
energy-performance-of-buildings-certificates  
 
13.7To   help   reduce   fuel   poverty   and   improve   the   energy   rating,   all   new   homes   should   seek  
to   maximise   energy   efficiency   through   improved   insulation   eg   roof,   wall,   floor   insulation   and  
energy   efficient   windows.   Other   initiatives   can   include   on   site   options   such   as   LED   street  
lights,   photovoltaic   (solar)   panels,   electric   vehicle   charging,   near   site   options   -   eg   financial  
contributions   towards   site   based   district   heating   scheme,   retro   fitting   of   low/zero   carbon  
technologies   to   local   communal   buildings.   Off-site   options   -   investment   in   energy   from   waste  
plants,   investment   in   district   heating   pipe   work.   These   are   addressed   the   Climate   Change  
chapter.  
 
13.8For   existing   residential   developments   there   are   a   number   of   other   initiatives   such   as   the  
Kent   and   Medway   Warm   Homes   scheme   which   is   a   partnership   project   between   Kent   County  
Council   and   district   councils   to   support   residents   in   Kent   and   Medway   to   save   energy   in   their  
home.   In   addition   Kent   Housing   Group   consulted   on   the   Kent   Fuel   Poverty   Strategy   in   2016  
and   is   producing   an   Action   Plan.  
 
13.9The   requirements   to   provide   these   could   have   an   impact   on   the   viability   of   development  
in   Thanet.   The   Council   commissioned   a   Whole   Plan   Viability   Study   to   ensure   that   policies   in  
the   Plan   and   has   concluded   that   development   in   Thanet   remains   viable   after   taking   these  
requirements   into   account.  
 
13.10The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   that   new   development   achieves   the   necessary  
levels   of   sustainable   design   and   construction   and   should   be   read   in   conjunction   with   the   policy  
on   the   new   technical   standards.  
 
 
Policy   QD01   -   Sustainable   Design  
All   new   buildings   and   conversions   of   existing   buildings   must   be   designed   to   reduce  
emissions   of   greenhouse   gases   and   have   resilience   to   function   in   a   changing   climate.  
All   developments   will   be   required   to:  
 
1) Achieve   a   high   standard   of   energy   efficiency   to   the   equivalent   of   Level   4  
of   the   Code   for   Sustainable   Homes    (subject   to   HE05   where   applicable).    Where  
viability   is   an   issue,   it   will   be   incumbent   an   on   an   applicant   to   demonstrate   to   the  
satisfaction   of   the   Council   why   this   standard   cannot   be   achieved.  
2) Make   the   best   use   of   solar   energy   passive   heating   and   cooling,   natural   light,  
natural   ventilation   and   landscaping.  
3) Provide   safe   and   attractive   cycling   and   walking   opportunities   to   reduce   the   need  
to   travel   by   car.  
 
All   new   buildings   and   conversions   of   existing   buildings   must   be   designed   to   use  
resources   sustainably.   This   includes,   but   is   not   limited   to:  
 
4)Re-using   existing   buildings   and   vacant   floors   wherever   possible;  
5)Designing   buildings   flexibly   from   the   outset   to   allow   a   wide   variety   of   possible   uses;  
6) Using   sustainable   materials   wherever   possible   and   making   the   most  
sustainable   use   of   other   materials;  
7)Minimising   waste   and   promoting   recycling,   during   both   construction   and   occupation.  
  
General   Design   Principles  
13.11The   historic   environment   can   add   value   to   new   development   by   creating   a   sense   of  
place   and   distinctiveness.   New   developments   need   to   be   designed   in   a   way   that   respects   and  
complements   their   surroundings,   and   enhance   areas   that   are   less   attractive.   There   are   many  
areas   in   Thanet   which   are   considered   to   possess   certain   valuable   qualities   such   as   their   open  
form   of   development,   the   separation   between   buildings   and   the   positive   contribution   made   by  
landscaping.   The   design,   scale   and   grouping   of   existing   buildings,   the   spaces   between   them,  
the   texture,   type   and   colour   of   materials,   enclosure,   land   contours   and   views   all   contribute   to   the  
character   and   identity   of   a   place.   An   attractive   well-designed   environment   can   foster   economic  
regeneration.   Heritage   England   provides   advice   and   guidance   on   Heritage   and   Sustainable  
Growth.   Materials   should   normally   be   of   a   local   type   and   harmonise   with   those   of   adjoining  
development   (where   these   present   a   pleasing   appearance).   Architectural   style   should   respect  
that   of   other   development   in   the   locality.   Innovation   in   decoration   can,   if   sensitively   considered,  
enhance   the   identity   and   character   of   a   building   and   place.   New   innovative   modern   design   will  
be   acceptable   where   it   reflects   local   context   and   distinctiveness,   is   fit   for   purpose   and   exhibits  
durability  
 
13.12Buildings   and   the   spaces   around   them   should   be   thought   about   holistically,   with   the  
landscape   and   public   realm,   including   open   space   provision,   being   as   important   as   the  
building   itself.   Successful   landscape   design   will   integrate   development   into   its   surroundings  
and   enhance   the   function,   character   and   amenity   value   of   spaces   and   boundaries.   Taking  
account   of   existing   landscape   features,   such   as   trees,   is   crucial   in   creating   high   quality   and  
responsive   schemes.   Existing   trees   can   provide   a   sense   of   maturity   to   new   developments   and  
play   an   important   role   in   softening   and   integrating   development   into   the   district.   Landscape  
design   extends   beyond   the   curtilage   of   new   buildings   to   include   streets,   parks   and   other   open  
spaces   and   should   help   to   support   an   attractive   and   high   quality   public   realm.   This   policy   does  
not   seek   to   control   the   design   of   individual   gardens   unless   these   are   a   key   part   of   a   heritage  
asset.  
 
13.13Well-designed   open   spaces   and   parks   not   only   help   to   create   a   high   quality   environment  
but   they   help   to   encourage   a   more   active   lifestyle   thereby   improving   the   health   of   the   local  
community.   The   Open   Space   Strategy   2017   highlights   that   one   of   the   key   issues   facing   the  
district   is   relating   to   health   with   68.4%   of   residents   being   classed   as   having   weight   issues   which  
are   "excessive"   and   "obese".   In   order   to   meet   the   objective   of   promoting   the   physical   and  
mental   well-being   of   the   community   as   set   out   Strategic   Priority   4,   the   Council   will   expect  
developers   to   have   regard   to   the   Active   Design   Guidance   produced   by   Sport   England.   This   sets  
out   10   principles   of   active   design   which   have   been   identified   by   drawing   from   urban   design  
practice   and   practical   examples   to   promote   environments   that   offer   individuals   and   communities  
the   greatest   potential   to   lead   active   and   healthy   lifestyles.   The   10   principles   are:   activity   for   all;  
walkable   communities;   connected   walking   and   cycling   routes;   co-location   of   community  
facilities;   network   of   multifunctional   open   space;   high   quality   of   street   and   spaces;   appropriate  
infrastructure;   active   buildings;   management   maintenance   monitoring   and   evaluation;   and  
activity   promotion   and   local   champions.  
 
13.14Landscape   proposals   should   result   in   high   quality   amenity   spaces,   which   receive  
adequate   sunlight   (in   accordance   with   best   practice   guidance)   and   which   work   with   the  
buildings   to   help   define   thresholds   and   boundaries   and   to   provide   opportunities   for   private  
usable   amenity   space   through   gardens,   roof   terraces   and   balconies.  
 
13.15Maintenance   and   management   plans   must   be   provided   with   any   proposals   and  
considered   early   in   the   design   process.   Schemes   which   include   species   that   support   local  
distinctiveness   enhance   biodiversity   and   cope   with   climatic   changes   will   be   supported.  
  
13.16The   function   of   a   building   is   a   major   determinant   of   its   built   form.   However,   a   principal  
aim   in   designing   new   development   should   be   to   respect   and   complement   the   merits   of   existing  
built   and   natural   features   including   landscape,   while   still   expressing   and   accommodating   the  
function   of   the   building   through   design.  
 
13.17Some   buildings   (e.g.   public   buildings)   need   to   be   of   larger   scale   than   others.   However,  
the   scale   and   proportion   of   existing   development   should   generally   be   respected.   It   may   be  
possible   to   break   down   the   bulk   of   a   large   building   (e.g.   by   insertion   of   horizontal   design  
features)   to   achieve   a   satisfactory   appearance   in   relation   to   adjoining   plot   widths   and  
proportions   and   to   break   bland   expanses   down   to   a   scale   sympathetic   to   that   of   existing  
buildings.  
 
13.18Density   is   a   measure   of   the   number   of   dwellings   which   can   be   accommodated   on   a   site  
or   in   an   area   and   can   affect   the   appearance   and   characteristics   of   development   in   the   following  
ways:  
  
●The   space   between   buildings  
●Amenity   and   private   access  
●Parking  
●Provision/retention   of   trees   and   shrubs  
●Levels   of   Surface   water   run   off  
 
13.19Some   parts   of   Thanet   are   already   densely   developed.   Former   holiday   areas   such   as  
Cliftonville   have   seen   significant   numbers   of   conversions   of   large   buildings   (often   previously  
used   as   hotels)   into   flatted   accommodation   which   has,   in   some   cases,   had   a   detrimental   impact  
due   to   small,   poor   quality   developments,   absent   landlords,   and   a   transient   population.   To   help  
address   this   the   Council   will   implement   the   optional   internal   space   standards   as   set   out   in  
policy   QD04.   Other   areas   of   the   district   benefit   from   lower   density   developments.   The   density   of  
residential   developments   is   not   prescribed   in   this   Plan,   as,   in   all   instances,   the   compatibility  
with   the   character   of   the   area   and   the   mix   of   housing   to   meet   local   needs   or   demand   will  
influence   design   and   layout.  
 
13.20The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   local   planning  
authorities   should   consider   policies   to   resist   inappropriate   development   of   residential  
gardens   where   development   would   cause   harm   to   the   local   area.  
 
13.21In   Thanet,   applications   have   been   refused   for   development   on   garden   land   due   to   the  
impact   the   proposal   would   have   on   the   character   and   appearance   of   the   area.   Some   parts   of  
the   district   enjoy   a   high   quality   environment,   with   spacious   surroundings,   and   development  
within   a   garden   could   have   a   detrimental   effect.   Residential   gardens   also   form   part   of   Thanet's  
Green   Infrastructure   providing   biodiversity   and   wildlife   habitats.   However,   there   could   also   be  
instances   where   a   development   within   a   garden   could   be   in   keeping   with   the   pattern   of  
development,   forms   part   of   a   comprehensive   development,   enhances   the   streetscene,   or   is  
situated   where   the   property   would   be   a   frontage   development.  
 
The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   all   new   development   respects   and   enhances   local   character.  
 
 
Policy   QD02   -   General   Design   Principles  
The   primary   planning   aim   in   all   new   development   is   to   promote   or   reinforce   the   local  
character   of   the   area   and   provide   high   quality   and   inclusive   design   and   be   sustainable   in  
all   other   respects.   Development   must:  
  
1)Relate   to   the   surrounding   development,   form   and   layout   and   strengthen   links   to  
the   adjacent   areas.  
2)Be   well   designed,   respect   and   enhance   the   character   of   the   area   paying   particular  
attention   to   context   and   identity   of   its   location,   scale,   massing,   rhythm,   density,  
layout   and   use   of   materials   appropriate   to   the   locality.   The   development   itself  
must   be   compatible   with   neighbouring   buildings   and   spaces   and   be   inclusive   in  
its   design   for   all   users.  
3)Incorporate   a   high   degree   of   permeability   for   pedestrians   and   cyclists,   provide  
safe   and   satisfactory   access   for   pedestrians,   public   transport   and   other  
vehicles,   ensuring   provision   for   disabled   access.  
4)Improve   people's   quality   of   life   by   creating   safe   and   accessible   environments,  
and   promoting   public   safety   and   security   by   designing   out   crime.  
 
External   spaces,   landscape,   public   realm,   and   boundary   treatments   must   be   designed   as  
an   integral   part   of   new   development   proposals   and   coordinated   with   adjacent   sites   and  
phases.   Development   will   be   supported   where   it   is   demonstrated   that:  
 
5)Existing   features   including   trees,   natural   habitats,   boundary   treatments  
and   historic   street   furniture   and/or   surfaces   that   positively   contribute   to   the  
quality   and   character   of   an   area   are   should   be   retained,   enhanced   and  
protected   where   appropriate.  
6)An   integrated   approach   is   taken   to   surface   water   management   as   part   of   the   overall  
 design.  
7)A   coordinated   approach   is   taken   to   the   design   and   siting   of   street   furniture,  
boundary   treatments,   lighting,   signage   and   public   art   to   meet   the   needs   of   all  
users.  
8)Trees   and   other   planting   is   incorporated   appropriate   to   both   the   scale   of  
buildings   and   the   space   available,   to   provide   opportunities   for   increasing  
biodiversity   interest   and   improving   connectivity   between   nature   conservation  
sites   where   appropriate  
 
Residential   development   on   garden   land   will   be   permitted   where   not   judged   harmful   to  
the   local   area   in   terms   of   the   character   and   residential   amenity,   the   intrinsic   value   of  
the   site   as   an   open   space   is   not   considered   worthy   of   retention,   and   will   not   conflict  
with   any   other   requirements   of   other   design   policies   and   policy   HO1.  
 
Living   conditions  
13.22The   increasing   dominance   of   private   housing   and   policies   to   maximise   use   of   land  
have   caused   concern   about   homes   having   levels   of   "liveable"   space.   Where   homes   are   of   a  
substandard   size   people   may   be   forced   into   buying   them   because   of   lack   of   alternatives   and  
as   a   result   do   not   stay   in   them   long   before   they   find   they   have   to   move   on.   This   can   be  
disruptive   especially   for   families   with   young   children   and   can   affect   education   if   children   are  
having   to   move   schools   frequently,   also   inhibits   community   cohesion   and   "putting   down   roots".  
Application   of   the   national   spaces   standards   can   help   to   address   this.  
 
13.23There   are   opportunities   to   facilitate   meetings   between   members   of   the   community   who  
might   not   otherwise   come   into   contact   with   each   other,   including   through   mixed-use  
developments,   strong   neighbourhood   centres   and   active   street   frontages   which   bring   together  
those   who   work,   live   and   play   in   the   vicinity.   Safe   and   accessible   developments   with   clear   and  
legible   pedestrian   routes   and   high   quality   open   space   will   also   help   achieve   this   by   encouraging  
the   active   and   continual   use   of   public   areas.  
 
 13.24Designing   out   crime   and   designing   in   community   safety   should   be   central   to   the  
planning   and   delivery   of   new   development.   Section   17   of   the   Crime   and   Disorder   Act   1998  
places   a   duty   on   councils   to   do   all   they   reasonably   can   to   reduce   crime   and   disorder   locally  
and   improve   people's   quality   of   life   as   a   result.   New   developments   will   need   to   demonstrate  
that   their   design   has   sought   to   introduce   measures   to   reduce   crime   and   address   the   needs   of  
public   safety.   Design   can   help   achieve   a   safer   environment   including   in   the   following   ways:  
 
●Well   defined   routes,   spaces   and   entrances  
●Ensuring   different   uses   do   not   conflict  
●Ensuring   publicly   accessible   spaces   are   over-looked  
●Places   that   promote   a   sense   of   ownership  
●Physical   protection   (i.e.   security   features)  
●Places   where   human   activity   creates   a   sense   of   safety  
●Future   management   and   maintenance  
 
Policy   QD03   -   Living   Conditions  
All   new   development   should:  
 
1)Be   compatible   with   neighbouring   buildings   and   spaces   and   not   lead   to  
the   unacceptable   living   conditions   through   overlooking,   noise   or  
vibration,   light   pollution,   overshadowing,   loss   of   natural   light   or   sense   of  
enclosure.  
2)Be   of   appropriate   size   and   layout   with   sufficient   usable   space   to  
facilitate   comfortable   living   conditions   and   meet   the   standards   set   out  
in   QD04.  
3)   Residential   development   should   include   the   provision   of   private   or   shared  
external   amenity   space/play   space,   where   possible.  
4)Provide   for   clothes   drying   facilities   and   waste   disposal   or   bin   storage,   with   a  
collection   point   for   storage   containers   no   further   than   15   metres   from   where  
the   collection   vehicle   will   pass.  
 
Technical   Standards  
13.25In   March   2015   the   Government   introduced   new   technical   standards   covering   water  
usage,   internal   space   requirements,   accessibility   and   adaptability.   In   respect   of   water   efficiency,  
the   Planning   Practice   Guidance   states   that   where   there   is   a   clear   local   need,   local   planning  
authorities   can   require   new   dwellings   to   meet   the   tighter   building   regulations   optional  
requirement   of   110   litres/person/day,   rather   than   the   125   litres/person/day.   Thanet   is   within   a  
water   stress   area   as   identified   by   the   Environment   Agency   in   their   publication   "Water   Stressed  
Areas   Final   Classification   July   2013".   Both   the   Environment   Agency   and   Southern   Water  
support   a   reduction   in   daily   usage   per   person/day   for   internal   use   in   water   stressed   areas  
therefore   new   developments   will   be   expected   to   meet   the   water   efficiency   optional   requirement  
of   110litre   /person/day.  
 
Internal   space   standards:  
 
13.26Paragraph   50   of   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   states   that   local   planning  
authorities   should   identify   the   size,   type,   tenure   and   range   of   housing   that   is   required   in  
particular   locations,   reflecting   local   demand.   The   National   Planning   Practice   Guidance   further  
qualifies   this   by   recommending   that   where   a   local   planning   authority   wishes   to   require   an  
internal   space   standard   they   should   do   so   by   reference   in   their   local   plan   (paragraph   18).  
 
 13.27The   Council   believes   that   everyone   has   the   right   to   a   high   standard   of   residential  
accommodation   with   sufficient   space   to   meet   their   own   needs.   There   has   been   a   general   trend  
for   houses   today   to   be   comparatively   smaller   than   ones   built   a   hundred   years   ago   and   these  
trends   have   led   to   calls   for   the   introduction   of   national   space   standards   for   housing.   The  
requirement   of   a   minimum   space   standard   can   add   to   the   attractiveness   of   the   development  
and   increase   the   marketability   of   properties,   thereby   widening   the   potential   sale   and   rental  
markets.   The   Council   has   successfully   applied   a   standard   for   flat   conversions   as   part   of   the  
Cliftonville   Development   Plan   Document,   where   small   room   sizes   were   an   issue   in   connection  
with   flat   conversions.   (Conversion   to   Flats   Guidelines   -   1988).  
 
13.28In   order   to   ensure   that   new   housing   is   built   to   a   high   standard   of   design   and   provide  
adequately   for   the   changing   needs   of   future   occupants   thereby   improving   the   quality   of   life,   the  
Council   is   intending   to   implement   the   National   Described   Space   Standard   (March   2015).These  
are   replicated   in   table   13   for   ease   of   reference.   The   policy   will   apply   to   all   tenures   and   it   will   be  
up   to   the   applicant   to   demonstrate   why   these   standards   cannot   be   met   within   their  
development.  
 
Table   13   -   National   Described   Space   Standards  
 
Number   of  
bedrooms   (B)  Number   of  
bed   spaces  
(persons)  1   storey  
dwellings  2   storey  
dwellings  3   storey  
dwellings  Built-in  
storage  
1b  1p  39   (37)*  -  -  1.0  
 2p  50  58  -  1.5  
2b  3p  61  70  -  2.0  
  4p  70  79  -    
3b  4p  74  84  90  2.5  
  5p  86  93  99    
  6p  95  102  108    
4b  5p  90  97  103  3.0  
  6p  99  106  112    
  7p  108  115  121    
  8p  117  124  130    
5b  6p  103  110  116  3.5  
  7p  112  119  125    
  8p  121  128  134    
 6b  7p  116  123  129  4.0  
 8p  125  132  138   
 
 
13.29It   certain   circumstances   it   may   be   necessary   to   make   an   exception   to   development  
meeting   these   standards   e.g.   in   the   conversion   of   historic   buildings   where   the   implementation  
of   the   standard   would   be   detrimental   to   the   character   and   integrity   of   the   building.   In   such  
circumstances   the   applicant   will   be   required   to   demonstrate   the   case   for   not   meeting   these  
standards.  
 
Policy   QD04   -Technical   Standards  
All   new   development   will   be   expected   to   meet   the   new   technical   standards   as   follows:  
 
1.Internal   space   standards   as   set   out   in   Table   13  
2.Water   efficiency   standard   of   110litres/person/day  
 
 
Accessible   and   Adaptable   Accommodation  
13.30Paragraph   7   of   the   NPPF   states   that   one   of   the   three   dimensions   to   sustainable  
development   is   a   social   role   which   should   support   strong,   vibrant   and   healthy   communities,   by  
providing   the   supply   of   housing   required   to   meet   the   needs   of   present   and   future   generations;  
and   by   creating   a   high   quality   built   environment,   with   accessible   local   services   that   reflect   the  
community's   needs   and   support   its   health,   social   and   cultural   well-being.   Paragraph   50   further  
states   that   local   authorities   should   deliver   a   wide   choice   of   high   quality   homes,   widen  
opportunities   for   home   ownership   and   create   sustainable,   inclusive   and   mixed   communities.  
Local   planning   authorities   should   also   plan   for   a   mix   of   housing   based   on   current   and   future  
demographic   trends,   market   trends   and   the   needs   of   different   groups   in   the   community   (such  
as,   but   not   limited   to,   families   with   children,   older   people,   people   with   disabilities,   service  
families   and   people   wishing   to   build   their   own   homes).  
 
13.31The   District   has   an   ageing   population   base   and   the   recent   2014   based   Sub-National  
Population   Projections   (published   May   2016)   project   that   the   60+   age   group   in   Thanet   will   grow  
by   39%   from   41,000   in   2014   to   57,000   by   2031.   This   has   implications   for   the   demand   for  
different   types   of   housing   and   meeting   the   needs   of   an   ageing   population   in   situ.   An   increase   in  
the   elderly   population   can   be   expected   to   result   in   an   increase   in   people   with   dementia   and  
mobility   problems.   The   SHMA   estimated   that   the   number   of   people   with   a   long   term   health  
problem   or   disability   will   increase   by   32%   over   the   plan   period.   It   is   important   that   sufficient  
homes   are   built   that   have   the   flexibility   to   adapt   to   the   range   of   life   stages   of   the   occupants.  
Some   of   these   households   will   inevitably   require   adaptions   to   properties   to   provide   the   flexibility  
to   accommodate   their   changing   needs   whilst   others   may   require   more   specialist  
accommodation   or   support.   There   is   clear   evidence   of   need   for   properties   which   are   capable   of  
accommodating   people's   changing   needs.   This   general   trend   can   be   evidenced   from   the  
Council's   housing   register   (September   2016)   which   shows   that   there   are   51   households   on   the  
register   who   are   dependent   on   a   wheelchair   and   a   further   73   households   who   use   a   wheelchair  
for   part   of   the   day.   Therefore   there   are   currently   124   households   currently   in   need   of   wheelchair  
adaptable   accommodation.   However,   this   may   not   include   those   households   who   currently  
have   mobility   problems   and   may   become   dependent   on   a   wheelchair   in   the   future.  
 
13.32The   increase   in   persons   with   a   long-term   health   problem/   disability,   as   evidenced   by  
 the   SHMA,   together   with   the   Council's   own   data   from   the   housing   register,   provides   clear  
evidence   of   a   need   for   adaptable   homes.   The   SHMA   recommends   that   on   this   basis,   the  
Council   should   consider   whether   it   should   require   a   proportion   (such   as   10%)   of   new   homes  
to   be   wheelchair-   accessible   or   whether   new   housing   should   be   built   to   new   National   Housing  
Standards.  
 
13.33In   order   to   meet   the   changing   needs   of   this   increasing   age   group,   the   Council   will  
encourage   developers   to   consider   the   future   needs   of   households   when   designing   residential  
units.   The   Council   requires   as   a   minimum,   10%   of   all   new   development   should   be   designed   to  
building   regulation   optional   requirement   M4   (2)   accessible   and   adaptable   dwellings.   In   respect  
of   the   new   Building   Regulation   optional   requirement   M4   (3)   wheelchair   user   dwellings,   the  
Council   will   require   a   proportion   of   new   dwellings   to   meet   this   standard   based   on   local   need  
relating   to   the   number   of   households   requiring   wheelchair   adaptable   homes   in   suitable  
locations,   that   are   currently   on   the   Council's   housing   register.   This   supports   the   general   aim   of  
the   Plan   to   improve   the   quality   of   life   and   health   of   the   residents   of   the   District   and   ensuring   a  
high   standard   of   design.   These   standards   aim   to   future   proof   new   development   in   a   sustainable  
way   ensuring   adaptability   to   changing   needs   and   achieving   longevity   of   design.  
 
 
Policy   QD05   -   Accessible   and   Adaptable   Accommodation  
Accessibility   provision   in   new   developments   as   required   by   Building   Regulations   Part  
M4   shall   be   provided   as   follows:  
 
1)10%   of   new   build   developments   will   be   expected   to   be   built   in   compliance  
with   building   regulation   part   M4(2)   accessible   and   adaptable   dwellings;  
2)5%   of   the   affordable   housing   units   on   housing   developments   will   be   expected   to  
be   built   in   compliance   with   building   regulations   part   M4(3)   wheelchair   user  
dwellings.  
 
The   above   requirements   will   only   be   reduced   if   it   would   make   the   proposed  
development   unviable   or   site   specific   factors   prevent   their   inclusion.  
 
13.34The   technical   standards   have   been   assessed   in   the   viability   study   and   no   viability  
issues   have   been   identified.   Only   in   exceptional   circumstances   will   the   Council   consider  
deviations   from   the   space   and   accessibility   standards   for   example   where   there   are   viability  
concerns,   or   the   practical   implementation   will   affect   the   character   or   have   a   detrimental  
impact   on   a   local   heritage   asset.   If   viability   is   thought   to   be   an   issue   with   a   particular  
development   the   Council   will   assess   viability   considerations   in   line   with   the   implementation  
policy   SP02.  
 
Advertisements  
13.35Some   advertisements   need   advertisement   consent,   and   it   is   important   that   they   are  
controlled   through   planning   policy   as   they   can   form   an   integral   part   of   the   streetscene   or   they  
can   be   intrusive   and   discordant.   It   is   also   important   to   make   sure   that   they   are   not   a   danger   to  
the   public   or   highway   safety.   It   is   particularly   important   to   consider   their   impact   when   they   are  
located   in   conservation   areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy   QD06   -   Advertisements  
Applications   for   advertisements   will   be   considered   in   relation   to   their   effects   upon  
amenity   and   public   safety.   Regard   will   be   paid   to   the   surrounding   location,   manner   of  
illumination   (if   proposed),   material   composition,   design   and   relationship   to   the   land,  
building   or   structure    to   which   they   are   to   be   affixed.   Advertisements   should   not  
dominate   but   should   be   in   balance   with   the   character,   townscape   and   architecture   of   the  
buildings   on   which   they   are   situated.   Regard   should   be   paid   to   the   proximity   of   any  
listed   buildings   or   structures,   and   any   impact   to   their   setting.  
 
In   and   adjoining   conservation   areas   the   Council   will   require   that   the   design   and   siting  
of   advertisements   does   not   detract   from,   and   preferably   makes   a   positive   contribution  
to,   the   character   and/or   appearance   of   the   area.  
 
 
Telecommunications  
13.36The  National  Planning  Policy  Framework  (NPPF)  states  that  when  preparing  local            
plans,  local  planning  authorities  should  support  the  expansion  of  electronic  communications            
networks,   including   telecommunications   and   high   speed   broadband.  
 
13.37Mobile   communications   are   now   considered   an   integral   part   of   the   success   of   most  
business   operations   and   individual   lifestyles.   With   the   growth   of   services   such   as   mobile  
internet   access,   demand   for   new   telecommunications   is   continuing   to   grow.   The   Council   is   keen  
to   facilitate   this   expansion   whilst   at   the   same   time   minimising   any   environmental   impacts.   It   is  
the   Council's   aim   to   reduce   the   proliferation   of   new   masts   by   encouraging   mast   sharing   and  
siting   equipment   on   existing   tall   structures   and   buildings.  
 
Policy   QD07   -   Telecommunications  
Proposals   for   telecommunications   development   will   be   permitted   provided   that  
the   following   criteria   are   met.  
 
1)The   siting   and   appearance   of   the   proposed   apparatus   and   associated   structures  
should   seek   to   minimise   impact   on   the   visual   amenity,   character   and   appearance  
of   the   surrounding   area.  
2)If   on   a   building,   apparatus   and   associated   structures   should   be   sited   and  
designed   to   minimise   impact   to   the   external   appearance   of   the   host   building.  
3)If   proposing   a   new   mast,   it   should   be   demonstrated   that   the   applicant   has  
explored   the   possibility   of   erecting   apparatus   on   existing   buildings,   masts   or  
other   structures.   Such   evidence   should   accompany   any   application   made   to   the  
Council.  
4)If   proposing   development   in   a   sensitive   area,   the   development   should   not   have  
an   unacceptable   effect   on   areas   of   ecological   interest,   areas   of   landscape  
importance,   archaeological   sites,   conservation   areas   or   buildings   of  
architectural   or   historic   interest.  
 
When   considering   applications   for   telecommunications   development,   the   Council   will  
have   regard   to   the   operational   requirements   of   telecommunications   networks   and   the  
technical   limitations   of   the   technology.  
 
  
 14-   Heritage  
 
Archaeology  
14.1Thanet,   the   former   island   located   at   the   north   eastern   point   of   Kent   and   in   close  
proximity   to   continental   Europe,   has   long   been   a   gateway   to   new   settlers,   ideas,   trade   and  
custom   into   Britain   and   on   the   frontline   of   invasion   and   defence.   Some   of   the   great   events  
in   the   nation's   early   history   have   taken   place   in   or   close   to   Thanet   including   the   arrival   of   the  
Romans,   Anglo-Saxons   and   Christianity.   The   result   is   an   incredible   wealth   of   archaeological  
remains   throughout   the   island   dating   from   earliest   prehistoric   times   to   the   present   day.  
Across   Thanet's   towns,   villages   and   countryside,   archaeological   investigation   is   regularly  
making   new   discoveries   of   remains   that   are   of   regional   and   national   importance   and   that   in  
many   cases   exhibit   a   character   that   is   unique   to   the   former   island.   The   archaeology   of  
Thanet   stands   comparison   with   any   area   of   the   country.  
 
14.2Much   of   Thanet's   archaeology   lies   shallowly   buried   beneath   the   plough   soils   of   the  
island's   agricultural   lands.   Here   aerial   photography   and   top   soil   stripping   ahead   of   major  
infrastructure   and   other   development   works   has   in   recent   years   revealed   extensive   buried  
archaeological   landscapes,   particularly   of   prehistoric,   Roman   and   Anglo-Saxon   date,   that  
are   changing   our   understanding   of   settlement   and   other   activities   at   those   times.   Within   the  
towns   and   villages,   as   well   as   remains   of   these   earlier   periods   are   often   found   remains,  
sometimes   more   deeply   buried,   associated   with   the   medieval   development   of   the  
settlements   and   extending   through   their   periods   of   growth   and   industrial   development   to  
their   19 th    and   20 th    century   prominence.   Elsewhere   across   Thanet   can   be   found   buried   and  
standing   remains   associated   with   the   defence   of   the   coast   and   the   former   airfield   at  
Manston,   the   industrial   heritage   of   the   area   and   the   development   of   the   historic   landscape.  
Much   of   this   rich   archaeological   resource   can   be   particularly   vulnerable   to   new   development  
both   in   undeveloped   and   brownfield   sites.  
 
14.3It   is   not   possible   for   this   summary   for   the   Local   Plan   to   provide   a   comprehensive  
overview   of   the   archaeology   of   Thanet,   however   particular   themes   particularly   relevant   for  
land-use   planning   are:  
 
●Deposits   and   features   associated   with   the   formation   of   the   island   and   the   creation   of  
the   Wantsum   Channel   and   its   later   reclamation   for   agricultural   land;  
●The   evidence   of   early   hunter   gatherer   peoples   on   Thanet   which   can   be   seen   in   the  
Pleistocene   deposits   of   the   island   particularly   at   Pegwell   Bay   and   Manston;  
●The   rich   and   extensive   ritual   and   funerary   buried   landscapes   of   the   Neolithic   and   Early  
Bronze   Age   periods.   Particular   highlights   are   the   major   monuments   of   the   causewayed  
enclosures   at   Chalk   Hill,   Pegwell   and   the   remains   of   hundreds   of   late   Neolithic   and  
Bronze   Age   barrows;  
●Extensive   buried   landscapes   of   the   settlements,   farmsteads,   trackways   and   agricultural  
lands   of   the   later   prehistoric   peoples   of   Thanet.   Recent   investigations   on   major  
development   schemes   such   as   East   Kent   Access   2   and   Thanet   Earth   have   illustrated   the  
layout   and   development   of   large   tracts   of   the   later   prehistoric   landscape.   Evidence   of  
major   enclosed   sites   has   been   found   in   several   places   for   example   North   Foreland,  
Dumpton,   Pegwell   Bay   and   Fort   Hill,   Margate;  
●A   rich   Romano-British   landscape   that   saw   the   development   of   villa   estates   (for   example  
at   Tivoli   and   Minster),   a   pattern   of   coastal   and   inland   settlement   that   saw   the  
construction   of   sunken-featured   buildings   of   a   type   rarely   found   outside   Thanet,   linked  
 by   a   network   of   roads   and   trackways,   and   the   establishment   of   small   cemeteries   of   both  
inhumation   and   cremation   burial   rites.   The   inhabitants   of   Thanet   at   this   time   would   have  
borne   witness   to   the   arrival   and   departure   of   the   Romans   at   nearby   Richborough   and  
lived   under   the   influence   of   that   major   port   of   entry;  
●The   arrival   of   the   Anglo-Saxons   is   celebrated   in   Thanet   through   the   tradition   of   the  
arrival   of   Hengist   and   Horsa   (AD   449)   at   Ebbsfleet   near   Cliffsend.   Remains   of   the   new  
settlers   can   be   seen   in   the   rich   cemeteries   that   can   be   found   throughout   the   island   and  
the   occasional   evidence   of   dispersed   settlement   that   has   been   found   on   a   number   of  
sites   and   is   difficult   to   locate   other   than   through   stripping   of   large   areas;  
●AD   597   saw   the   arrival   in   Thanet   of   a   mission   from   Pope   Gregory   in   Rome   led   by   the  
monk   Augustine.   The   growth   of   the   church   and   its   influence   on   Thanet   can   be   seen   in  
the   establishment   of   the   convent   at   Minster,   the   presence   of   a   number   of   monastic  
granges   and   parish   churches.   Evidence   for   the   early   development   of   the   villages   can  
also   be   traced   in   the   fabric   of   surviving   historic   buildings   and   buried   deposits   in   the   core  
of   the   settlements.  
●Archaeological   deposits   connected   with   the   origins   and   development   of   Thanet's   main  
towns   of   Margate,   Broadstairs   and   Ramsgate,   their   ports   and   development   as   19th   and  
20th   leisure   resorts   survive   both   in   the   ground   and   the   fabric   of   the   standing   remains.  
Large   numbers   of   wrecks   are   present   around   the   coast   e.g.   Goodwin   Sands.  
●Remains   of   coastal   and   other   anti-invasion   defences   and   the   important   military   and  
civilian   airfield   at   Manston   which   had   its   origins   in   the   First   World   War   and   continued   as  
an   important   military   airfield   into   the   Cold   War.  
 
14.4In   response   to   their   likely   potential   impact   on   important   archaeological   remains,   the   Council  
considers   it   essential   for   new   development   proposals   to   assess   and   understand   the   effect   that   they  
may   have   on   the   significance   of   archaeological   remains   whether   known   or   as   yet   undiscovered.  
Because   Thanet's   heritage   is   such   a   valuable   and   irreplaceable   resource   the   following   policy  
applies:  
 
Policy   HE01   -   Archaeology  
The   Council   will   promote   the   identification,   recording,   protection   and   enhancement   of  
archaeological   sites,   monuments   and   historic   landscape   features,   and   will   seek   to  
encourage   and   develop   their   educational,   recreational   and   tourist   potential   through  
management   and   interpretation  
 
Developers   should   submit   information   with   the   planning   application   that   allows   an  
assessment   of   the   impact   of   the   proposal   on   the   significance   of   the   heritage   asset.  
Where   appropriate   the   Council   may   require   the   developer   to   provide   additional  
information   in   the   form   of   a   desk-based   or   field   assessment.   Planning   permission  
will   be   refused   without   adequate   assessment   of   the   archaeological   implications   of  
the   proposal.  
 
Development   proposals   adversely   affecting   the   integrity   or   setting   of   Scheduled  
Monuments   or   other   heritage   assets   of   comparable   significance   will   normally   be  
refused.  
 
Where   the   case   for   development   which   would   affect   an   archaeological   site   is  
accepted   by   the   Council,   preservation   in   situ   of   archaeological   remains   will  
normally   be   sought.   Where   this   is   not   possible   or   not   justified,   appropriate  
provision   for   investigation   and   recording   will   be   required.   The   fieldwork   should  
define:  
 
 1)The   character,   significance,   extent   and   condition   of   any   archaeological  
deposits   or   structures   within   the   application   site;  
2)The   likely   impact   of   the   proposed   development   on   these   features;  
3)The   means   of   mitigating   the   effect   of   the   proposed   development.  
 
Recording   should   be   carried   out   by   an   appropriately   qualified   archaeologist   or  
archaeological   contractor   and   may   take   place   in   advance   of   and   during   development.   No  
work   shall   take   place   until   a   specification   for   the   archaeological   work   has   been   submitted  
and   approved   by   the   Council.   Arrangements   must   also   be   in   place   for   any   necessary   post-  
excavation   assessment,   analysis   and   publication   of   the   results,   and   deposition   of   the  
archive   in   a   suitable,   accessible   repository.  
 
Development   in   Conservation   Areas  
14.5Conservation   areas   are   designated   by   the   Council   where   there   is   a   valued  
distinctive   character   which   the   Council   considers   deserve   special   protection.   Key   elements  
of   a   conservation   area   include   the   architectural   design   or   historic   interest   of   buildings;   the  
materials,   colour   and   texture;   the   contribution   of   green   and   open   spaces;   street   patterns  
and   spaces   between   buildings;   and   views   in   and   out   of   the   area.   The   Council   will   review  
the   boundaries   of   existing   conservation   areas   and   will   consider   the   designation   of   new  
conservation   areas   as   necessary   and   as   resources   allow.  
 
14.6The   Council   will   not   permit   development   which   fails   to   retain   those   essential  
features   upon   which   the   character   of   a   conservation   area   depends.   These   features   may  
include   natural   features,   trees,   hedges,   walls,   fences,   open   areas   and   ground   surfaces,   as  
well   as   buildings   and   groups   of   buildings.  
 
14.7The   character   of   conservation   areas   depends   on   the   relationship   of   buildings   to  
each   other   and   their   settings,   in   the   local   and   wider   context.   The   effect   of   a   proposed  
development   on   the   character   or   appearance   of   a   Conservation   Area   is   always   a   material  
consideration   in   the   determination   of   planning   applications.   All   development   should  
preserve   or   enhance   that   character   or   appearance   or   local   distinctiveness.   It   is   also  
important   that   the   spaces   around   and   within   the   conservation   area   are   retained,   where   they  
add   to   its   character.   The   first   step   in   the   design   process   must,   therefore,   be   an   appraisal   of  
the   qualities   of   the   area   and   the   opportunity   to   reflect   and   improve   on   them.   Such   an  
appraisal   should   be   submitted   as   part   of   a   planning   application.  
 
14.8Particular   attention   should   be   paid   to   conserving   attractive   views   out   of   and   into  
the   area,   including   those   from   more   distant   or   higher   vantage   points.   Consideration   should  
also   be   given   to   the   assessment   and   mitigation   against   any   negative   impact   the   proposal  
might   have   on   the   townscape,   roofscape,   skyline   and   landscape.  
 
Policy   HE02   -   Development   in   Conservation   Areas  
Within   conservation   areas,   development   proposals   which   preserve   or   enhance  
the   character   or   appearance   of   the   area,   and   accord   with   other   relevant   policies   of  
this   Plan,   will   be   permitted,   provided   that:  
 
Proposals   for   New   Buildings  
 
1) They   respond   sympathetically   to   the   historic   settlement   pattern,   plot  
 sizes   and   plot   widths,   open   spaces,   streetscape,   trees   and   landscape   features,  
2) They   respond   sympathetically   to   their   setting,   context   and   the   wider  
townscape,   including   views   into   and   out   of   conservation   areas  
3) The   proportions   of   features   and   design   details   should   relate   well   to   each  
other   and   to   adjoining   buildings,  
4)Walls,   gates   and   fences   are,   as   far   as   possible,   of   a   kind   traditionally   used   in   the   locality,  
5) Conserve   or   enhance   the   significance   of   all   heritage   assets,   their   setting  
and   the   wider   townscape,   including   views   into   and   out   of   conservation   areas  
6) Demonstrate   a   clear   understanding   of   the   significance   of   heritage   assets  
and   of   their   wider   context,  
 
Proposals   for   Extensions  
 
7) The   character,   scale   and   plan   form   of   the   original   building   are  
respected   and   the   extension   is   subordinate   to   it   and   does   not   dominate  
principal   elevations,  
8) Appropriate   materials   and   detailing   are   proposed   and   the   extension   would  
not   result   in   the   loss   of   features   that   contribute   to   the   character   or   appearance   of   the  
conservation   area.  
New   development   which   would   detract   from   the   immediate   or   wider   landscape  
setting   of   any   part   of   a   conservation   area   will   not   be   permitted.  
 
 
Listed   Buildings   and   their   setting  
14.9The   NPPF   sets   out   the   general   approach   to   conserving   and   enhancing   the   historic  
environment   and   the   impact   of   development   on   designated   and   non-designated   heritage   assets  
and   conservation   areas   (paragraphs   126-141).   The   Council   will   assess   proposals   to   alter   or  
extend   a   listed   building   against   the   need   to   preserve   the   special   architectural   or   historic   interest  
which   led   to   the   building   being   listed.   There   is   a   general   presumption   in   favour   of   the   preservation  
of   listed   buildings,   and   consent   to   demolish   or   partly   demolish   such   buildings   will   only   be   granted  
in   exceptional   circumstances.  
 
14.10The   setting   of   listed   buildings   may   be   affected   by   development.   It   is   important   that  
applications   for   planning   permission   for   development   affecting   listed   buildings,   or   their   settings,  
include   full   details   of   the   proposal   so   that   an   informed   decision   can   be   reached   and   will   be  
supported   where   they   preserve   or   better   reveal   the   significance   of   the   Listed   Building.  
 
Local   Heritage   Assets  
14.11Local  heritage  assets,  including  buildings,  structures,  features  and  gardens  of  local            
interest,  are  an  important  element  of  the  rich  history  of  a  settlement  and  reinforce  local                
distinctiveness   and   sense   of   place.  
 
14.12The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   requires   local   planning   authorities   to  
have   an   up   to   date   understanding   of   the   local   historic   environment   and   its   significance.   Although  
not   likely   to   meet   the   current   criteria   for   statutory   listing,   local   heritage   assets   are   important   to  
their   locality   by   reason   of   their   cultural,   architectural   and   historical   contribution.  
 
14.13The   retention   of   local   heritage   assets   may   be   achieved   through   appropriate   adaptive  
re-use   or   change   of   use.   A   high   quality   historic   built   environment   can   aid   economic   regeneration  
and   investment.  
  
14.14Unlike   statutory   listed   buildings   or   Registered   Parks   and   Gardens,   Local   Designated  
Asset   status   does   not   put   any   extra   planning   constraints   on   a   property;   rather   it   would   be   a  
material   consideration   if   a   development   was   proposed   (i.e.   the   historical   and   architectural   quality  
of   the   building   would   be   taken   into   consideration).   In   addition,   it   is   intended   that   the   locally  
designated   Asset   Register   will   raise   the   profile   of   and   give   recognition   to   the   buildings   and   parks  
that   are   of   special   importance   to   Thanet.  
 
14.15The   NPPF   supports   the   introduction   of   locally   designated   heritage   assets   and   heritage  
best   practice   encourages   further   support   to   this   important   local   designation   by   the   introduction  
of   Article   4   (2)   to   all   locally   designated   single   dwellings   within   a   conservation   area.  
 
14.16Authorised   works   to   single   dwellings   are   permitted   under   Article   3   of   the   Town   and   County  
(General   Permitted   Development)   Order   1995   as   amended   by   the   Town   and   County   Planning  
General   Permitted   Development   (Amendment)   Order   2008   which   came   into   force   from   1 st  
October   2008.  
 
14.17Many   of   these   small   scale   permitted   development   works   such   as   the   replacement   of   as  
built   timber   windows   and   doors   with   plastic   in   modern   styles   can   significantly   harm   the   character  
and   appearance   of   historic   buildings   and   areas.  
 
14.18When   a   building   is   statutory   listed   this   problem   is   avoided   by   the   requirement   for   listed  
building   consent.   In   the   case   of   unlisted   buildings   (even   those   locally   listed)   Article   3   of   the  
General   Permitted   Development   Order   allows   a   vast   range   of   works   to   be   carried   out   without  
the   need   to   apply   for   planning   permission.  
 
14.19Within   conservation   areas   permitted   development   rights   are   more   limited   than   elsewhere  
but   even   so   those   works   can   still   degrade   the   character   of   individual   buildings   as   a   result   of  
inappropriate   changes.  
 
14.20A  local  planning  authority  can  restrict  the  permitted  development  rights  of  property             
owners  to  carry  out  certain  categories  of  development  that  would  otherwise  be  automatically              
allowed  through  the  making  of  an  Article  4  direction.  These  directions  can  be  made  to  cover  one                  
or   more   properties   and   they   can   restrict   one   or   more   classes   of   development.  
 
14.21The   effect   of   an   Article   4(2)   Direction   is   not   that   development   within   the   particular   class   in  
Schedule   2   of   the   General   Permitted   Development   Orders   cannot   be   carried   out   but   simply   that   it  
is   no   longer   automatically   permitted,   but   instead   must   be   subject   to   a   specific   planning   application  
(for   which   there   is   no   fee).   This   does   not   necessarily   mean   that   the   local   planning   authority   will  
refuse   permission   for   the   works   but   it   does   enable   the   authority   to   retain   some   control   over   the  
design   and   detailing   of   the   proposed   development   and   to   grant   permission   subject   to   appropriate  
conditions.   The   introduction   of   these   directions   is   not   intended   to   prevent   all   change,   but   rather   to  
manage   the   way   building   and   landscape   alterations   are   carried   out.  
 
14.22Before   undertaking   any   works   to   a   designated   heritage   asset,   the   significance   of   that  
asset   must   be   clearly   understood,   as   well   as   the   potential   impact   of   the   development.   Where  
listed   buildings   are   concerned,   it   is   important   to   address   the   full   impact   of   modern   building  
standards   concerning   aspects   such   as   fire   prevention,   sound   and   thermal   insulation,  
energy-efficiency   savings   and   disabled   access.   Pre-application   meetings   are   strongly  
recommended   to   ensure   that   standards   can   be   accommodated   without   jeopardising   the   special  
interest   of   the   building.   Applicants   considering   works   to   a   listed   building   are   also   advised   to  
consult   best   practice   guidance.  
 
 Policy   HE03   -   Heritage   Assets   
The   Council   supports   the   retention   of   local   heritage   assets,   including   listed  
buildings,   structures,   features   and   gardens   of   local   interest.   Local   heritage   assets  
will   be   identified   in   a   local   list   as   part   of   the   Heritage   Strategy.  
 
Proposals   that   affect   both   designated   and   non-designated   heritage   assets,   will   be  
assessed   by   reference   to    the   scale   of   harm,   both   direct   and   indirect,   or   loss   and   the  
significance   of   the   heritage   asset   in   accordance   with   the   criteria   in   the   National  
Planning   Policy   Framework.   
 
Historic   Parks   and   Gardens  
14.23Thanet   has   a   number   of   important   parks;   gardens,   planned   squares,   cemeteries   and  
churchyards.   These   areas   provide   significant   amenity   areas   for   the   immediate   environs   and  
support   and   enhance   the   setting   of   significant   designated   and   non-designated   heritage  
assets.   Parks   and   gardens   of   particular   historical   importance   are   listed   by   English   Heritage  
in   a   Register   of   Historic   Parks   and   Gardens   -   Albion   Place   Gardens   in   Ramsgate   is  
included   in   this   register.   Kent   County   Council's   Historic   Environment   Record   also   includes   a  
number   of   important   gardens   and   urban   spaces   locally.  
 
14.24Planned   parks   such   as   Ellington   Park   and   Dane   Park   were   opened   to   the   public   in  
1898   and   include   features   such   as   ornate   bandstands   and   fountains.   Less   formal   areas  
include   grounds   to   substantial   historic   houses   such   as   George   V   in   Ramsgate   (former  
residence   of   Sir   Moses  
Montefiore),   Pierremont   Park   and   Northdown   Park.   The   cemeteries   at   Margate   and  
Ramsgate   include   a   selection   of   fine   memorials,   cemetery   buildings   and   mature   trees.  
 
14.25Planned   squares   are   evident   within   the   towns   and   are   typically   set   pieces  
subordinate   to   buildings.   These   are   a   particular   feature   of   the   coastal   towns.   Examples  
include   Hawley   Square   in   Margate   and   Vale   Square   in   Ramsgate   where   high   quality  
amenity   space   is   closely   related   to   the   setting   of   listed   buildings   with   a   high   degree   of  
openness   and   permeability.  
 
14.26Both   registered   and   non-registered   parks   and   gardens   are   important   because   of  
their   design   or   design   history,   the   plants   they   contain;   their   historic   significance;   or   their  
relationship   with   adjacent   buildings   and   structures.   In   many   cases,   the   designed   open  
space   is   an   important   element   of   the   design   of   the   surrounding   built   environment.   The  
Council   will   resist   changes   that   would   harm   the   character   or   setting   of   important   parks   and  
gardens,   important   plant   material   (particularly   trees),   views   and   other   features.  
 
In   recognising   the   importance   of   these   heritage   assets   the   following   policy   applies.  
 
Policy   HE04   -   Historic   Parks   and   Gardens  
 
Proposals   that   affect   historic   parks   and   gardens   will   be   assessed   by   reference   to   the   scale  
of   harm,   both   direct   and   indirect,   or   loss   to   and   the   significance   of   the   park   or   garden.  
 
 
 
 Works   to   a   heritage   asset   to   address   climate   change  
14.27The   Council   is   committed   to   tackling   climate   change   and   reducing   the   carbon   emissions   of  
Thanet.   At   the   same   time,   the   Council   is   committed   to   conserving   the   historic   environment,  
particularly   preserving   and   enhancing   the   character   and   appearance   of   its   heritage   assets.   The  
Council's   aim,   therefore,   is   to   ensure   a   balanced   approach   between   protecting   the   heritage  
assets   of   Thanet   and   ensuring   that   they   contribute   to   tackling   climate   change   and   reducing   the  
carbon   emissions   of   the   district.   Such   measures   could   include   seeking   to   encourage   and   enable  
the   sensitive   retrofitting   of   energy   efficiency   measures   and   the   appropriate   use   of  
micro-renewables   in   historic   buildings   (including   listed   buildings)   and   conservation   areas,   whilst  
safeguarding   the   special   characteristics   of   these   heritage   assets   for   the   future.  
 
14.28The   Council   has   been   involved   in   a   joint   initiative   with   the   Kent   School   of   Architecture   to  
consider   the   impact   of   climate   change   and   energy   efficiency   on   the   historic   environment.   It  
secured   funding   from   the   Technology   Strategy   Board   for   a   project   that   looked   at   how   Victorian  
Seaside   houses   would   perform   environmentally   in   the   climate   of   the   year   2080.   A   building   on  
Dalby   Square   was   chosen   as   a   test   bed.   The   Council   worked   with   Kent   School   of   Architecture  
who   found   that   terraced   Victorian   houses   can   perform   environmentally   better   than   some   modern  
dwellings.   The   findings   of   this   ground   breaking   study   will   be   published   by   the   Kent   School   of  
Architecture   as   a   Climate   Change   Toolkit   for   Victorian   houses.   Further   advice   on   the   adaptation  
of   the   historic   environment   in   response   to   climate   change   issues   can   be   found   in   the   Historic  
England   (formerly   English   Heritage)   publication:   Climate   Change   and   the   Historic   Environment  
(2008).   Adaptive   re-   use   of   a   building   gives   significant   carbon   savings   in   terms   of   embodied  
energy   in   the   fabric   of   the   building,   so   the   focus   will   be   on   enhancing   the   performance   of  
traditional   buildings   as   much   as   practicable   without   damaging   their   significance.   Minimal  
intervention   will   be   required,   along   with   assurance   that   the   works   do   not   harm   the   building's  
integrity   or   significance.  
 
14.29Planning   applications   will   need   to   demonstrate   a   thorough   understanding   of   the   building   in  
question   via   the   submission   of   the   following   information:  
 
●surveys   of   existing   construction,   to   include   walls,   floors,   ceilings   and   roofs;  
●submission   of   baseline   energy   consumption   data   before   and   after  
improvements   have   taken   place;  
●measured   data   of   existing   environmental   performance   of   the   building's   fabric;  
●an   indication   of   any   national   performance   standards   being   targeted   as   a   result  
of   works;   and  
●recommendations   on   the   environmental   performance   measures   to   be  
implemented   in   order   to   achieve   the   standard.  
 
14.30Prior   to   looking   at   alternative   means   of   generating   energy,   it   is   important   to   investigate  
and   put   into   practice   all   possible   means   of   conserving   energy   (hierarchical   approach).   The  
Chartered   Institution   of   Building   Services   Engineers'   guidance   on   Building   Services   in   Historic  
Buildings   sets   out   four   principal   aims   when   seeking   to   enhance   the   sustainability   of   heritage  
assets:  
 
●Preserve   historic   fabric;  
●Extend   the   beneficial   use   of   older   buildings;  
●Reduce   carbon   emissions,   using   the   hierarchical   approach;   and  
●Specify   environmentally   conscious   materials.  
 
 
 Policy   HE05   -   Works   to   a   Heritage   Asset   to   Address  
Climate   Change  
Proposals   to   enhance   the   environmental   performance   of   heritage   assets   will   be  
supported   where   a   sensitive   and   hierarchical   approach   to   design   and   specification  
ensures   that   the   significance   of   the   asset   is   not   compromised   by   inappropriate  
interventions.  
 
Any   works   should   be   undertaken   based   on   a   thorough   understanding   of   the  
building's   performance.  
  
 15-   Climate   Change  
15.1Adaptation   is   an   essential   part   of   addressing   the   impacts   and   opportunities   created   by   our  
changing   climate.   The   Intergovernmental   Panel   on   Climate   Change   (IPCC)   defines   adaptation   as  
"adjustments   in   natural   or   human   systems   in   response   to   actual   or   expected   climatic   stimuli   or  
their   effects,   which   moderate   harm   or   exploit   beneficial   opportunities".   There   is   a   statutory   duty   on  
local   planning   authorities   to   include   policies   in   their   local   plan   designed   to   tackle   climate   change  
and   its   impacts.   These   can   range   from   policies   that   reduce   the   need   to   travel,   flood   risk   and  
coastal   change,   sustainable   construction   and   design   and   renewable   low   carbon   technologies.  
Local   plans   can   also   address   appropriate   adaptation   and   mitigation   measures   to   combat   climate  
change.  
 
Fluvial   and   Tidal   Flooding  
15.2Flooding   has   become   a   significant   issue   and   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework  
(NPPF)   states   that   inappropriate   development   in   areas   at   risk   of   flooding   should   be   avoided   by  
directing   development   away   from   areas   at   highest   risk,   but   without   increasing   the   risk   of   flooding  
elsewhere.   This   is   known   as   the   'Sequential   Test'   and   is   accompanied   by   an   'Exception   Test'   to  
be   applied   where   necessary.   Any   development   that   takes   place   in   an   area   at   risk   of   flooding   must  
incorporate   appropriate   flood   resilient   and   resistant   measures   (in   line   with   paragraph   103   of   the  
NPPF).   The   Strategic   Flood   Risk   Assessment   sets   out   other   generic   mitigation   measures   that  
could   be   applied   to   developments   in   flood   risk   zones   such   as   ensuring   sleeping   accommodation  
of   residential   development   is   above   ground   floor   level.   Other   measures   could   include   those   that  
prevent   or   limit   the   amount   of   water   entering   the   property,   flood   resilient   building   techniques   such  
as   the   siting   of   electrical   controls   at   higher   levels,   raising   floor   levels   and   the   use   of   sustainable  
drainage   systems   and   flood   barriers.  
 
15.3Thanet   has   few   areas   of   low   lying   land   that   are   at   risk   of   flooding   from   the   sea.   The   two  
primary   sources   of   flooding   in   the   district   are   fluvial   and   tidal;   fluvial   flooding   from   the   Wantsum  
Channel,   and   tidal   flooding   from   extreme   tide   levels.   The   majority   of   development   proposed   in  
this   Plan   has   been   directed   away   from   the   identified   Flood   Risk   Areas.  
 
15.4The   densely   populated   Old   Town   area   of   Margate   falls   within   an   area   of   low   lying   land.  
The   financial   cost   of   damage   to   property   in   the   Old   Town   area   resulting   from   a   major   flooding  
event   could   be   as   much   as   £70m.   Such   a   flooding   event   could   also   put   the   safety   of   residents  
and   the   public   at   risk.   Recent   flood   defence   works   have   significantly   reduced   this   risk.   The  
Council's   flood   risk   assessment   presents   advice   and   recommendations   on   the   implications   of  
flood   risk   and   climate   change.   Site   specific   Flood   Risk   Assessments   may   be   required   for  
developments   within   identified   areas   at   risk   from   flooding.  
 
15.5Areas  at  risk  of  flooding  are  shown  on  the  flood  maps  on  the  Environment  Agency's                
website  and  are  updated  regularly  - www.environment-agency.gov.uk .  These  should  be  referred            
to   when   considering   development   in   areas   at   risk   from   flooding   as   these   are   regularly   updated.  
 
The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   that   development   is   not   put   at   risk   by   flooding.  
 
Policy   CC01   -   Fluvial   and   Tidal   Flooding  
 
  New   development   in   an   area   identified   as   being   at   risk   of   flooding   and    f alling   within   Flood  
Zones   2   and   3,   will   only   be   permitted   if   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   satisfies   the  
Sequential   Test   and   where   required   the   Exception   Test   as   set   out   in   the   NPPF.  
 Development   proposals   in   these   areas   shall   be   accompanied   by    a   Flood   Risk   Assessment  
including   developments   over   1   hectare   in   Flood   Zone   1,    which   should   address   flood   risk  
from   all   sources   of   flooding   including   surface   and   groundwater   flooding.  
Any   development   that   takes   place   in   a   flood   risk   area   will   be   expected   to   incorporate   flood  
resilient   measures.  
 
Surface   Water   Management  
15.6Management   of   surface   water   is   important   in   terms   of   reducing   the   risk   of   pollutants  
draining   into   the   groundwater   and   bathing   waters,   and   reducing   the   risk   of   surface   water   flooding.  
 
15.7The   Thanet   Surface   Water   Management   Plan   (SWMP)   2013   assessed   historic   flooding  
incidents,   and   identified   the   causes   of   this   flooding   as   surface   water,   sewer,   tidal   or   blocked  
drains   or   gullies.   SWMPs   identify   areas   which   may   be   vulnerable   to   surface   water   flooding   as   a  
result   of   flooding   occurring   elsewhere   (eg   excessive   drainage   into   a   site   from   flooding   occurring  
further   along   a   watercourse).   An   Action   Plan   has   been   developed   which   identifies   a   range   of  
recommended   actions   for   the   reduction   of   flood   risk   across   the   Thanet   area.  
 
15.8The   following   actions   are   identified   for   the   Council,   which   could   be   achieved   through   the  
planning   process:  
 
●Ensure   all   new   developments,   where   possible,   consider   the   use   of   Sustainable  
Urban   Drainage   Systems   (SuDs)  
●Ensure   new   developments   do   not   increase   the   risk   of   surcharge   of   the   sewer  
network   within   their   catchment  
●Promote   benefits   of   rainwater   reuse   and   recycling  
●Support   KCC   in   the   use   of   SuDs   in   identified   areas  
 
15.9SuDs   are   designed   to   control   surface   water   run-off   close   to   where   it   falls   to   and   mimic  
natural   drainage   as   closely   as   possible   minimising   pollution   and   the   impacts   of   flooding   (NPPG).  
Surface   water   runoff   in   built   up   areas   tends   to   flow   rapidly   into   the   sewer   system,   which   places   a  
burden   on   the   sewerage   network   and   increases   flood   risk   downstream   as   piped   systems   have  
limited   capacity.   SuDs   can   slow   the   rate   at   which   water   disperses,   thus   reducing   the   risk   of  
flooding.  
 
15.10SuDs   are   more   sustainable   than   traditional   drainage   methods   and   they   provide  
opportunities   to:  
 
●Reduce   the   causes   and   impacts   of   flooding;  
●Remove   pollutants   from   urban   run-off   at   source  
●Combine   water   management   with   green   space   with   benefits   for   amenity,  
recreation   and   wildlife  
 
15.11The   provision   of   sustainable   drainage   within   new   development   became   a   material  
consideration   in   planning   decisions   from   April   2015.   Kent   County   Council   is   the   Lead   Local   Flood  
Authority   (LLFA)   for   the   county   and   as   such   they   are   the   statutory   consultee   in   the   planning  
process   to   oversee   the   provision   of   SuDs   for   major   development   within   the   District.   The   LLFA  
provides   technical   advice   and   guidance   on   the   surface   water   drainage   strategies,   designs   and  
maintenance   arrangements   proposed   by   developers   for   any   new   major   development.   Kent  
County   Council   has   prepared   a   Drainage   and   Planning   Policy   Statement   (September   2015)  
containing   guidance   on   how   to   integrate   sustainable   drainage   systems   into   the   master   planning   of  
large   and   small   developments.   Developers   should   consult   and   refer   to   this   guidance   and   any  
 future   updates,   when   preparing   applications   incorporating   SuDs   schemes.   All   applications  
incorporating   a   SuDs   scheme   will   also   need   to   include   details   of   a   robust   maintenance   scheme   to  
be   agreed   with   the   appropriate   authority.  
 
15.12Sustainable   Drainage   Systems   may   have   both   direct   and   indirect   impacts   on   the   historic  
environment   and   historic   buildings   are   often   more   vulnerable   than   modern   buildings   to   flood  
damage   to   their   foundations.   Kent   County   Council   has   produced   guidance   on   'The   Historic  
Environment   and   Sustainable   Drainage'   and   they   maintain   the   County   Historic   Environment  
Record   (HER).   When   preparing   SuDs   schemes   developers   should   fully   consider   the   potential  
impact   on   the   historic   environment   and   ensure   that   any   avoidable   damage   is   mitigated.  
 
15.13Kent   County   Council   has   prepared   guidance   on   the   process   from   application   to   adoption  
of   SuDs   'Drainage   and   Planning   Policy   Statement   2017'.   Developers   should   consult   KCC's  
guidance   and   any   future   updates,   when   preparing   applications   for   SuDs   schemes.   KCC   should  
be   consulted   early   on   in   the   process   and   further   information   is   available   from  
http://www.kent.gov.uk/waste- planning-and-land/flooding-and-drainage/sustainable-drainage-syst 
ems.  
 
15.14Infiltration   methods   are   unlikely   to   be   appropriate   in   some   parts   of   Thanet   due   to   the  
quality   of   the   groundwater.   Groundwater   from   the   chalk   rock   beneath   Thanet   is   used   to   supply  
water   for   drinking   water,   agriculture,   horticulture   and   industry.   It   also   feeds   the   springs   that  
emerge   along   the   coast   and   near   the   marshes.   The   groundwater   is   extremely   vulnerable   to  
contamination   as   substances   (natural   substances   and   man-made   chemicals)   are   able   to   pass  
rapidly   through   the   thin   soils   and   the   natural   fissures   (cracks)   in   the   chalk   rock   to   the   groundwater  
below   the   ground   surface.   The   acceptability   and   construction   details   of   infiltration   devices   is   not  
only   based   on   whether   the   site   is   in   a   Groundwater   Source   Protection   Zone,   it   also   depends   on  
whether   the   ground   conditions   are   suitable   (i.e.   free   from   contamination)   and   if   there   are  
adequate   unsaturated   area   to   help   reduce   any   discharge.   Proposals   for   infiltration   methods   within  
the   Groundwater   Source   Protection   Zone   should   be   discussed   with   the   Environment   Agency   as   it  
may   be   possible   for   SuDs   to   be   lined,   or   for   water   to   be   treated   prior   to   infiltration.  
 
15.15Under   the   Water   Framework   Directive   (WFD),   the   Kent   Isle   of   Thanet   Groundwater   Body  
has   been   classified   as   poor   status   for   the   groundwater   quality   and   quantity.   The   groundwater   is  
impacted   by   nitrates,   pesticides,   solvents   and   hydrocarbons   at   levels   that   are   of   concern.  
 
15.16The   quality   of   the   groundwater   also   has   an   impact   on   Thanet's   bathing   waters.   The  
Bathing   Water   Directive   which   aims   to   protect   public   health   and   the   environment   from   population  
has   been   revised   and   now   introduces   tighter   water   quality   standards.   This   was   fully   implemented  
in   2015.   Thanet   has   13   beaches   which   have   been   designated   as   'Bathing   Waters'   under   the  
Bathing   Water   Directive.   Thanet   received   seven   European   Blue   Flag   Awards   for   its   beaches   in  
2015.   These   are   awarded   to   beaches   that   have   met   and   maintained   a   series   of   stringent  
environmental,   educational,   safety   and   access   related   criteria.   In   addition   to   this   Thanet   has   been  
awarded   three   Seaside   Awards   for   Margate   Main   Sands,   Westbrook   Bay   and   Viking   Bay,   which  
rewards   beaches   in   England   that   achieve   the   highest   standards   of   beach   management.   There   is  
also   1   shellfish   water   designated   under   the   EU   Shellfish   Waters   Directive.  
 
15.17Walpole   Bay   has   previously   failed   to   meet   current   EC   mandatory   bathing   water   standards  
and   is   therefore   considered   to   be   at   significant   risk   of   not   meeting   the   revised   Bathing   Water  
Regulations.  
 
15.18Bathing   waters   can   be   nominated   for   designation   or   delisting   in   the   annual   DEFRA   review.  
The   quality   of   bathing   water   quality   can   be   affected   by   pollution   that   arises   from   a   variety   of  
sources   and   the   amount   of   pollution   from   individual   sources   may   be   small   but   the   combined   effect  
 can   be   significant.   Diffuse   pollution,   from   agricultural   or   other   sources,   can   run   off   land   or  
percolate   through   it   into   rivers   which   drain   into   the   sea.  
 
15.19The   following   factors   could   contribute   to   poor   bathing   water   quality   in   Thanet:  
 
●Pollution   from   sewage   -   bacteria   from   sewage   can   enter   our   waters   as   a  
result   of   system   failures   or   overflows   or   directly   from   sewage   works.  
●Water   draining   from   farms   and   farmland   -   manure   from   livestock   or   poorly  
stored   slurry   or   poor   practices   in   the   application   of   manure   on   to   land   can  
wash   into   rivers   and   streams   resulting   in   faecal   material   entering   the   sea.  
●Animals   and   birds   on   or   near   beaches   -   dog,   bird   and   other   animal   faeces  
can   affect   bathing   water   as   they   often   contain   high   levels   of   bacteria   (much  
higher   than   treated   human   waste).  
●Water  draining  from  populated  areas  -  water  draining  from  urban  areas            
following  heavy  rain  can  contain  pollution  from  a  variety  of  sources,            
including  animal  and  bird  faeces  or  incorrect  connections  of  wastewater           
from   houses   and   businesses   into   surface   water   drainage  
●Domestic   sewage   -   misconnected   drains   and   poorly   located   and  
maintained   septic   tanks   can   pollute   surface   water   systems.  
 
15.20The   loss   of   blue   flags   or   the   failure   of   any   of   Thanet's   beaches   to   meet   the  
requirements   of   the   revised   Bathing   Water   regulations   or   for   Shellfish   water   failure   could  
have   knock-on   implications   on   perception   of   water   quality   at   neighbouring   beaches   as   well  
as   the   local   economy   and   tourist   and   fishing   industry.   To   ensure   development   does   not  
negatively   impact   bathing   and   shellfish   water   quality   it   is   important   to   ensure   drainage  
infrastructure   is   adequate   i.e.   sewer   capacity   is   available   (or   financially   viable   to   increase)  
and   surface   water   drainage   is   managed.   The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   surface   water  
run-off   is   managed   appropriately.  
 
 
Policy   CC02   -   Surface   Water   Management  
New   development   is   required    to   manage   surface   water   resulting   from   the  
development   using   sustainable   drainage   systems   (SuDs)   wherever   possible.   SuDs  
design,   together   with   a   robust   long   term   maintenance   plan   should   be   included    as   an  
integral   part   of   the   master   planning   and   design   process   for   new   development   and  
should,   wherever   possible,   incorporate   multi-functional   benefits   for   people   and  
wildlife.   Developers   should   demonstrate   how   the    guidance   produced   by   the   Lead  
Local   Flood   Authority   (LLFA)   has   been   taken   into   account   and   applied     when  
submitting   a   planning   application   for   any   major   development.   Approval   of    the   design  
and   measures   to   be   implemented   for   the   long   term   maintenance   of   SuDs   will   be  
required   prior   to   development   being   permitted.  
 
When   preparing   SuDs   schemes   developers   should   fully   consider   the   potential  
impact   on   the   historic   environment   and   ensure   that   any   damage   is   mitigated.  
Proposals   for   SuDs   at   sites   within   the   Groundwater   Source   Protection   Zone   as  
shown   on   the   Policies   Map,   or   sites   near   the   Groundwater   Source   Protection  
Zone,   must   demonstrate   that   the   methods   used   will   not   cause   detriment   to   the  
quality   of   the   groundwater.  
 
Sites   identified   as   a   Tidally   Sensitive   Area   (as   identified   in   surface   water  
management   plans)   will   need   to   incorporate   Sustainable   Drainage   Methods   and   a  
maintenance   schedule   where   appropriate,   at   the   design   stage   of   a   planning  
 application,   and   a   Flood   Risk   Assessment   will   be   required   before   planning  
permission   can   be   granted.  
 
Coastal   Development  
15.21There   are   a   number   of   other   discrete   areas   of   flood   risk   around   the   coastline;   however,  
the   majority   of   coastline   is   at   risk   of   erosion   and   not   flooding.   Coastal   defences   have   an  
approximate   lifespan   of   50   years.   If   there   appears   to   be   an   economic   justification   for   maintaining  
them   then   they   will   be   maintained;   however,   feasibility   work   does   not   always   indicate   that   a  
project   will   be   successful   in   achieving   funding,   and   in   such   cases   defences   may   cease   to   be  
maintained.  
 
15.22The   Isle   of   Grain   to   South   Foreland   Shoreline   Management   Plan   (SMP)   provides   a   large-  
scale   assessment   of   the   risks   associated   with   coastal   evolution   and   presents   a   policy   framework  
to   address   these   risks   to   people   and   the   developed,   historic   and   natural   environment   in   a  
sustainable   manner.   It   also   includes   an   action   plan   to   facilitate   implementation   of   the   SMP  
policies   and   monitor   progress.   The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   that   new   development   is   not  
put   at   risk   from   coastal   erosion   which   may   put   people   or   property   at   risk,   or   potentially   reduce   the  
lifespan   of   those   dwellings.  
 
15.23The   Marine   Management   Organisation   (MMO)   will   deliver   UK   marine   policy   objectives   for  
English   waters   through   statutory   Marine   Plans   and   other   measures.   Thanet   is   within   the   South  
East   Marine   Plan   area   and   a   marine   plan   for   this   area   is   under   development.   Until   a   Marine   Plan  
has   been   published,   the   UK   Marine   Policy   Statement   should   be   used   for   guidance   and   licensing  
on   any   planning   activity   that   includes   a   section   of   coastline   or   tidal   river.   A   marine   licence   from  
the   MMO   may   be   required   for   coastal   developments   and   early   consultation   with   the   MMO   is  
advised.   
 
 
Policy   CC03   -   Coastal   Development  
Proposals   for   new   development   within   40   metres   of   the   coastline   or   clifftop   must  
demonstrate   to   the   satisfaction   of   the   Council   that   it   will   not:  
 
1)Expose   people   and   property   to   the   risks   of   coastal   erosion   and   flooding   for   the   life  
of   the   development,   or  
2)Accelerate   coastal   erosion   due   to   increased   surface   water   run   off;   and  
3)impact   on   natural   habitats   through   the   process   of   coastal   squeeze   or   otherwise  
restrict   the   capacity   of   the   coastline   to   adjust   to   sea-level   rise   and   climate   change  
 
Renewable   energy  
15.24There   are   a   number   of   options   for   obtaining   energy   from   renewable   sources   in   new   or  
existing   developments.   These   include:  
 
●Solar   photo-voltaic   panels  
●Wind   turbines  
●Solar   water   heating  
●Ground   source   heat   pumps  
●Biomass   and   biofuel  
  
15.25The   Council   will   encourage   new   developments   to   make   provision   for   renewable  
installations   in   their   master   planning   and   will   encourage   the   retrofitting   of   such   installations  
to   existing   buildings,   subject   to   the   criteria   in   policy   CC04.   The   following   policy   seeks   to  
encourage   the   use   of   renewable   energy   installations   in   new   and   existing   development   whilst  
mitigating   against   any   detrimental   effects.  
 
 
Policy   CC04   -   Renewable   energy  
Proposals   for   major   new   developments    shall   demonstrate   that   they   will   make   maximum  
use   of   renewable   energy   or   micro-   generation   equipment     and to   this   end   shall   include   a  
feasibility   assessment   taking   into   account   site   location   and   viability.    Proposals   for  
renewable   energy   or   micro-generation   facilities in   new   developments   should   ensure   that:  
 
 
1)There   are   no   significant   adverse   impacts   on   the   surrounding   area   such   as   visual,  
noise   and   amenity.  
2)Visual   and   landscape   impacts   have   been   minimised   in   the   design   and   layout   of   the  
scheme;  
3)There   is   no   significant    impact   on   residential   amenity   of   local   residents.  
4)There   is   no   adverse   impact   on   heritage   assets   or   their   setting.  
5)There   is   no   significant   impact   on   the   landscape   setting,   habitats,   biodiversity   or  
wildlife   assets,   particularly   protected   species   and   habitats.  
6)They   do   not   have   an   impact   on   the   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land   unless  
that   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   it   is   necessary   and   no   alternative   lower   grade   land   is  
available.  
 
 
District   Heating  
15.26District   heating   schemes   supply   heat   from   a   central   source   directly   to   homes   and  
businesses   through   a   network   of   pipes   carrying   hot   water.   This   means   that   individual   homes   and  
business   do   not   need   to   generate   their   own   heat   on   site.  
 
15.27Large   energy   users,   or   'anchor   loads'   are   an   essential   part   of   a   district   heating   network   to  
provide   a   base   heat   demand   that   will   allow   a   system   to   run   efficiently.   Anchor   loads   could   be  
large   energy   users   such   as   industry,   schools,   hospitals   or   leisure   centres   with   heated   swimming  
pools.   Map   4   is   a   heat   map   for   Thanet   showing   potential   areas   suitable   for   district   heating.  
 
  
 Map   4   -   Thanet's   Heat   Density  
 
 
15.28District   heating   is   most   suitable   where   there   is   a   high   density   of   built   development,   and  
especially   where   there   is   a   mix   of   building   types   This   diversity   of   energy   demand   helps   to   keep  
combined   heat   and   power   (CHP)   or   boiler   plant   running   in   a   more   steady   state   for   longer   -   which  
is   more   efficient.  
 
15.29The   Renewable   Energy   for   Kent   report   identifies   the   following   scale   and   types   of   district  
heating   networks   which   may   come   forward:  
 
Small   local   networks:    Typically   between   10   and   50   homes   in   a   street   or   a   block.   Gas   fired  
boilers   or   biomass   boilers   supplying   heat   only  
 
Medium   size   networks:    Typically   over   200   homes   and   normally   with   an   'anchor   building'   (i.e.   a  
school,   hospital   or   leisure   centre)  
 
Large   networks :   A   number   of   small   and   medium   sized   networks   linked   up   and   perhaps   taking  
heat   from   a   large   biomass   or   energy   from   waste   power   station  
 
 
15.30The   following   policy   seeks   to   encourage   district   heating   schemes   where   appropriate   and  
feasible.   Energy   statements   are   a   useful   tool   for   considering   the   energy   strategy   for   major   sites.  
These   could   consider   any   of   the   following   aspects:  
 
●the   overall   energy   strategy   for   the   site  
●the   energy   demands   for   the   development  
●an   assessment   oft   he   feasibility   of   the   available   renewable   and   low   carbon   technologies  
●assessment   of   the   likely   energy   savings   and   emissions  
●costs   of   technology   where   viability   is   a   concern  
●other   potential   impacts   of   renewable   energy   and   low   carbon   technologies  
●long   term   management   of   energy   supply   on   site  
 
 
 
Policy   CC05   -   District   Heating  
Support   will   be   given   to   the   inclusion   of   district   heating   schemes   in   new   development.  
Major   development   proposals   should   be   supported   by   an   Energy   Statement   to  
demonstrate   that   the   inclusion   of   such   a   scheme   has   been   considered.    Where   a   district  
heating   scheme   cannot   be   provided   the   developer   should   set   out   the   reasons   for   this.  
  
Solar   Parks  
15.31There   have   been   a   number   of   developments   for   renewable   energy   applications   in  
the   district   to   help   reduce   emissions.   A   number   of   solar   parks   have   been   granted  
permission   -   these   are   mainly   located   in   fields,   or   parts   of   fields,   are   temporary   (most   have  
a   25   year   lifespan),   and   the   land   can   revert   to   its   original   use   when   the   panels   are   removed.  
 
Map   5   -   Solar   Parks  
 
 
 
15.32The  siting  for  a  solar  park  will  usually  be  near  to  a  connection  to  the  national  grid                  
due  to  cost  implications  for  connection,  and  will  require  the  erection  of  a  fence  surrounding                
the   site   for   security   reasons.  
 
15.33Map   5   shows   sites   where   permission   has   been   granted   for   solar   parks   at   the   time  
of   writing.   It   may   be   possible   that   other   sites   could   be   considered   for   further   development  
of   solar   parks.   Further   sites   should   be   located   on   previously   developed   land   or  
non-agricultural   land   wherever   possible.   There   are   potential   negative   impacts   to   the  
countryside,   landscapes,   and   to   best   and   most   versatile   agricultural   land.   For   proposals   on  
agricultural   land,   the   developer   will   be   expected   to   demonstrate   how   the   land   can   still   be  
used   for   agricultural   purposes.  
 
15.34The   developer   will   be   required   to   outline   a   management   programme   to   demonstrate  
that   the   areas   beneath   and   around   the   panels   will   not   become   overgrown,   and   to   assist  
with   the   eventual   restoration   of   the   site,   normally   to   its   former   use.  
 
 
 
Policy   CC06   -   Solar   Parks  
Applications   for   solar   parks   will   only   be   permitted   if   there   is   no   significantly   detrimental  
impact   on   any   of   the   following:  
 
1)Thanet's   historic   landscapes  
2)Visual   and   local   amenity,   including   cumulative   effects  
3)Heritage   assets   and   views   important   to   their   setting  
 
Proposals   on   agricultural   land   must   demonstrate   that   the   proposal   will   comply   with   all   of  
the   following:  
4)   Cause   minimal   disturbance   to   the   agricultural   land   and  
5) Be   temporary,   capable   of   removal   and   reversible,   and   allow   for   continued   use   as  
such   on   the   remaining   undeveloped   area   of   the   site.  
6)Provide   biodiversity   enhancements.  
 
The   need   for   renewable   energy   does   not   automatically   override   environmental  
considerations.  
 
Solar   park   proposals   will   be   assessed   for    their   impact   on   the   Thanet   Coast   SPA   and  
Ramsar   site   in   order   to   ensure   no   loss   of   functionally   linked   land   and   provide   mitigation   if  
required.  
 
15.35The   Richborough   area,   which   straddles   the   district   boundary   with   Dover,   has   become   a  
focus   for   waste   treatment,   renewable   and   low   carbon   energy   industries.   The   former   Richborough  
Power   Station   provides   a   potential   location   for   such   facilities,   as   well   as   a   connection   to   the  
national   grid.   Thanet   and   Dover   Councils   have   approved   applications   for   solar   parks   and  
anaerobic   digesters   in   the   surrounding   area,   a   peaking   plant   facility   and   site-wide   infrastructure   to  
facilitate   the   creation   of   energy   from   waste   site,   on   the   former   Richborough   Power   Station   site.  
 
15.36The   Council   recognises   the   potential   of   the   site   to   help   to   mitigate   against   climate   change.  
Therefore   in   liaison   with   Dover   District   Council   and   Kent   County   Council   (as   the   Minerals   and  
Waste   Authority),   the   Council   will   continue   to   explore,   with   the   promoters   of   any   schemes,   how  
this   potential   can   be   realised.   Particular   regard   would   need   to   be   had   to   environmental,   transport  
and   wildlife   impacts   together   with   visual   impact   on   landscape   and   on   the   gateway   location   to   and  
from   Thanet.  
 
15.37The   Kent   Minerals   and   Waste   Sites   Local   Plan   2013-2030   and   Waste   Sites   Plan   look   to  
this   area   as   a   potential   location   for   energy   from   waste,   green   waste   treatment   and   for   the  
treatment/material   recycling   facilities.   Development   proposals   in   this   area   should   also   refer   to  
these   plans   and   the   relevant   National   Planning   Statements.  
 
15.38The   Secretary   Of   State   for   Transport   has   issued   directions   under   the   Town   and   Country  
Planning   (General   Development   Procedure)   Order   1995   to   safeguard   the   route   corridor   of   the  
Channel   Tunnel   Rail   Link   Project.   This   includes   additional   land   that   may   be   required   for  
associated   works/development.   (Such   direction   and   works   are   not   proposals   of   the   District  
Council,   and   the   routes   in   question   will   not   be   determined   through   the   development   plan   process  
but   through   other   statutory   procedures   which   will   provide   appropriate   opportunities   for   any  
objections   by   those   directly   affected   by   the   project).  
 
15.39Safeguarding   directions   for   development   affecting   the   route   corridor   for   the   channel   tunnel  
rail   link   project   apply   to   land   at   Richborough.   In   accordance   with   the   direction,   the   Council   will  
 consult   HS1   (south)   limited   before   granting   planning   permission   or   resolving   to   carry  
out/authorise   development   within   the   limit   of   land   subject   to   consultation.  
 
 
Policy   CC07-   Richborough  
Proposals   for   the   development   of   renewable   energy   facilities   at   Richborough   will  
be   permitted   if   it   can   be   demonstrated   that   the   development   will   not   be   detrimental  
to   nearby   sites   of   nature   conservation   value   or   heritage   assets   and   that   any  
potential   effects    would   be   fully    mitigated.  
  
 16-   Safe   and   Healthy   Environment  
16.1The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   states   that   the   planning   system   should  
contribute   to   and   enhance   the   natural   and   local   environment.   It   should   prevent   both   new   and  
existing   development   from   contributing   to   or   being   put   at   unacceptable   risk   of   pollution   by   soil,   air,  
water   or   noise   or   land   instability,   and   remediate   and   mitigate   despoiled,   degraded,   derelict  
contaminated   and   unstable   land   where   appropriate.   Consideration   must   be   given   to   the   impacts  
of   noise   on   health   and   quality   of   life   from   new   developments,   and   the   presence   of   Air   Quality  
Management   Areas   and   the   cumulative   impacts   on   air   quality   from   individual   sites   in   local   areas.  
 
16.2Environmental   pollution   and   impacts   on   human   health   are   important   issues,   and   the  
Council   is   keen   to   ensure   that   Thanet's   environmental   quality   is   maintained   and   enhanced.   The  
following   policies   aim   to   address   a   number   of   environmental   issues   to   help   achieve   this.  
 
Potentially   Polluting   Development  
16.3Activities   with   the   potential   to   pollute   are   controlled   by   wide   ranging   powers   under  
pollution   control   legislation.   However,   the   effects   of   development   that   might   cause   the  
release   of   pollutants   to   water,   land   or   air,   or   from   noise,   dust,   vibration,   light,   odour   or   heat,  
are   material   considerations   when   deciding   whether   or   not   to   grant   planning   permission.   The  
Council   will   require   any   application   to   include   sufficient   information   to   enable   the   risk   of  
pollution   to   be   assessed.  
 
Policy   SE01   -   Potentially   Polluting   Development  
Development   with   potential   to   pollute   will   be   permitted   only   where:  
 
1) Applicable   statutory   pollution   controls   and   siting   will   effectively   and   adequately  
minimise   the   impact   upon   existing   and   proposed   land   uses   and   the   environment   including  
the   effects,   including   cumulative   effects,   on   health,   the   natural   environment   such   as  
significant   natural   and   heritage   assets,   or   general   amenity   resulting   from   the   release   of  
pollutants   to   water,   land   or   air   or   from   noise,   dust,   vibration,   light,   odour   or   heat;   and  
 
In   determining   individual   proposals,   regard   will   be   paid   to:  
 
2)The   economic   and   wider   social   need   for   the   development;   and  
3) The   visual   impact   of   measure   needed   to   comply   with   any   statutory   environmental  
quality   standards   or   objectives.  
4) where   there   is   an   impact   and   the   development   is   acceptable,   a   suitable   mitigation   is  
proposed   to   the   satisfaction   of   the   pollution   control   regimes.  
 
Permission   for   development   which   is   sensitive   to   pollution   will   be   permitted   only   if   it   is  
sufficiently   separated   from   any   existing   or   potential   source   of   pollution   as   to   reduce  
pollution   impact   upon   health,   the   natural   environment   or   general   amenity   to   an   acceptable  
level,   and   adequate   safeguarding   and   mitigation   on   residential   amenity.  
 
Landfill   Sites   and   Unstable   Land  
16.4Sites  that  have  been  used  for  the  deposit  of  refuse  or  waste  may  generate  explosive  or                 
otherwise  harmful  gasses.  Thanet  has  approximately  26  such  sites  which  are  all  listed  in  the                
 National   Landfill   Atlas   held   by   the   Environment   Agency.  
 
16.5A   former   landfill   site   will   be   unlikely   to   be   actively   gassing   after   40-50   years   of   its   closure.  
The   Council   is   required   to   consult   the   Environment   Agency,   as   Waste   Regulation   Authority,  
before   granting   consent   for   development   within   250m   of   land   which   is,   or   has   within   30   years   of  
the   relevant   application,   been   used   for   the   deposit   of   refuse   or   waste.  
 
16.6If   an   application   for   a   new   development/redevelopment   or   major   change   of   use   on   or  
adjacent   to   a   site   included   in   the   landfill   atlas   is   received,   then   a   full   site-investigation   report  
including   gas   monitoring   will   be   required.  
 
16.7Where   the   presence   of   gas   is   discovered   or   it   is   suspected   that   it   may   be   present   during  
site   development,   the   Council   will   require   the   applicant   to   arrange   for   an   investigation   to   be  
carried   out   to   determine   its   source   and   for   satisfactory   and   effective   remedial   measures   to  
prevent   hazards   from   migrating   gas   (including   accumulation   into   property   or   other   confined  
spaces)   during   the   course   of   development   and   during   subsequent   use   of   the   site.   Specialist  
design   and   construction   advice   will   usually   have   to   be   sought   by   the   developer   in   this   regard.  
 
16.8For   development   on   unstable   land,   it   may   be   necessary   for   the   developer   to   carry   out  
specialist   investigations   and   assessments   to   determine   the   stability   of   the   site   proposed   for  
development   and   identify   any   remedial   measures   that   will   be   needed   to   deal   with   instability.  
Areas   known   to   the   Council   where   land   instability   is   likely   to   be   an   issue   include:  
 
●Minster   Marshes  
●Monkton   Marshes  
●Sarre   Marshes  
●Wade   Marshes  
●Land   overlying   Ramsgate   and   Margate   caves  
●Land   overlying   disused   railway   tunnel   between   Ramsgate   main   sands   and   the   railway  
line   at   Broadstairs  
 
Policy   SE02   -   Landfill   Sites   and   Unstable   Land  
In   considering   planning   applications   on   or   near   landfill   sites,   or   where   there   is  
otherwise   reason   to   suspect   that   potential   danger   from   evolving   or   migrating   gas  
may   be   present,   or   on   land   for   which   known   or   suspected   instability   might   render   it  
unsuitable   for   development,   the   local   planning   authority   may   require   a   specialist  
site   investigation   and   assessment   by   the   developer   to   identify   any   remedial  
measures   required   before   determining   such   planning   applications.  
 
Development   or   redevelopment,   including   change   of   use,   will   only   be   permitted   where:  
 
1) The   applicant/developer   has   demonstrated   either   that   there   is   no   unacceptable  
risk   caused   by   the   development   or   that   appropriate   remedial   measures   can  
overcome   such   risk;  
2) The   development   would   not   adversely   affect   neighbouring   land;   and  
3) Any   necessary   remedial   measures   can   be   achieved   without   unacceptable  
environmental   impact.  
 
Where   the   local   planning   authority   is   satisfied   that   the   risks   from   landfill   or  
ground   instability   can   be   overcome,   planning   consent   may   be   granted   subject   to  
conditions   or   a   legal   agreement   specifying   the   necessary   measures   to   be   carried  
out.  
  
 
Land   affected   by   Contamination   
16.9Some   sites   in   Thanet   are   known   to   be    affected   by   contamination.   The   allocation   of  
sites   should   not   be   taken   as   an   indication   that   they   are   free   from   any   hazardous/physical  
constraints,   or   that   they   are   not   in   the   vicinity   of   other   installations   handling   hazardous  
substances.  
 
16.10Development   on   land   affected   by   contamination   will   require   a   site   investigation   and  
assessment   to   establish   the   levels   of   contamination   present   and   identify   any   remedial  
measures   to   clean   the   site   to   make   it   suitable   for   its   proposed   end   use   and   remediate  
risks   to   the   wider   environment.  
 
16.11The   Council   has   adopted   a   revised   Contaminated   Land   Strategy   (January   2019)  
which   sets   out   the   Council’s   position   on   the   remediation   of   brownfield   land   in   relation   to  
the   EPA   1990   Part   IIa   duties   and   links   with   the   planning   regime.  
 
 
Policy   SE03   -   Land   affected   by   Contamination  
Development   proposals   that   would   enable   contaminated   sites   to   be   brought   into   beneficial  
use   will   normally   be   permitted,   so   long   as   the   sites   can   be   rendered   suitable   for   the  
proposed   end   use   in   terms   of   the   impact   on   human   health,   public   safety   and   the  
environment,   including   underlying   groundwater   resources.  
 
Development   on   land   known   or   suspected   to   be   contaminated   or   likely   to   be   adversely  
affected   by   such   contamination   will   only   be   permitted   where:  
 
1) An   appropriate   site   investigation   and   assessment   (agreed   by   the   Council)   has   been  
carried   out   as   part   of   the   application   to   establish   whether   contamination   is   present   and   to  
identify   any   remedial   measures   necessary   to   ensure   that   the   site   is   suitable   for   the  
proposed   end   use;  
2) The   proposed   remedial   measures   would   be   acceptable   in   planning   terms   and   would  
provide   effective   safeguards   against   contamination   hazards   during   the   development   and  
subsequent   occupation   of   the   site.  
 
Planning   conditions   will   be   attached   to   any   consent   to   ensure   that   remedial   measures   are  
fully   implemented,   before   occupation.  
 
In   the   case   of   sites   where   contamination   is   only   considered   to   be   a   possible   risk,   a   site  
investigation   will   be   required   by   condition.   Sites   where   contamination   is   believed   to   have  
been   removed   or   where   the   full   site   history   is   unknown   should   not   be   able   to   be  
considered   as   contaminated   land   under   Part   2A   of   the   Environmental   Protection   Act   1990  
in   relation   to   the   untended   use   of   the   land.  
 
 
Groundwater   Protection  
16.12Thanet's   groundwater   is   of   poor   quality   and   is   vulnerable   to   contamination   due   to  
 Thanet's   thin   soils   and   cracks   in   the   chalk   rock,   which   means   pollution   would   soak   through  
quickly   to   the   groundwater.   However   the   groundwater   is   used   to   supply   water   for   drinking  
water,   agriculture,   horticulture   and   industry   and   also   feeds   the   springs   that   emerge   along  
the   coast   near   the   marshes,   so   it   is   important   that   there   is   no   further   contamination   to   the  
groundwater.  
 
Thanet's   groundwater   zones   are   shown   on   the   Policies   Map,   and   in   more   detail   on   map   6.  
 
Map   6   -   Thanet's   Groundwater   Protection   Zones  
 
 
16.13Thanet's  groundwater  is  extremely  vulnerable  to  contamination  as  substances  (natural           
substances  and  man-made  chemicals)  are  able  to  pass  rapidly  through  the  thin  soils  and  the                
natural   fissures   (cracks)   in   the   chalk   rock   to   the   groundwater   below   the   ground   surface.  
 
16.14Once   the   chalk   and   groundwater   is   contaminated   at   a   site   by   a   substance   it   can   take  
decades   to   clean-up.   The   Council   and   the   Environment   Agency   have   worked   hard   to   prevent  
contamination   by   consistently   applying   Groundwater   Protection   policies   to   any   proposed   land-use  
changes   in   Thanet   to   reduce   potential   future   impact.  
 
16.15Under   the   Water   Framework   Directive   (WFD),   the   'Kent   Isle   of   Thanet   Groundwater   Body'  
has   been   classified   as   poor   status   for   the   groundwater   quality   and   quantity.   The   groundwater   is  
impacted   by   nitrates,   pesticides,   solvents   and   hydrocarbons   at   levels   that   are   of   concern.  
Thanet's   groundwater   is   currently   a   candidate   Water   Protection   Zone   (WPZ).   These   zones   are  
used   in   areas   identified   as   being   at   high   risk   as   a   'last   resort'   when   other   mechanisms   have   failed  
or   are   unlikely   to   prevent   failure   of   WFD   objectives.   WPZs   are   a   new   regulatory   tool   to   address  
diffuse   water   pollution.   They   are   designed   to   help   enforce   measures   to   prevent   pollution   and  
improve   water   quality   where   standards   set   out   in   the   Water   Framework   Directive   (WFD)   are   not  
being   met.   It   is   hoped   that   sufficient   measures   can   be   taken,   by   various   organisations   and  
individuals,   that   will   help   remediate   the   problems   with   Thanet's   groundwater   and   avoid   a   WPZ  
designation.  
 
16.16The   poor   groundwater   quality   cannot   be   attributed   to   just   one   source.   In   Thanet   there   are  
 
considerable   risks   to   the   groundwater   from   both   urban   and   rural   activities.   These   risks   are  
intensified   by   the   compact   nature   of   the   district.   Hazards   to   Thanet's   groundwater   include   petrol  
stations,   gas   works,   drainage   from   roads,   leakage   from   sewers,   pesticide   storage,   septic   tanks,  
sheep   dips,   and   farm   buildings.   Uses   that   can   cause   pollution   to   the   groundwater   include   dry  
cleaners,   mechanics,   scrap   metal,   photo   processing,   and   some   sustainable   drainage   systems.  
 
16.17Well   designed   SuDs   in   suitable   locations   can   improve   the   volume   of   groundwater  
available   without   affecting   the   quality;   however   locations   and   depths   of   discharge   to   ground  
must   be   carefully   designed   to   ensure   that   they   are   appropriate   and   do   not   cause   further  
degradation.   SuDs   must   be   designed   so   that   pollutants   are   removed   prior   to   discharge,   and  
where   possible,   properly   designed   in   order   to   improve   the   groundwater   quantity.   Discharges  
to   the   ground   in   sensitive   areas   should   be   approved   by   the   Environment   Agency.  
 
16.18Drainage   and   provision   of   water   are   addressed   by   Policies   SP02   and   SP14   for   housing  
development   and   general   pollution   prevention   Policy   SE01.  
 
 
Policy   SE04   -   Groundwater   Protection  
Proposals   for   development   within   the   Groundwater   Source   Protection   Zones   identified   on  
the   Policies   Map   will   only   be   permitted   if   there   is   no   risk   of   contamination   to   groundwater  
sources.   If   a   risk   is   identified,   development   will   only   be   permitted   if   adequate   mitigation  
measures   can   be   implemented.    Proposals   which   involve   the   use   of   piled   foundations   on  
contaminated   sites   must   demonstrate   that   they   will   not   cause   disturbance   of   any   ground  
so   as   to   cause   turbidity   in   water   supply   and/or   create   pathways   enabling   contaminated  
materials   to   reach   the   groundwater.  
 
Proposals   for   Sustainable   Drainage   systems   involving   infiltration   must   be   assessed   and  
discussed   with   the   Environment   Agency   to   determine   their   suitability   in   terms   of   the  
impact   of   any   drainage   into   the   groundwater   aquifer.  
 
 
Air   Quality  
16.19The   Environment   Act   1995   established   a   local   air   quality   management   regime   which  
requires   local   authorities   to   review   and   assess   ambient   air   quality   in   their   areas   against   health-  
based   standards   for   a   number   of   specific   pollutants   as   set   out   in   regulations.   It   is   then   required   to  
produce   an   Air   Quality   Action   Plan.   If   there   is   a   risk   that   levels   of   air   pollution   in   any   part   of   an  
authority's   area   will   be   higher   than   the   prescribed   objectives   then   the   authority   is   required   to  
designate   an   Air   Quality   Management   Area   (AQMA).  
 
16.20Thanet   generally   has   good   air   quality;   however   there   are   areas   at   The   Square   in  
Birchington,   the   junction   of   Hereson   Road/Boundary   Road   and   High   Street   St   Lawrence,  
Ramsgate   where   air   quality   is   poor   due   to   pollution   from   road   transport.   An   urban   wide   Air   Quality  
Management   Area   has   been   declared   to   enable   effective   management   of   air   quality.   The  
transport   strategy   that   accompanies   the   plan   is   aiming   to   address   this   issue   by   proposing   road  
improvements   and   new   links   to   form   an   "inner   circuit".   Further   details   are   available   in   chapter   6  
New   Strategic   Routes   Policy.  
 
 
 
 
 Map   7   -   Thanet   Urban   Air   Quality   Management   Area  
 
 
16.21Planning   is   an   effective   tool   to   improve   air   quality.   It   can   be   used   to   locate   development  
to   reduce   emissions   overall,   and   reduce   the   direct   impacts   of   new   development,   through   policy  
requirements.  
 
16.22  An   AQMA   makes   consideration   of   the   air   quality   impacts   of   a   proposed   development  
important.   However,   there   is   still   a   need   to   regard   air   quality   as   a   material   factor   in   determining  
planning   applications   in   any   location.   This   is   particularly   important   where   the   proposed  
development   is   not   physically   within   the   AQMA,   but   could   have   adverse   impacts   on   air   quality  
within   it,   or   where   air   quality   in   that   given   area   is   close   to   exceeding   guideline   objectives   itself.  
 
16.23The   Council   has   produced   an   Air   Quality   Technical   Planning   Guidance   August   2016,   in  
conjunction   with   the   Kent   and   Medway   Air   Quality   Partnership.   The   guidance   sets   out   the  
approach   that   should   be   adopted   from   pre-application   stage   through   to   submitting   details   to   the  
local   planning   authority.   The   process   involves   initial   screening   to   see   if   the   development   does   not  
require   any   assessment   and/or   mitigation   or   if   the   development   requires   an   air   quality  
assessment   and/or   an   emissions   mitigation   assessment.   Advice   from   the   Council's   air   quality  
officer   should   be   sought   early   on   in   the   process.  
 
16.24Developments   that   require   the   submission   of   an   Air   Quality   Assessment   include   the  
following:  
 
1)If   the   development   is   likely   to   have   a   significant   impact   upon   an   AQMA  
2)If   the   development   has   the   potential   to   cause   a   deterioration   in   local   air   quality   (i.e.   once  
completed   it   will   increase   pollutant   concentrations)  
3)If   the   development   is   located   in   an   area   of   poor   air   quality   (i.e.   it   will   expose   future  
occupiers   to   unacceptable   pollutant   concentrations)   whether   the   site   lies   within   a  
designated   AQMA   or,   if   so   advised   by   the   Local   Authority,   or   a   "candidate"   AQMA  
4)If   the   demolition/construction   phase   will   have   a   significant   impact   on   the   local  
environment   (e.g.   through   fugitive   dust   and   exhaust   emissions)  
 
16.25The   types   of   development   that   are   likely   to   require   an   air   quality   assessment   are  
identified   in   the   Kent   and   Medway   Air   Quality   Partnerships   Technical   Planning   Guidance   August  
 
2016,   although   the   Council's   air   quality   officer   will   confirm   whether   an   air   quality   assessment   is  
required   or   if   an   emissions   mitigation   assessment   will   suffice.  
 
16.26Where   an   air   quality   and/or   an   emissions   mitigation   assessment   are   required,   they  
should   be   carried   out   by   the   developer's   air   quality   consultant.  
 
16.27The   Air   Quality   Technical   Planning   Guidance   provides   advice   on   the   level   of   information  
required,   the   process,   assessment   and   possible   mitigation   and   applicants   are   encouraged   to  
refer   to   this   document.   It   is   vital   that   air   quality   is   discussed   at   the   pre-application   stage   where  
possible,   to   avoid   delays   in   the   processing   of   the   planning   application.   Applicants   should   always  
seek   to   use   the   most   up   to   date   information   on   air   quality   when   carrying   out   an   assessment.  
Early   consultation   with   the   Council's   air   quality   officer   is   recommended   to   determine   whether   an  
air   quality   assessment   is   required   before   submitting   a   planning   application.  
 
16.28In   order   to   improve   air   quality   generally   within   the   District,   the   Air   Quality   Technical  
Planning   Guidance   encourages   the   use   of   less   polluting   transport,   by   requiring   proposals   for  
new   residential   development   of   10   or   more   units   and   commercial/industrial   developments   above  
a   certain   size,   to   provide   electric   car   charging   points.  
 
16.29This   approach   compliments   the   Council's   aim   to   improve   the   health   and   wellbeing   of   its  
residents.   The   Council   will   also   work   with   the   relevant   providers   of   public   transport   to   provide  
less   polluting   forms   of   transport   through   a   Quality   Bus   Partnership.  
 
Policy   SE05   -   Air   Quality  
All   major   development   schemes   should   promote   a   shift   to   the   use   of   sustainable   low  
emission   transport   to   minimise   the   impact   of   vehicle   emissions   on   air   quality.  
Development   will   be   located   where   it   is   accessible   to   support   the   use   of   public   transport,  
walking   and   cycling.  
 
New   development   must   ensure   that   users   are   not   significantly   adversely   affected   by   the  
air   quality   and   include   mitigation   measures   where   appropriate.  
 
All   developments   which   either   individually   or   cumulatively   are   likely   to   have   a   detrimental  
impact   on   air   quality,   will   be   required   to   submit   an   Air   Quality   and/or   Emissions   Mitigation  
Assessment,   in   line   with   the   Air   Quality   Technical   Planning   Guidance   2016   and   any  
subsequent   revisions.  
 
The   Air   Quality   Assessment   should   address   the   cumulative   effect   of   further   emissions.  
 
The   Emission   Mitigation   Assessment   should   address   any   proposed   mitigation   measures  
through   good   design   and   offsetting   measures   that   would   prevent   the   National   Air   Quality  
Objectives   being   exceeded   or   reduce   the   extent   of   the   air   quality   deterioration.   These   will  
be   of   particular   importance   within   the   urban   AQMA,   associated   areas   and   areas   of   lower  
air   quality.  
 
Proposals   that   fail   to   demonstrate   these   will   not   be   permitted.  
 
Noise   Pollution  
16.30The   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   outlines   that   local   plan   policies   and  
development   management   decisions   should   aim   to   avoid   noise   from   giving   rise   to   significant  
 adverse   impacts   on   health   and   quality   of   life   as   a   result   of   new   development.   It   states   that   where  
conflict   does   arise,   impacts   must   as   far   as   possible   be   mitigated   against   and   be   reduced   to   a  
minimum.  
 
16.31The   Government's   Noise   Policy   Statement   for   England   stated   priority   is   to:  
 
' Avoid   significant   adverse   impacts   on   health   and   quality   of   life   from  
environmental,   neighbour   and   neighbourhood   noise   within   the   context   of  
Government   policy   on   sustainable   development'.  
 
16.32The   second   aim   is   to   mitigate   and   minimise   adverse   impacts,   and   the   third   is   to   contribute  
to   the   improvement   of   health   and   quality   of   life   through   effective   management   control   of   noise.  
 
16.33Noise   is   a   material   consideration   when   determining   planning   applications.   The  
Government's   National   Planning   Practice   Guidance [i]     states   that   consideration   should   be   given  
to:  
 
●Whether   or   not   a   significant   adverse   effect   is   occurring   or   likely   to   occur;  
●Whether   or   not   an   adverse   effect   is   occurring   or   likely   to   occur;   and  
●Whether   or   not   a   good   standard   of   amenity   can   be   achieved.  
 
16.34The   guidance   provides   the   following   noise   hierarchy   to   determine   when   noise  
could   be   a   concern:  
 
Table   14   -   Noise   Hierarchy  
 
Perception  Examples   of   outcomes  Increasing  
effect   level  Action  
Not  
noticeable  No   effect  No   observed  
effect  No   specific  
measures  
required  
Noticeable  
and   not  
intrusive  Noise   can   be   heard,   but   does   not   cause   any   change  
in   behaviour   or   attitude.   Can   slightly   affect   the  
acoustic   character   of   the   area   but   not   such   that   there  
is   a   perceived   change   in   the   quality   of   life.  No   observed  
adverse   effect  No   specific  
measures  
required  
Lowest  
Observed  
Adverse   Effect  
Level  
Noticeable  
and   intrusive  Noise   can   be   heard   and   causes   small   changes   in  
behaviour   and/or   attitude,   e.g.   turning   up   volume   of  
television;   speaking   more   loudly;   closing   windows   for  
some   of   the   time   because   of   the   noise.   Potential   for  
non-awakening   sleep   disturbance.  
Affects   the   acoustic   character   of   the   area   such   that  
there   is   a   perceived   change   in   the   quality   of   life.  Observed  
Adverse   Effect  Mitigate  
and   reduce  
to   a  
minimum  
Significant  
Observed  
Adverse   Effect  
Level  
 Noticeable  
and  
disruptive  The   noise   causes   a   material   change   in   behaviour  
and/or   attitude,   e.g.   having   to   keep   windows   closed  
most   of   the   time,   avoiding   certain   activities   during  
periods   of   intrusion.   Potential   for   sleep   disturbance  
resulting   in   difficulty   in   getting   to   sleep,   premature  
awakening   and   difficulty   in   getting   back   to   sleep.  
Quality   of   life   diminished   due   to   change   in   acoustic  
character   of   the   area.  Significant  
Observed  
Adverse   Effect  Avoid  
Noticeable  
and   very  
disruptive  Extensive   and   regular   changes   in   behaviour   and/or  
an   inability   to   mitigate   effect   of   noise   leading   to  
psychological   stress   or   physiological   effects,   e.g.  
regular   sleep   deprivation/awakening;   loss   of   appetite,  
significant,   medically   definable   harm,   e.g.   auditory  
and   non-auditory  Unacceptable  
Adverse   Effect  Prevent  
 
16.35The   guidance   suggests   four   broad   types   of   mitigation   against   noise:  
 
●engineering:    reducing   the   noise   generated   at   source   and/or   containing   the   noise  
generated;  
●layout:    where   possible,   optimising   the   distance   between   the   source   and  
noise-sensitive   receptors   and/or   incorporating   good   design   to   minimise   noise  
transmission   through   the   use   of   screening   by   natural   or   purpose   built   barriers,   or   other  
buildings;  
●using   planning   conditions/obligations    to   restrict   activities   allowed   on   the   site   at  
certain   times   and/or   specifying   permissible   noise   levels   differentiating   as   appropriate  
between   different   times   of   day,   such   as   evenings   and   late   at   night,   and;  
●mitigating    the   impact   on   areas   likely   to   be   affected   by   noise   including   through   noise  
insulation   when   the   impact   is   on   a   building.  
 
Further   information   and   guidance   can   be   found   in   the   following   sources:  
 
●Chartered   Institute   of   Environmental   Health,   Acoustic   and   Noise   Consultants   and  
Institute   of   Acoustics:   Professional   Practice   Guidance   on   Planning   and   Noise  
●British   Standard   4142:   Methods   for   rating   and   assessing   industrial   and   commercial  
sound  
●British   Standard   5228   Code   of   practice   for   noise   and   vibration   control   on   construction  
and   open   sites  
●British   Standard   6472   Vibration  
●British   Standard   8233   Guidance   on   sound   insulation   and   noise   reduction   for   buildings  
 
Policy   SE06   -   Noise   Pollution  
In   areas   where   noise   levels   are   relatively   high,   permission   will   be   granted   for   noise-  
sensitive   development   only   where   adequate   mitigation   is   provided,   and   the   impact   of   the  
noise   can   be   reduced   to   acceptable   levels.  
 
Development   proposals   that   generate   significant   levels   of   noise   must   be   accompanied   by  
a   scheme   to   mitigate   such   effects,   bearing   in   mind   the   nature   of   surrounding   uses.  
Proposals   that   would   have   an   unacceptable   impact   on   noise-sensitive   areas   or   uses   will  
not   be   permitted.  
 
 Noise   Action   Plan   Important   Areas  
16.36Noise   Action   Plans   have   been   prepared   in   line   with   the   terms   of   the   Environmental   Noise  
Directive   and   cover   noise   from   roads,   railways   and   agglomerations.   There   are   26   road   related  
'Important   Areas'   and   2   rail   Important   Areas   in   Thanet.   (These   correspond   with   hotspots   identified  
in   the   AQMA).    The   Defra   maps   are   available   here:    http://www.extrium.co.uk/noiseviewer.html#   
 
16.37Within   the   identified   areas,   residential   development   will   need   to   include   mitigation  
measures   to   reduce   the   impact   of   noise   on   residential   amenity.   Such   measures   may   include  
screening/barriers,   double   glazing,   locating   windows   so   they   are   not   opposite   the   noise   source.  
Developers   should   liaise   with   Kent   County   Council   as   the   Highway   Authority   to   agree   appropriate  
mitigation.  
 
Policy   SE07   -   Noise   Action   Plan   Important   Areas  
Proposals   for   residential   development   within   identified   Important   Areas   in   the   Noise  
Action   Plan   must   incorporate   mitigation   measures   against   the   impact   of   noise   on  
residential   amenity.  
 
Light   Pollution  
16.38Light   pollution   is   identified   as   a   statutory   nuisance   under   the   Clean   Neighbourhoods   and  
Environment   Act   2005.   Poorly   designed   or   installed   lighting   can   be   obtrusive   by   introducing   a  
suburban   character   into   rural   areas,   and   also   wastes   electricity.   Different   forms   of   light   pollution  
are   identified   as:  
 
●Light   Spillage   -   artificial   illumination   that   results   in   the   spillage   of   light   that   is   likely   to  
cause   irritation,   annoyance   or   distress   to   others  
●Light   Trespass   -   the   spilling   of   light   beyond   the   boundary   of   the   property   on   which   the  
light   source   is   located  
●Light   Glare   -   the   uncomfortable   brightness   of   a   light   source   when   viewed   against   a   dark  
background  
●Sky   Glow   -   the   brightening   of   the   night   sky   above   our   towns   and   cities  
 
16.39Due   to   Thanet's   open   landscapes   and   vast   skies,   poor   outdoor   lighting   can   have   a  
substantial   adverse   effect   on   the   character   of   the   area   well   beyond   the   site   on   which   the   lighting   is  
located.  
 
16.40Inappropriate   lighting   has   been   shown   to   have   major   impacts   on   wildlife.     The   impacts   of  
light   pollution   on   bat   species   and   potential   mitigation   measures   are   particularly   well   documented.  
 
16.41The   Council   refers   to   the   Institution   of   Lighting   Professionals   Guidance   Notes   for   the  
Reduction   of   Obtrusive   Light [i] .   The   guidance   identifies   environmental   zones   and   corresponding  
lighting   environments   as   shown   in   table   15:  
 
 
 
 
 
[i]    https://www.theilp.org.uk/documents/obtrusive-light/  
 
 Table   15   -   Environmental   Zones  
 
Zone  Surrounding  Lighting  
Environment  ILP   examples  Corresponding   areas   in   Thanet  
E0  Protected  Dark  UNESCO   starlight  
reserves,   IDA   dark  
sky   parks  None  
E1  Natural  Intrinsically   dark  National   Parks,   Areas   of  
Outstanding   Natural  
Beauty   etc  Landscape  Character  Areas  associated     
with  Pegwell  Bay  and  former  Wantsum       
Channel,   the   European   Marine   Sites  
E2  Rural  Low   district  
brightness  Village   or   relatively   dark  
outer   suburban  
locations  Rural   areas   outside   of   the   built   confines  
Including   Green   Wedges  
E3  Suburban  Medium   district  
brightness  Small   town   centres   or  
suburban   locations  Urban   areas   and   villages  
E4  Urban  High   district  
brightness  Town/city   centres   with  
high   levels   of   night   time  
activity  Amusement   area   at   Margate   Seafront  
 
16.42The   Institute   of   Lighting   Professionals   recommends   the   following   standards   within   these  
areas:  
 
Table   16   -   Obtrusive   Light   Limitations   for   Exterior   Lighting   Installations   -   General  
Observers  
 
Environmental  
Zone  Sky   Glow  
ULR  
[Max  
%](1)  Light   Intrusion  
(into   windows)  
Ev   [lux]   (2)  Luminaire  
intensity   I  
[candelas]   (3)  Building  
Luminance  
Pre-curfew   (4)  
Pre-  
curfew  Post-  
curfew  Pre-  
curfew  Post-  
curfew  Average,  
L  
E0  0  0  0  0  0  0  
E1  0  2  0   (   1*)  2,500  0  0  
E2  2.5  5  1  7,500  500  5  
E3  5.0  10  2  10,000  1,000  10  
E4  15  25  5  25,000  2,500  25  
 
ULR   =   Upward   Light   Ratio   of   the   Installation   is   the   maximum   permitted   percentage   of  
luminaire   flux   that   goes   directly   into   the   sky.  
Ev   =   Vertical   Illuminance   in   Lux   -   measured   flat   on   the   glazing   at   the   centre   of   the  
window.   I   =   Light   Intensity   in   Candelas   (cd)  
L   =   Luminance   in   Candelas   per   Square   Metre   (cd/m2)  
 
Curfew   =   the   time   after   which   stricter   requirements   (for   the   control   of   obtrusive   light)   will  
apply;   often   a   condition   of   use   of   lighting   applied   by   the   local   planning   authority.   If   not  
otherwise   stated   -   23.00hrs   is   suggested.  
 
*   =   Permitted   only   from   Public   road   lighting   installations  
  
1) Upward   Light   Ratio    -   Some   lighting   schemes   will   require   the   deliberate   and   careful   use  
of   upward   light,   e.g.   ground   recessed   luminaires,   ground   mounted   floodlights,   festive   lighting,   to  
which   these   limits   cannot   apply.   However,   care   should   always   be   taken   to   minimise   any   upward  
waste   light   by   the   proper   application   of   suitably   directional   luminaires   and   light   controlling  
attachments.  
2) Light   Intrusion   (into   Windows)    -   These   values   are   suggested   maxima   and   need   to   take  
account   of   existing   light   intrusion   at   the   point   of   measurement.   In   the   case   of   road   lighting   on  
public   highways   where   building   facades   are   adjacent   to   the   lit   highway,   these   levels   may   not   be  
obtainable.   In   such   cases   where   a   specific   complaint   has   been   received,   the   Highway   Authority  
should   endeavour   to   reduce   the   light   intrusion   into   the   window   down   to   the   post   curfew   value   by  
fitting   a   shield,   replacing   the   luminaire,   or   by   varying   the   lighting   level.  
3) Luminaire   Intensity    -   This   applies   to   each   luminaire   in   the   potentially   obtrusive   direction,  
outside   of   the   area   being   lit.   The   figures   given   are   for   general   guidance   only   and   for   some   sports  
lighting   applications   with   limited   mounting   heights,   may   be   difficult   to   achieve.  
4) Building   Luminance    -   This   should   be   limited   to   avoid   over   lighting,   and   related   to   the  
general   district   brightness.   In   this   reference   building   luminance   is   applicable   to   buildings   directly  
illuminated   as   a   night-time   feature   as   against   the   illumination   of   a   building   caused   by   spill   light  
from   adjacent   luminaires   or   luminaires   fixed   to   the   building   but   used   to   light   an   adjacent   area.  
 
Further   information,   guidance   and   advice   is   available   from   the   ILE   website  
https://www.theilp.org.uk/resources/free-resources/     and   developers   are   recommended   to   refer   to  
these.  
 
Policy   SE08   -   Light   Pollution  
Development   proposals   that   include   the   provision   of   new   outdoor   lighting   or   require  
specific   lighting   in   connection   with   the   operation   of   the   proposed   development   will   be  
permitted   if   it   can   be   demonstrated   that:  
 
1)It  has  been  designed  to  minimise  light  glare,  light  trespass,  light  spillage  and  sky               
glow  through  using  the  best  available  technology  to  minimise  light  pollution  and             
conserve   energy;  
2)There   is   no   adverse   impact   on   residential   amenity   and   the   character   of   the  
surroundings;  
3)There   is   no   adverse   impact   on   sites   of   nature   conservation   interest   and/or  
protected   and   other   vulnerable   species   and   heritage   assets;  
4)There   is   no   adverse   impact   on   landscapes   character   areas,   the   wider   countryside  
or   those   areas   where   dark   skies   are   an   important   part   of   the   nocturnal   landscape;  
5)It   does   not   have   an   adverse   impact   on   long   distance   views   or   from   vantage   points;  
6)Where   appropriate,   mitigation   measures   are   proposed.  
 
In   addition   a   lighting   strategy   may   be   required   for   major   developments   or   those  
developments   with   specific   lighting   requirements   or   for   those   that   are   in   or   adjacent   to  
sensitive   locations.  
 
A   Landscape   and   Visual   Impact   Assessment   will   be   required   for   proposed   developments  
that   fall   in   to   the   E1   category,   as   set   out   in   Table   15   Environmental   Zones.  
 
   Proposals   that   exceed   the   Institution   of   Lighting   Professionals   standards   will   not   be  
permitted.  
 
  
  
17-   Communities  
17.1Social,   cultural   and   community   facilities   are   an   integral   part   of   developing   inclusive   and  
cohesive   communities.  
 
17.2One   of   the   core   principles   of   the   National   Planning   Policy   Framework   (NPPF)   is   to   take  
account   of   and   support   local   strategies   to   support   health,   social   and   cultural   wellbeing   for   all,  
and   deliver   sufficient   community   and   cultural   facilities   to   meet   local   needs.  
 
17.3The   NPPF   also   states   that   planning   policies   and   decisions   should   plan   positively  
for   the   provision   and   use   of   shared   space,   community   facilities   and   other   local   services,  
and   to   guard   against   the   unnecessary   loss   of   such   facilities.   It   states   that   planning  
policy   should   promote   the   retention   and   development   of   local   services   and   community  
facilities   in   villages.    Further   guidance   and   advice   on   the   design   of   new   facilities   is   set  
out   in   the   Sport   England   Active   Design   guidance   as   referenced   in   paragraph   13.13.  
 
17.4The   NPPF   affords   protection   to   existing   open   space,   sports   and   recreational  
buildings   and   land   (including   playing   fields)   stating   that   they   should   not   be   built   on   unless  
the   land   is   surplus   to   requirements,   or   the   development   will   result   in   better   provision   of  
open   space   or   sports   and   recreational   provision.  
 
17.5Community   facilities   are   defined   in   this   Plan   as   local   and   village   shops,   meeting  
places,   sports   venues,   nurseries,   cultural   buildings,   public   houses,   places   of   worship,   public  
rights   of   way,   other   local   services   including   those   for   education   and   medical   purposes,  
which   enhance   the   sustainability   of   communities   and   residential   environments.   It   also  
includes,   vacant   land   that   was   last   lawfully   used   as   a   community   facility   or   previously  
occupied   by   a   building   whose   last   lawful   use   was   for   a   community   facility.  
 
17.6The   provision   of   new   facilities   can   be   important   in   promoting   sustainable  
development   by   reducing   the   need   to   travel   and   providing   a   service   for   those   who   do   not  
have   access   to   transport.  
 
17.7To   be   all   inclusive,   new   community   facilities   should   be   designed   in   accordance  
with   the   Changing   Places   specification   set   out   in   Kent   County   Council's   Kent   Adult   Social  
Services   Glossary   document   dated   October   2008   or   any   successor   document   or   as  
modified   by   legislation   or   best   practice   or   otherwise   agreed   which   complies   with   the  
Disability   Discrimination   Act.  
 
17.8Paragraph   42   of   NPPF   recognises   the   vital   role   that   high-speed   broad   band  
technologies   and   other   communication   networks   play   in   enhancing   the   provision   of   local  
community   services   and   facilities.   Local   authorities   and   other   public   sector   providers   are  
increasingly   reliant   on   digital   infrastructure   to   provide   services   and   to   interact   with   their  
customers.   It   is   therefore   becoming   increasingly   important   for   community   facilities   to   also  
have   this   access   as   this   will   safeguard   their   future   use   making   them   more   viable   and  
adaptable   for   a   range   of   uses.   This   will   enable   them   to   adapt   to   the   changing   demands  
thereby   safeguarding   their   viability   as   a   commercial   concern.   The   Council   will   expect  
proposals   for   new   community   facilities   to   include   the   provision   of   high   speed   broadband   to  
help   facilitate   the   creation   of   a   community   hub   thereby   making   the   facility   more   viable   in   the  
long   term.  
 
 
  
Policy   CM01   -   Provision   of   New   Community   Facilities  
Proposals   for   new,   or   extensions   of,   or   improvements   to   existing   community  
facilities   will   be   permitted   provided   they:  
 
1)are   of   a   scale   to   meet   the   needs   of   the   local   community   and   in   keeping   with  
the   character   of   the   area;  
2)are   provided   with   adequate   parking   and   operational   space;  
3)are   accessible   by   walking   or   cycling   to   the   local   community;  
4)are   located   within   or   adjacent   to   the   community   or   settlement   they   serve;  
5)would   not   significantly   impact   upon   the   amenity   of   neighbouring   residents;  
6)either   provide   or   have   the   ability   in   the   future,   to   make   provision   for   broadband   to  
facilitate   the   creation   of   a   community   hub   network   and   provide   flexible   business   space.  
 
Protection   of   Existing   Community   Facilities  
17.9Community   facilities   including   local   shops,   services   and   public   houses   play   a   vital  
economic   and   social   role   in   both   urban   and   rural   areas   and   their   retention   can   assist   in  
meeting   the   needs   of   the   local   community   and   reducing   the   need   to   travel.   The   Council  
recognises   that   there   is   a   risk   that   such   facilities   may   be   lost   to   more   financially   profitable  
uses,   and   that   such   facilities   are   often   difficult   to   replace.   It   is   therefore   considered   that   the  
loss   of   existing   facilities   should   be   resisted   where   they   provide   for   a   current   or   future   local  
need.  
 
17.10Such   facilities   that   are   important   to   the   community   should   be   retained   unless  
genuine   but   unsuccessful   attempts   have   been   made   to   retain   the   premises   in   a  
community   use.   To   assess   applications   for   the   change   of   use   or   redevelopment   of  
existing   community   facilities,   the   Council   will   require   a   thorough   analysis   of   the   existing  
operation   and   attempts   made   to   secure   the   future   viability   of   the   community   use.   In   all  
cases,   the   applicant   must   demonstrate   that:  
 
●the   need   for   the   existing   or   alternative   community   facilities   has   been   researched   and   that  
there   is   insufficient   viable   demand,  
●opportunities   to   support   the   facility   by   the   introduction   of   other   services   have   been   explored,  
where   the   dual   use   of   premises   for   a   number   of   community   functions   may   help   support   the  
viability   of   facilities,  
●efforts   have   been   undertaken   to   secure   the   viability   of   the   facility   through   applications   for  
grant   aid,   business   advice   and   discussions   with   community   groups,   parish   Councils,   Thanet  
District   Council,   Kent   County   Council   and   other   national   or   local   bodies   with   a   direct   interest  
in   service   provision,   and  
●the   site   has   been   actively   marketed   for   its   existing   use   and   alternative   community   uses,   at   a  
realistic   price   and   for   a   reasonable   period   of   time   of   at   least   a   year,   proportionate   to   the  
type   and   scale   of   the   facility.  
 
17.11The   following   policy   seeks   to   ensure   that   existing   community   facilities   are   protected   where  
there   is   a   need   for   them.  
 
 
 
 
 Policy   CM02   -   Protection   of   Existing   Community   Facilities  
Proposals   which   would   result   in   the   loss   of   a   community   facility    will   not   be  
permitted   unless   it   can   be   demonstrated:  
 
1)There   is   alternative   local   provision   which   is   accessible   to   the   local   community  
and   the   proposal   will   not   undermine   the   ability   of   the   community   to   meet   its  
day   to   day   needs;   or  
2)Every   reasonable   attempt   has   been   made   to   secure   an   alternative  
community   use   and   the   site   is   not   viable   for   redevelopment   to   provide  
alternative   community   facilities;   
3)Alternative   provision   of   at   least   equivalent,   or   where   possible,   improved  
community   benefit   is   provided   in   a   convenient   accessible   location   to   serve  
the   existing   community.  
 
Margate   Cemetery   Expansion  
17.12Margate   Cemetery   is   nearing   capacity   and   a   need   has   been   identified   for   its  
expansion.   A   site   of   approximately   4.2   ha   has   been   identified   to   the   east   of   the   existing  
cemetery   to   accommodate   the   additional   land   requirement.  
 
 
Policy   CM03   -   Expansion   of   Margate   Cemetery  
Land   of   approximately   1   hectare     is   allocated   and   safeguarded   for   the   expansion  
of   Margate   Cemetery   and   ancillary   uses   as   shown   on   the   Policies   Map.  
 
  
 18-   Transport  
 
Transport   Assessments   and   Travel   Plans  
18.1Development   proposals   may   need   to   be   accompanied   by   and   judged   against  
transport   assessments   or   statements   to   assess   the   impact   of   development   on   the   highway  
network   and   what   improvements   to   transport   infrastructure   may   be   needed   to   accommodate  
them.   Proposals   likely   to   have   significant   transport   implications   will   also   require   submission  
of   a   travel   plan   indicating   measures   to   improve   accessibility   and   promote   sustainable   and  
low   carbon   emission   travel,   such   as   electric   vehicle   charging   infrastructure.   Where   feasible,  
development   schemes   should   incorporate   links   to   walking   and   cycling   networks   and/or  
contribute   proportionately   to   their   extension,   rationalisation   and   improvement.   Proposals  
should   have   regard   to   the   route   networks   promoted   in   the   walking   and   cycling   strategies  
and   integrate   with   them   and   with   public   transport   routes   and   services.   Many   people   will   still  
choose   to   travel   by   car,   and   development   may   also   need   to   provide   or   contribute   to  
improvements   to   the   road   network   to   reduce   congestion   and   improve   pedestrian   movement  
and   safety.  
18.2The   Council   will   require   new   development   proposals   to   address   any   adverse  
transport   impacts.   With   larger   developments,   equivalent   to   100   dwellings   or   more,   a  
Transport   Assessment   would   usually   be   necessary.   Smaller   developments   may   only   need   a  
Transport   Statement.    However,   some   smaller   developments   may   have   a   disproportionate  
impact   on   the   network   by   reason   of   their   location;   the   nature   of   the   proposed   development;  
or   the   timing   of   the   development   relative   to   other   developments   or   the   provision   of   new  
transport   infrastructure.    The   Council,   in   conjunction   with   KCC   Highways,   will   consider   each  
proposal   on   its   own   merits   and   provide   advice   to   applicants   accordingly.  
 
Policy   TP01   -   Transport   Assessments   and   Travel   Plans  
Development   proposals   would   have   significant   transport   implications   shall   be  
supported   by   a   Transport   Assessment   and   where   applicable   a   Travel   Plan.   These  
should   show   how   multi-modal   access   travel   options   will   be   achieved,   and   how  
transport   infrastructure   needs   arising   from   the   expected   demand   will   be   provided.  
In   relation   to   other   developments,   a   Transport   Statement   will   be   required,   which  
addresses   any   transport   impacts   arising   from   the   development   and   any   mitigation  
measures   that   are   needed   to   minimise   the   identified   impact.  
 
Walking  
18.3Walking   and   cycling   generally   improve   overall   health   and   fitness   levels,   can  
reduce   the   number   of   cars   on   the   network,   reduce   congestion,   improve   air   quality   and  
save   money   for   the   individual.   Creating   active   street   frontages,   with   more   people   walking  
and   cycling,   also   reduces   crime   levels   and   can   act   as   a   catalyst   for   more   people   to  
become   active.   The   quality,   safety   and   convenience   of   access   by   foot,   bicycle   and   public  
transport   are   all   key   factors   in   encouraging   people   to   select   alternative   modes   to   the  
private   car.  
 
 
 18.4Thanet   has   a   road   network   which   largely   accommodates   footways   on   both   sides,  
not   only   in   the   main   towns   and   seaside   settlements   but   also   along   the   distributor   routes  
connecting   them.   In   the   rural   areas   the   Public   Rights   of   Way   network   offers   walkers   (and  
sometimes   horse   riders   and   cyclists)   a   good   connection   across   open   countryside   to   the  
coast,   rural   settlements   and   end   destinations,   with   some   circular   walks   offering   superb  
views   of   both   coast   and   countryside   combined.   The   Thanet   Coastal   Path   follows   the  
longest   stretch   of   chalk   coastline   in   the   country,   the   route   having   been   set   up   in   the  
1990s.   The   Viking   Coastal   Trail   is   good   for   casual   walkers,   offering   good   views   out   to   sea.  
There   are   other   signposted   walks   in   Thanet,   including   the   Turner   and   Dickens   Walk  
linking   Margate   and   Broadstairs.  
 
18.5In   2005   "Feet   First,"   a   local   walking   strategy   for   Thanet   was   published.   This  
identifies   barriers   to   walking   in   the   district   and   aims   to   promote   and   enable   walking,   for  
example   by   specifying   a   network   of   routes   for   improvements.  
 
Policy   TP02   -   Walking  
New   development   will   be   expected   to   be   designed   so   as   to   facilitate   safe   and  
convenient   movement   by   pedestrians   including   people   with   limited   mobility,   elderly  
people   and   people   with   young   children.  
 
The   Council   will   seek   to   approve   proposals   to   provide   and   enhance   safe   and  
convenient   walking   routes   including   specifically   connection   to   and   between  
public   transport   stops,   railway   stations,   town   centres,   residential   areas,   schools  
and   other   public   buildings.  
 
Cycling  
18.6Cycling   can   provide   an   alternative   to   the   private   car   for   short   trips   and   form   part   of  
longer   journeys   by   public   transport.   Popularity   of   cycling   as   a   healthy,   enjoyable,   efficient,  
pollution-free   and   cheap   means   of   transport   is   dependent   on   safe,   continuous,   direct   and  
attractive   cycleways,   together   with   facilities   for   secure   cycle   storage   at   interchange   points  
and   destinations.  
 
18.7The   Viking   Coastal   Trail   roughly   encircles   the   former   Isle   of   Thanet   providing  
connections   between   the   towns,   leisure   and   heritage   attractions.   It   forms   part   of   the  
National   Cycle   Network   and   connects   to   the   Oyster   Bay   Trail   to   Whitstable.   Other   routes  
have   designated   facilities   to   make   cycling   more   attractive,   such   as   the   shared   use  
footway/cycleways   adjacent   to   New   Haine   Road.   Provision   of   toucan   crossings   and  
facilities   such   as   cycle   parking   at   stations,   shopping   centres   and   other   key   locations,   also  
help   to   improve   the   attractiveness   and   popularity   of   cycling   in   the   district.  
 
18.8The   Council   has   published   a   Thanet   Cycling   Plan   (developed   in   association   with  
local   cycling   groups),   and,   in   conjunction   with   the   County   Council,   will   seek   provision   of   a  
network   of   cycle   routes   using   existing   routes   and   where   appropriate   extensions   to   the  
primary   route   network.   This   includes   part   of   the   Sustrans   national   cycle   network,   which  
runs   through   Thanet,   together   with   priority   links   between   residential   areas,   places   of   work,  
schools,   stations   and   town   centres.   The   Council   will   seek   every   opportunity   to   introduce  
cycle   routes   in   accordance   with   Thanet   Cycling   Plan  
 
18.9Thanet   Cycling   Plan   aims   to   establish   a   comprehensive   safe   network   of   cycle   routes  
catering   for   all   journey   purposes,   and   features   existing   and   proposed   routes.   The   Cycling  
 Plan   may   be   updated   periodically   to   reflect   the   evolving   network,   and   its   proposed   cycle  
routes   are   not   therefore   featured   in   this   document.  
 
18.10New   development   generating   travel   demand   will   be   expected   to   promote   cycling   by  
demonstrating   that   the   access   needs   of   cyclists   have   been   taken   into   account,   and   through  
provision   of   cycle   parking   and   changing   facilities.   Secure   parking   facilities   and  
changing/shower   facilities   will   encourage   use   of   cycling.   Cycle   parking   provision   will   be  
judged   against   the   standards   set   out   in   the   cycle   parking   standards   Appendix   C.  
 
Policy   TP03   -   Cycling  
The   Council   will   seek   the   provision   at   the   earliest   opportunity   of   a   network   of   cycle  
routes.   Development   that   would   prejudice   the   safety   of   existing   or   implementation  
of   proposed   cycle   routes   will   not   be   permitted.  
 
New  development  will  be  expected  to  consider  the  need  for  the  safety  of              
cyclists  and  incorporate  facilities  for  cyclists  into  the  design  of  new  and             
improved   roads,   junction   improvements   and   traffic   management   proposals.  
 
Substantial   development   generating   travel   demand   will   be   expected   to  
provide   convenient   cycle   parking   and   changing   facilities.  
 
New   residential   development   will   be   expected   to   provide   secure   facilities  
for   the   parking   and   storage   of   cycles.  
  
Bus   and   rail  
18.11Public   transport   has   a   major   part   to   play   in   the   realisation   of   a   sustainable  
lifestyle   by   reducing   car   usage   and   pollution.   Thanet   has   the   lowest   level   of   car  
ownership   in   Kent,   which   means   that   public   transport   is   vital   for   personal   mobility.   A  
good   public   transport   network   is   therefore   important   so   that   both   these   issues   are  
addressed.  
 
18.12The   Council   has   no   direct   control   over   the   provision   of   bus   and   rail   services.  
However,   in   its   planning   and   other   functions   the   Council   will   support   the   continuation   and  
improvement   of   an   effective   public   transport   service   for   both   bus   and   rail.   Developer  
contributions   will   be   used   to   facilitate   implementation   of   such   improvements.   In   addition   the  
Council   will   expect   new   developments   to   take   into   account   the   needs   of   public   transport.  
This   could   include   various   measures   such   as   designing   in   waiting   areas   or   the   provision   of  
sign   posting   and   bus   shelters.  
 
18.13Thanet   is   served   by   seven   railway   stations   and   has   direct   services   to   London,  
Canterbury,   Ashford   and   Dover.  
 
18.14In   December   2009   HS1   services   commenced   from   Ramsgate   to   London   St.  
Pancras   reducing   rail   journey   times   to   1   hour   and   16   minutes.   For   purposes   of  
comparison,   the   mainline   journey   time   to   London   Victoria   is   around   2   hours   and   to   London  
Charing   Cross   up   to   2   hours   and   30   minutes.   The   three   principal   stations   are   Ramsgate,  
Broadstairs   and   Margate   with   routes   in   three   directions:  
 
●London   via   Faversham   and   Chatham  
 ●London   via   Canterbury   and   Ashford  
●Dover   and   Folkestone   via   Sandwich  
 
Buses  
18.15Buses  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  providing  a  flexible  alternative  to  the  private                
car.  This  Plan  supports  development  that  will  facilitate  greater  use  of  and  improvement  to               
bus  services.  New  development  will  be  expected  to  provide  or  contribute  towards             
appropriate   improvements.  
 
18.16In   2000   a   Quality   Bus   Partnership   (QBP)   was   formed   between   Stagecoach,   Thanet  
District   and   Kent   County   Council   with   the   aim   of   increasing   local   bus   patronage.   The  
formation   of   the   Partnership   has   seen   investment   in   roadside   infrastructure   and   new  
vehicles   as   well   as   other   initiatives   to   improve   services,   such   as   the   high   frequency   LOOP  
and   STAR   services.   However,   there   are   still   areas   of   congestion   and   inefficiencies   on   the  
highway   network   that   prevent   the   bus   services   running   as   well   as   they   might.   The   QBP   will  
continue   to   work   to   remove   these   restrictions.  
 
18.17All  bus  routes  within  Thanet  are  supported  by  an  established  QBP  between  three              
partners  -  the  commercial  bus  operator  (Stagecoach),  Kent  County  Council  and  Thanet             
District  Council.  This  group  meets  quarterly  and  includes  attendance  by  Council  members             
from   both   Local   Authorities.  
 
18.18The   purpose   of   the   QBP   is   to   co-ordinate   all   matters   which   might   affect   bus  
operation,   including   potential   investment   opportunities,   which   could   range   from   new   bus  
stock,   localised   highway   improvements   to   compliment   bus   routes   to   new   highway  
infrastructure   associated   with   new   development   proposals.  
 
18.19The   re-development   of   the   bus   route   network   in   2004   and   the   subsequent  
support   for   bus   services   through   the   QBP   have   established   underlying   growth   in   the   bus  
network.   Whilst   the   projected   increases   in   passenger   numbers   in   future   years   appear  
less   dramatic   in   percentage   terms   they   actually   constitute   greater   absolute   growth.  
  
Policy   TP04   -   Public   Transport  
Development   proposals   will   be   expected   to   take   account   of   the   need   to   facilitate   use  
of   public   transport.   The   Council   will   seek   to   approve   proposals   consisting   of   or  
incorporating:  
 
1) improvement   of   passenger   and   waiting   facilities  
2) measures   to   improve   personal   security  
3) improved   accessibility   for   people   with   mobility   limitations  
4) bus/rail   interchange   facilities  
5) secure   cycle   storage  
 
Coach   parking  
18.20Tourism   in   Thanet   depends   to   a   large   extent   on   coach   business.   Coach   travel   is  
to   be   encouraged   as   an   acceptable   alternative   to   car   based   visitor   travel.   Dedicated   sites  
to   park   coaches   are   therefore   required.   Sites   at   Dreamland   and   Vere   Road   in  
Broadstairs   are   currently   used   for   such   purposes.   Replacement   provision   for   coach  
 parking,   displaced   by   development   at   the   Rendezvous,   Margate,   is   needed;  
 
18.21Ramsgate   has   no   designated   coach   park,   and   Broadstairs   has   limited   provision  
which   may   prove   to   be   insufficient   at   peak   times.   The   Council   will   seek   appropriate  
solutions   to   accommodate   demand   on   a   temporary   basis   until   such   time   as   a   specific   site  
may   be   justified   and   identified   through   a   review   of   potential   coach   parking   sites.  
 
Policy   TP05   -   Coach   Parking  
Land   at   Vere   Road,   Broadstairs,   as   identified   on   the   Proposals   Map   will   be   retained  
for   use   as   coach   parking   to   serve   the   tourist   trade.  
 
The   Council   will   consider   the   need   to   identify   a   site   to   accommodate   demand   for  
coach   parking   at   other   locations.  
 
Car   parking  
18.22The   availability   of   car   parking   is   a   major   influence   on   choice   of   means   of   travel.  
This   Plan   recognises   the   need   to   maintain   some   car   parking   provision,   for   example   to  
provide   choice   of   travel   to   urban   centres,   while   restricting   provision   in   new   development  
in   order   to   optimise   site   development   potential,   and   promote   sustainable   transport  
choice .  
 
18.23The   Council   will   expect   new   development   to   make   efficient   use   of   sites   and  
optimise   site   development   potential.   Accordingly   it   will   encourage   well   designed   schemes  
that   correspondingly   minimise   the   proportion   of   the   site   used   to   accommodate   the  
appropriate   level   of   car   parking.  
 
18.24It   is   anticipated   that   during   peak   periods   demand   for   off-street   car   parking   may   be  
created   by   developments   or   activities   that   encourage   large   numbers   of   visitors   to   the   area  
and   may   exceed   current   capacity.   The   Council   will   proactively   seek   and   encourage   suitable  
opportunities   and   solutions   to   manage   and   accommodate   demand   for   car   parking.  
 
Policy   TP06   -   Car   Parking  
Proposals   for   development   will   be   expected   to   make   satisfactory   provision   for   the  
parking   of   vehicles,   including   disabled   parking.   
 
Suitable   levels   of   provision   will   be   considered   in   relation   to   individual   proposals  
taking   account   of   the   type   of   development,   location,   accessibility,   availability   of  
opportunities   for   public   transport,   likely   accumulation   of   car   parking,   design  
considerations   and   having   regard   to   the   guidance   referred   to   below.     Parking  
provision   in   the   town   centr es   will   also   be   assessed   in   relation   to   the   provisions   of  
Policies   SP10   -   SP12.  
 
In   considering   the   level   of   parking   provision   in   respect   of   proposals   for   residential  
development   (use   class   C3),   the   Council   will   have   regard   to   the   guidance   provided  
in   Kent   Design   Review:   Interim   Guidance   Note   3   -   Residential   Parking    or   any  
subsequent   guidance .  
 
In   considering   the   level   of   parking   provision   in   respect   of   proposals   for   other  
 development,   the   Council   will    have   regard   to   the   indicative   guidance   in   Kent   Vehicle  
Parking   Standards   2006   (Appendix   C),    or   any   subsequent   guidance .  
 
Where   the   level   of   provision   implied   in   the   above   guidance   would   be   detrimental  
to   the   character   of   a   conservation   area   or   adversely   affect   the   setting   of   a   listed  
building   or   ancient   monument   then   a   reduced   level   of   provision   may   be   accepted.  
 
Within   the   town   centres   of   Margate,   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs   (as   defined   on   the  
Policies   Map)   new   development   proposals   will   not   be   required   or   expected   to  
provide   on   site   car   parking   spaces.   Where   feasible   such   proposals   should   consider  
measures   to   encourage   occupiers   to   make   greater   use   of   public   transport.  
 
18.25The   attractiveness   of   town   centres   for   business,   shoppers,   residents   and   tourists  
depends   amongst   other   things   on   an   adequate   level   of   car   parking   and   effective  
enforcement   of   traffic   regulations   to   prevent   illegal   parking   on   the   highway   and   on   public  
footpaths.   In   town   centres   the   objective   is   to   reduce   the   dominance   of   the   private   car   in  
favour   of   walking,   cycling   and   public   transport,   and   to   maximise   site   development  
potential.   Accordingly   the   approach   is   to   make   better   use   of   parking   facilities   that   already  
exist,   rather   than   providing   more,   and   to   apply   charging   and   enforcement   policies  
designed   to   encourage   use   of   town   centre   public   car   parks   for   short   term   parking,   and   to  
prevent   displacement   of   parking   pressures   beyond   the   immediate   town   centre   area.  
 
18.26In   district   centres   including   Birchington   and   Northdown   Road,   non-car   transport   and  
optimum   use   of   existing   public   and   on   street   provision   for   short   stay   will   be   encouraged  
through   appropriate   charges   and   enforcement.  
 
18.27Outside   the   areas   referred   to   above,   the   Council   will   monitor   the   situation,   and  
consider   appropriate   measures   and   mechanisms   to   address   any   problems   identified.  
 
Policy   TP07   -   Town   Centre   Public   Car   Parks  
In   the   town   centres   of   Margate,   Ramsgate   and   Broadstairs,   as   shown   on   the  
Policies   Map,   the   existing   level   of   off-street   public   car   parking   will   be   retained.  
Development   resulting   in   the   loss   of   space   at   such   car   parks   will   be   permitted,  
providing   the   following   criteria   are   met:  
 
1)the   proposal   includes   satisfactory   replacement   provision   as   part   of   the  
development   or   on   an   alternative   site   considered   appropriate   and   compatible  
with   the   operational   requirements   of   the   Council's   parking   service,   or  
2)exceptional   release   would   enable   provision   at   an   alternative   location   for   which  
there   is   greater   demand   and   which   is   compatible   with   the   operational  
requirements   of   the   Council's   parking   service,   or  
3)evidence   demonstrates   that   the   car   park   is   under   used   and/or   loss   of   spaces  
would   be   compatible   with   the   operational   requirements   of   the   Council's   parking  
service.  
  
Freight   and   service   delivery  
 
18.28Effective   delivery   of   goods   and   services   is   essential   to   the   health   of   Thanet's   town  
centres,   local   business   and   economic   regeneration.   Road   freight   traffic   needs   to   be  
directed   to   routes   fit   for   the   purpose.   Thanet's   business   parks,   industrial   estates   and   the  
Port   of   Ramsgate   are   directly   accessible   through   the   primary   road   network.   However,   town  
 centre   roads   are   generally   unsuited   to   accommodate   large   vehicles,   and   off-street   servicing  
facilities   are   limited.   Proposals   for   new   development   in   town   centres   will   therefore   be  
expected   to   include   adequate   off-street   servicing.   Where   feasible,   off-street   loading   areas,  
enabling   goods   to   be   delivered   to   shops   in   smaller   loads,   will   be   encouraged   in   new  
developments.  
 
Policy   TP08   -   Freight   and   service   delivery  
Wherever   capacity   exists   or   is   capable   of   being   provided,   new   development   proposals   will  
be   expected   to   demonstrate   adequate   off   street   servicing.  
 
Car   parking   at   Westwood  
18.29Due   to   its   historically   ad   hoc   pattern   of   growth,   Westwood   has   a   number   of   large,  
free   car   parks   in   locations   which   encourage   shoppers   to   drive   between   them   to   visit   its  
various   retail   stores.   As   a   multi-purpose   destination,   Westwood   is   collectively   over-provided  
with   car   parking.   The   Council   will   seek   to   encourage   non-car   travel   to   Westwood.   Within   the  
area   shown   on   the   map   below,   it   will   restrict   parking   provision,   and   encourage   developers   to  
work   with   the   Council   to   reduce   existing   parking   provision,   develop   better   access,   services  
and   facilities   for   customers   who   wish   to   walk,   cycle   or   arrive   by   public   transport.   The  
Council   will   seek   to   achieve   this   through   cooperation   with   developers   and   in   determining  
development   applications   to   extend   existing   or   build   new   commercial   development.  
 
18.30A   key   objective   of   the   Westwood   Relief   Scheme   is   to   remove   private   vehicles   from  
the   area   around   the   A256/A254   intersection   in   favour   of   a   pedestrian   friendly   public   realm  
enabling   safe   and   convenient   movement   on   foot   between   various   commercial   destinations  
and   a   smoother   flow   of   through   traffic   passing   around   the   area.   Delivery   of   the   scheme   will  
require   some   reconfiguration   of   the   road   network   and   land   use   in   the   vicinity   including  
potentially   locating   and   rationalising   car   parking   so   that   access   by   vehicle   is   from   outside  
the   pedestrian   friendly   area.  
 
18.31The   most   appropriate   way   for   this   to   be   achieved   is   through   a   Supplementary  
Planning   Document   which   sets   out   the   long-term   objectives   for   the   area   in   more   detail;  
and   identifies   particular   schemes   or   opportunities   for   bringing   this   about.   Draft   Policy   SP07  
sets   this   out   in   more   detail.  
 
Policy   TP09   -   Car   parking   provision   at   Westwood  
At   Westwood,   new   commercial   development   proposals   will   be   expected   to  
demonstrate   specific   measures   to   encourage   customers   to   arrive   at   the   site   by  
means   other   than   car.   Such   measures   could   include   restricting   total   levels   of   car  
parking   provision   and    would   be   the   subject   of   a   legal   agreement.  
 
1)Car   parking   provision   in   new   development   at   the   indicative   maximum   level   set  
out   in   the   guidance   at   Appendix   C   will   require   specific   justification.  
2)Where   new   development   is   proposed   at   sites   with   existing   car   parking   then  
shared   use   of   car   parking   will   be   expected   and   total   provision,   assessed   on  
the   basis   of   resultant   total   floor   space   of   existing   and   new   development,  
shall   not   exceed   the   maximum   levels   of   provision   referred   in   Appendix   C.  
3)Where  extensions  to  premises  are  proposed  then  no  new  car  parking            
provision  will  be  permitted.  Replacement  of  any  car  parking  lost  as  a  result              
of  such  development  will  not  be  permitted  unless  special  justification  can  be             
 demonstrated.  
4)Proposals   for   development   that   may   impact   upon   demand   for   car   parking  
will   be   considered   in   light   of   compatibility   with   the   Westwood   Relief  
Strategy.  
 
Traffic   Management  
18.32The   emerging   Transport   Strategy   identifies   a   range   of   issues   to   be   addressed,   and  
which   may   require   traffic   management   based   solutions.   Such   issues   include   the   need   to  
address   deficiencies   in   the   highway   network   or   junction   capacity   affecting   efficient   running  
of   bus   services,   causing   congestion   or   affecting   air   quality   and   the   need   to   improve  
connectivity   and   address   barriers   to   walking   and   cycling.  
 
 
Policy   TP10   -   Traffic   Management  
Development   required   to   implement   traffic   management   measures   designed   to  
realise   the   best   use   of   the   highway   network   in   terms   of   safety,   traffic   capacity   and  
environmental   conditions   will   be   approved.  
 Appendix A - Superseded Policies
 
Table 1 lists the policies that are to be replaced by the policies in Table 2 - below. The Cliftonville
 
Development Plan Document adopted in February 2010 still applies.
 
 
TABLE 1: SUPERSEDED POLICIES
 
 
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
Economic Development & Regeneration
 
EC1
 
Land Allocated for Economic
 
Development
 
yes
 
EC2
 
Kent International Airport
 
yes
 
EC3
 
Kent International - surface
 
transport issues
 
 
EC4
 
Airside Development Area
 
yes
 
EC5
 
Land at, and east of, the
 
airport terminal
 
yes
 
EC6
 
Fire Training School
 
yes
 
EC7
 
Economic Development
 
Infrastructure
 
yes
 
EC8
 
Ramsgate Waterfront
 
yes
 
EC9
 
Ramsgate New Port
 
yes
 
EC10
 
Margate Old Town and Harbour
 
yes
 
EC11
 
Business Hotels
 
 
EC12
 
Retention of Employment Sites
 
yes
 
EC13
 
Office Accommodation
 
 
EC14
 
Working from Home
 
 
Housing
 
H1
 
Residential Development Sites
 
yes
 
H2
 
Dwelling Supply
 
yes
 
H3
 
Phasing
 
yes
 
H4
 
Windfall Sites
 
yes
 
H5
 
Monitoring
 
 
H6
 
Residential Development
 
Site – Westwood
 
yes
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
H7
 
Residential Development
 
and Amenity Site – Minster
 
yes
 
H8
 
Size and Type of Housing
 
yes
 
H9
 
Better Use of Land for Housing
 
 
H10
 
Areas in Need of Special Action
 
yes
 
H11
 
Non-self contained
 
residential accommodation
 
yes
 
H12
 
Retention of existing housing stock
yes
 
H13
 
Residential Amenities
 
 
H14
 
Affordable Housing Negotiations
 
on Housing sites
 
yes
 
H15
 
Rural Local Needs Housing
 
yes
 
H16
 
New Agricultural dwellings
 
yes
 
Town Centres & Retailing
 
TC1
 
New Retail Development
 
yes
 
TC2
 
Westwood Cross Town Centre
 
 
TC3
 
Town Centre Expansion
 
 
TC4
 
Mixed Use Area
 
yes
 
TC5
 
Retail Warehouse Stores
 
 
TC6
 
Assessment of Applications
 
 
TC7
 
Margate, Ramsgate and
 
Broadstairs Core Centres
 
yes
 
TC8
 
District and Local Centres
 
yes
 
TC9
 
Hot Food Takeaways
 
yes
 
Transportation
 
TR1
 
Location of Development
 
 
TR2
 
Appropriate Use of Road
 
Hierarchy
 
 
TR3
 
Provision of Transport
 
Infrastructure
 
yes
 
TR4
 
New Road and Highway
 
Improvements
 
yes
 
TR5
 
Off-street parking in town centres
 
yes
 
TR6
 
Ramsgate Station Goods Yard
 
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
TR7
 
Roadside services
 
 
TR8
 
Rail Link Safeguarding Direction
 
yes
 
TR9
 
Ramsgate Renaissance
 
 
TR10
 
Coach Parking
 
yes
 
TR11
 
Pedestrian Movement
 
 
TR12
 
Cycling
 
yes
 
TR13
 
Public Transport Facilities
 
 
TR14
 
Provision of Facilities for
 
Sustainable Transport
 
 
TR15
 
Green Travel Plans
 
yes
 
TR16
 
Car Parking Provision
 
yes
 
TR17
 
Retention of existing Car Parking
 
yes
 
TR18
 
Car Parking at Westwood and Out
 
of Centre Locations
 
yes
 
TR19
 
Traffic Management Measures
 
 
TR20
 
Telecommunications
 
 
Design
 
D1
 
Design Principles
 
yes
 
D2
 
Landscaping
 
yes
 
D3
 
Extensions to Dwelling Houses
 
 
D4
 
Design Statements
 
 
D5
 
Advertisements
 
yes
 
D6
 
Satellite Antennae
 
 
D7
 
Areas of High Townscape Value
 
yes
 
D8
 
Seafront Architecture
 
 
D9
 
Accommodation for Elderly
 
Relatives
 
yes
 
D10
 
Agricultural Buildings
 
 
Heritage
 
HE1
 
Listed Buildings of Special
 
Architectural or Historic
 
interest
 
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
HE2
 
Change of Use of Listed Buildings
 
 
HE3
 
Listed Rural Buildings
 
 
HE4
 
Planning Controls in
 
Conservation Areas
 
 
HE5
 
Conservation Area Consent
 
 
HE6
 
Demolition in Conservation areas
 
 
HE7
 
Non-listed buildings in
 
Conservation Areas
 
 
HE8
 
Street Furniture
 
 
HE9
 
Importance of
 
Archaeological Resource
 
 
HE10
 
Scheduled Ancient Monuments
 
 
HE11
 
Archaeological Assessment
 
yes
 
HE12
 
Archaeological Sites and
 
Preservation
 
yes
 
HE13
 
Royal Sea Bathing Hospital
 
 
HE14
 
Montefiore Site
 
yes
 
Tourism
 
T1
 
Tourist Facilities
 
yes
 
T2
 
Serviced Accommodation
 
 
T3
 
Self-Catering Accommodation
 
yes
 
T4
 
Former Hoverport Site, Pegwell
 
Bay
 
yes
 
T5
 
The Lido Site
 
yes
 
T6
 
Language Schools
 
yes
 
T7
 
Amusement Uses
 
yes
 
T8
 
Dreamland
 
yes
 
T9
 
Rural Tourism
 
 
Sport & Recreation
 
SR1
 
New Facilities
 
yes
 
SR2
 
Jackey Baker's
 
yes
 
SR3
 
Maximising Use of Facilities
 
yes
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
SR4
 
Provision of New Sports Facilities
 
yes
 
SR5
 
Playspace
 
yes
 
SR6
 
Amenity Areas
 
 
SR7
 
Urban Fringe
 
yes
 
SR8
 
Formal Countryside Recreation
 
yes
 
SR9
 
Informal Countryside Recreation
 
yes
 
SR10
 
Public Open Space
 
yes
 
SR11
 
Private Open Space
 
yes
 
SR12
 
Playing Fields
 
yes
 
SR13
 
Allotments
 
yes
 
SR14
 
Community Woodland
 
yes
 
SR15
 
Golf Courses & Country Park
 
 
SR16
 
Equestrian Uses and Buildings
 
yes
 
SR17
 
Statutory Rights of Way
 
 
SR18
 
Major Holiday Beaches
 
yes
 
SR19
 
Intermediate Beaches
 
yes
 
SR20
 
Undeveloped Beaches
 
yes
 
SR21
 
Development on
 
Seafront Esplanades
 
 
Countryside & Coast
 
CC1
 
Development in the Countryside
 
(Urban and rural Confines)
 
yes
 
CC2
 
Landscape Character Areas
 
yes
 
CC3
 
Local Landscape Features
 
 
CC4
 
Island Approach Routes
 
 
CC5
 
Green Wedges
 
yes
 
CC6
 
Village Separation Corridors
 
 
CC7
 
Rural Lanes
 
yes
 
CC8
 
Power Lines
 
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
CC9
 
Best & most versatile Farmland
 
 
CC10
 
Farm Diversification
 
yes
 
CC11
 
Agriculture Related Development
 
 
CC12
 
Farm Retail Units
 
 
CC13
 
Coastal Park Initiative
 
 
CC14
 
Development Along the Coast
 
 
CC15
 
Coastal Defence Works
 
 
CC16
 
Undeveloped Coast
 
 
CC17
 
Undeveloped Clifftop Sites
 
 
Rural Settlements
 
R1
 
General Levels of Development
 
yes
 
R2
 
Village Gaps
 
yes
 
R3
 
Village Services
 
yes
 
R4
 
Village Shops
 
yes
 
R5
 
Conversion of Rural Buildings
 
 
R6
 
Traffic in the Villages
 
 
Nature Conservation
 
NC1
 
Habitats
 
 
NC2
 
Nature Reserve and SSSIs
 
 
NC3
 
Local Wildlife Sites
 
yes
 
NC4
 
Habitat Management and Creation
 
 
NC5
 
Lower Stour Valley
 
 
NC6
 
RIGS Sites
 
yes
 
Environmental Protection
 
EP1
 
Potentially Polluting Development
 
 
EP2
 
Landfill Sites
 
yes
 
EP3
 
Unstable Land
 
 
 
  
Policy
 
Number
 
Policy Name
 
Saved Policy (Under paragraph 1(3) of Schedule
 
8 to the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
 
2004)
 
EP4
 
Derelict and Contaminated Land
 
 
EP5
 
Local Air Quality Monitoring
 
yes
 
EP6
 
General Noise Control
 
 
EP7
 
Aircraft Noise
 
yes
 
EP8
 
Aircraft Noise and Residential
 
Development
 
yes
 
EP9
 
Light Pollution
 
yes
 
EP10
 
Wantsum Channel Flood Risk
 
Area
 
 
EP11
 
Margate Flood Risk Area
 
 
EP12
 
Surface Water Run-Off
 
 
EP13
 
Groundwater Protection Zones
 
yes
 
EP14
 
Renewable Energy
 
 
Community Facilities
 
CF1
 
Community Facilities
 
yes
 
CF2
 
Development Contributions
 
yes
 
CF3
 
Training Facilities
 
yes
 
CF4
 
QEQM Hospital, Margate
 
yes
 
CF5
 
Margate Cemetery
 
yes
 
CF6
 
New Education Site
 
yes
 
 
 TABLE 2: SUPERSEDING POLICIES
 
 
Policy Number
 
Policy Name
 
Strategic proposals
 
SP01
 
Implementation
 
Economic Strategy
 
SP02
 
Employment Growth
 
SP03
 
Land Allocated for Economic Development
 
SP04
 
Manston Business Park
 
Town Centre Strategy
 
SP06
 
Thanet’s Town Centres
 
SP07
 
Westwood
 
SP08
 
Margate
 
SP09
 
Ramsgate
 
SP10
 
Broadstairs
 
Housing Strategy
 
SP11
 
Housing Provision
 
SP12
 
General Housing Policy
 
SP13
 
Strategic Housing Sites – Manston Green
 
SP14
 
Strategic Housing Site at Birchington
 
SP15
 
Strategic Housing Site at Westgate on Sea
 
SP16
 
Westwood Strategic Housing
 
SP17
 
Land fronting Nash and Haine Roads
 
SP18
 
Land at Manston Court Road/Haine Road
 
SP19
 
Type and Size of Dwellings
 
SP20
 
Affordable Housing
 
Environment Strategy
 
SP21
 
Development in the Countryside
 
SP22
 
Safeguarding the Identity of Thanet’s Settlements
 
SP23
 
Landscape Character Areas
 
SP24
 
Green Infrastructure
 
SP25
 
Protection of the International and European Designated Sites
 
SP26
 
Strategic Access management and Monitoring Plan (SAMM) policy
 
SP27
 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity Assets
 
SP28
 
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas
 
SP29
 
Protection of Open Space
 
SP30
 
Local Green Space
 
SP31
 
Provision of Accessible Natural and Semi Natural Green Space, Parks, Gardens
 
and Recreation Grounds
 
SP32
 
Allotments
 
SP33
 
Quality Development
 
SP34
 
Conservation and Enhancement of Thanet's Historic Environment
 
SP35
 
Climate Change
 
Community Strategy
 
 
  
SP36
 
Healthy and Inclusive Communities
 
SP37
 
QEQM Hospital, Margate
 
SP38
 
New medical centre at Westwood
 
SP39
 
Community Infrastructure
 
SP40
 
Expansion of Primary and Secondary Schools
 
Transport Strategy
 
SP41
 
Safe and Sustainable Travel
 
SP42
 
Accessible locations
 
SP43
 
Transport Infrastructure
 
SP44
 
Connectivity
 
SP45
 
New Railway Station
 
SP46
 
Strategic Road Network
 
SP47
 
Strategic Routes
 
Economy
 
E01
 
Retention of existing employment sites
 
E02
 
Home Working
 
E03
 
Digital Infrastructure
 
Town and District Centres
 
E04
 
Primary and Secondary Frontages
 
E05
 
Sequential and Impact Test
 
E06
 
District and Local Centres
 
Tourism
 
E07
 
Serviced Tourist Accommodation
 
E08
 
Self Catering Tourist Accommodation
 
E09
 
Protection of Existing Tourist Accommodation
 
E10
 
Major Holiday Beaches
 
E11
 
Intermediate Beaches
 
E12
 
Undeveloped Beaches
 
E13
 
Language Schools
 
E14
 
Quex Park
 
The Rural Economy
 
E15
 
New build development for economic development purposes in the rural area
 
E16
 
Conversion of rural buildings for economic development purposes
 
E17
 
Farm Diversification
 
E18
 
Best and Most Versatile Agricultural Land
 
E19
 
Agricultural Related Development
 
Housing
 
HO1
 
Housing Development
 
HO2
 
Land North and South of Shottendane Road, Margate
 
HO3
 
Land on west side of Old Haine Road, Ramsgate
 
HO4
 
Land fronting Nash Road and Manston Road
 
HO6
 
Land south of Brooke Avenue Garlinge
 
HO7
 
Land at Haine Road and Spratling Street, Ramsgate
 
 
  
HO8
 
Land south of Canterbury Road East, Ramsgate
 
HO9
 
Land at Melbourne Avenue, Ramsgate
 
HO10
 
Cliftonville West and Margate central
 
HO11
 
Housing at Rural Settlements
 
HO12
 
Land at Tothill Street, Minster
 
HO13
 
Land at Manor Road, St Nicholas at Wade
 
HO14
 
Land at Walter’s Hall Farm, Monkton
 
HO15
 
Land south side of A253, Cliffsend
 
HO16
 
Land north of Cottington Rd, Cliffsend
 
HO17
 
Land south side of Cottington Rd, Cliffsend
 
HO18
 
Rural Housing Need
 
HO19
 
New agricultural dwellings
 
HO20
 
Care and Supported Housing
 
HO21
 
Non self-contained residential accommodation
 
HO22
 
Accommodation for Gypsy and Travelling Communities
 
HO23
 
Residential use of empty property
 
HO24
 
Retention of existing housing stock
 
HO25
 
Ancillary accommodation for a family member
 
HO26
 
Fostering Homes
 
Green Infrastructure
 
GI01
 
Protection of Nationally Designated Sites (SSSI) and Marine Conservation Zones
 
(MCZ)
 
GI02
 
Locally Designated Wildlife Sites
 
GI03
 
Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGS)
 
GI04
 
Amenity Green Space and Equipped Play Areas
 
GI05
 
Protection of Playing Fields and Outdoor Sports Facilities
 
GI06
 
Landscaping and Green Infrastructure
 
GI07
 
Jackey Bakers
 
Quality Development
 
QD01
 
Sustainable Design
 
QD02
 
General design principles
 
QD03
 
Living Conditions
 
QD04
 
Technical Standards
 
QD05
 
Accessible and Adaptable Accommodation
 
QD06
 
Advertisements
 
QD07
 
Telecommunications
 
Heritage
 
HE01
 
Archaeology
 
HE02
 
Development in Conservation Areas
 
HE03
 
Local Heritage Assets
 
HE04
 
Historic Parks and Gardens
 
HE05
 
Works to a heritage asset to address climate change
 
Climate Change
 
CC01
 
Fluvial and Tidal Flooding
 
 
  
CC02
 
Surface Water Management
 
CC03
 
Coastal Development
 
CC04
 
Renewable energy
 
CC05
 
District Heating
 
CC06
 
Solar Parks
 
CC07
 
Richborough
 
Safe and Healthy Environment
 
SE01
 
Potentially Polluting Development
 
SE02
 
Landfill Sites and Unstable Land
 
SE03
 
Contaminated Land
 
SE04
 
Groundwater Protection
 
SE05
 
Air Quality
 
SE06
 
Noise Pollution
 
SE07
 
Noise Action Plan Important Areas
 
SE08
 
Light Pollution
 
Communities
 
CM01
 
Provision of New Community Facilities
 
CM02
 
Protection of Existing Community Facilities
 
CM03
 
Expansion of Margate Cemetery
 
CM04
 
Expansion of Minster Cemetery
 
Transport
 
TP01
 
Transport Assessments and Travel Plans
 
TP02
 
Walking
 
TP03
 
Cycling
 
TP04
 
Public Transport
 
TP05
 
Coach Parking
 
TP06
 
Car Parking
 
TP07
 
Town Centre Public Car Parks
 
TP08
 
Freight and service delivery
 
TP09
 
Car parking provision at Westwood
 
TP10
 
Traffic Management
 
 
 APPENDIX   B    Housing   Allocations   and   Permissions  
 
Please   note   that   the   allocations   table   includes   those   sites   with   planning   permissions   for   completeness.    These   are   also   listed   in   the   permissions   table  
however,   these   sites   are   only   included   in   the   planning   permissions   calculations   therefore   there   is   no   double   counting.  
 
Site   Address  Total  
units  2019 
/20  2020 
/21  2021 
/22  2022 
/23  2023 
/24  2024 
/25  2025 
/26  2026/ 
27  2027/ 
28  2028 
/29  2029 
/30  2030/ 
31  2031/ 
32  
STRATEGIC   SITES                                            
Westgate   Policy   SP15  2000  0  25  75  100  150  200  250  250  250  250  250  200     
Birchington   Policy   SP14  1600  0  0  50  100  150  150  200  200  200  150  150  150  100  
Westwood    Policy   SP16  1450  0  0  50  150  150  150  150  150  150  150  150  100  100  
Land   At   Manston   Court   Road   /  
Haine   Road   Westwood   Village  
SP18  1400  0  50  110  120  130  140  140  140  120  150  150  150     
Manston   Green   14/0050  785  0  50  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  35  0  0     
Land   At   Manston   Road   &  
Shottendane   Road   HO2  550  0  30  90  90  90  90  90  70  0  0  0  0     
Euro   Kent   Land   At   New   Haine   Road  
11/0910  496  0  0  50  50  50  50  70  70  70  70  16  0     
Euro   Kent   Land   At    New   Haine  
Road  
  17/1485  54  0  0  10  20  24  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   Fronting   Nash   And   Haine  
Roads   SP17    Phase   5   15/0250  469  0  0  50  50  75  75  75  75  69  0  0  0     
Land   Fronting   Nash   And   Haine  
Roads   SP17    Phase   4   14/0320  204  0  50  50  50  54  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
 Land   Fronting   Nash   And   Haine  
Roads   SP17   Phase   3C   17/0726  97  0  20  30  30  17  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
NON   STRATEGIC   SITES   OUTSIDE   URBAN  
AREA                                            
Land   Off   Nash/Manston   Rds,  
Margate   HO4  250  0  20  70  70  70  20  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Westwood   Lodge,   Poorhole   Lane  
Broadstairs   15/0788  151  0  0  20  50  50  31  0  0  0  0  0  0     
  Land   At   Haine   Rd   &   Spratling   St,  
Ramsgate   HO7   16/1374  100  0  5  15  30  30  20  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   West   Of   Old   Haine   Road,  
Ramsgate   HO3  100  0  0  50  50  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   Adjacent   To   Former   Manston  
Allotments   Manston   Road  
Ramsgate  80  0  20  30  30  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   South   East   Of   Brooke   Avenue,  
Westbrook   HO6   16/0376   18/1416  43  20  23  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
South   Of   Canterbury   Rd,   Ramsgate  
HO8   16/1416  14  14  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
MIXED   USE   SITES                                             
Cottage   Car   Park,   New   Street,  
Margate  32  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  15  17  0  0  0     
Margate   Town   Centre,   (South   Of  
New   Street,   Margate)  27  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  5  10  12  0  0     
 Queen   Arms   Yard,   Margate  24  0  0  0  0  24  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
NON   STRATEGIC   URBAN   AREA   SITES                                         
Manston   Road   Industrial   Estate  
South   Site   Flambeau   Europlast   Ltd  
15/0187  120  0  0  30  60  30  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Gas   Works   Boundary   Road,   Ramsgate  96  0  0  30  50  16  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Thanet   Reach   Southern   Part   Millenium  
Way  80  0  0  20  40  20  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Lanthorne   Court   Broadstairs  56  0  0  20  36  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Former   Newington   Nursery   &   Infants  
Nursery   &   Infants    Ho9  49  0  0  20  29  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Manston   Road   Industrial   Estate   North  
Site   Adjacent   To   The    Beacon   16/1715  48  0  0  10  20  18  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   Of   Northwood   Road,   Ramsgate  45  0  0  20  25  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   Victoria   Road   &   Dane   Rd,  
Margate  35  0  0  10  15  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Haine   Farm,   Haine   Road,   Ramsgate  35  0  0  15  20  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Part   Of   Pysons   Road  26  0  0  10  16  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Highﬁeld   Road,   Ramsgate  25  0  0  10  15  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Former   Club   Union   Convalescent   Home,  
North   Of   Reading   Street   Broadstairs  24  0  0  10  14  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
 Suﬀolk   Avenue,   Westgate  23  0  0  11  12  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
R/O   Cecilia   Road,   Ramsgate  23  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  10  13  0  0  0     
Gas   Holder   Sta on,   Addington   Street  
,Margate  22  0  0  11  11  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Adjacent   To   21   Royal   Road   &   9   Townley  
Street  18  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  9  9  0  0  0     
End   Of   Seaﬁeld   Road  16  0  0  16  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   Wilderness   Hill   And   Dane   Road  14  0  0  0  14  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Ww   Mar n,   Dane   Park   Road,   Ramsgate  14  0  0  7  7  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Foreland   School,   Lanthorne   Rd,  
Lanthorne   Rd,   14  0  0  7  7  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Dane   Valley   Arms,   Dane   Valley   Road,  
Margate  13  0  0  7  6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   Waterside   Drive,   Westgate  12  0  0  0  12  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Adjacent   To   9   Minnis   Road,   Birchington  11  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  5  6  0  0  0     
10   Cliﬀ   Street,   Ramsgate  11  0  0  0  11  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Complete   Car   Sales,   Willsons   Road,  
Ramsgate  10  0  0  0  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Builders   Yard,   The   Avenue,   Margate  10  0  0  0  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
 Margate   Delivery   Oﬃce,   12-18  
Addington   Streetaddington   Street  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  10  0  0  0  0     
Ind   Units,   Marlborough   Rd,   Margate  10  0  0  5  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Gap   House   School,   1   Southcliﬀ   Parade,  
Southcliﬀ   Parade,   10  0  0  5  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Furniture   Mart,   Booth   Place,   Gro o   Hill  9  0  0  0  9  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Magnet   And   Southern,   Newington  
Road,   Ramsgate  8  0  0  0  8  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Sho endane   Farm,   Margate  8  0  0  8  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Adjacent   To   8   Chapel   Place,   Ramsgate  6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  6  0  0  0  0     
Ro   7_10   Marine   Gdns   -   5   Dwellings  6  0  0  0  0  6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
38,   38a   And   42   St   Peters   Road,  
Broadstairs  5  0  0  0  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Units   1-4   Monkton   Place   Ramsgate  5  0  0  0  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
1   Thanet   Road,   Margate  5  0  0  0  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
79-85   High   Street,   Ramsgate   See  
17/1508  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Laleham   School,   Northdown   Park   Road,  
Margate   See   14/0518  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
 Fort   Hill,   Arcadian   See   15/0532   16/1240  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
RURAL   SITES                                           
Tothill   Street   Minster   250  0  30  60  60  50  50  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Site   "A"   South   Side   Of   A253,  
Cliffsend   See   17/0152  62  0  20  20  22  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Jentex   Oil   Depot  
   Canterbury   Road   West   
Ramsgate  56  0  0  0  0  20  20  16  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   North   Of   Cottington   Rd   (West  
Of   Beech   Grove)   17/0151  41  0  15  15  11  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   South   Side   Of   Foxborough  
Lane   35  0  0  10  25  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   The   Length,   St.   Nicholas  
See   17/1342   25  0  0  5  10  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
South   Side   Cottington   Rd,   Cliffsend.   23  0  10  13  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   Walter's   Hall   Farm,  
Monkton  20  0  10  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Builders   Yard   South   Of   116-124  
Monkton   Street,   Monkton  20  0  0  10  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
Land   At   Manor   Rd,   St   Nicholas   See  
15/0770   (Residual   Figure)  10  5  5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
CLIFTONVILLE   SITES                                           
Rear   Of   59-65   Harold   Rd  9  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  9  0  0  0  0     
 Adj   To   60   Harold   Rd   And   Rear   Of   40-56  
Harold   Rd  14  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  7  7  0  0  0     
Adj   To   14   Harold   Rd  10  0  10  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
St   George's   Hotel   See   05/0018  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0     
 
 
  
 Extant   Planning   Permissions   (under   construction   and   not   started)   as   at   31 st    March   2019  
Applicati 
on  
Number  Site   Address  Total  
extant  
units  2019 
/20  2020 
/21  2021 
/22  2022 
/23  2023 
/24  2024 
/25  2025 
/26  2026 
/27  2027 
/28  2028 
/29  2029 
/30  2030 
/31  
140050  Land   East   And   West   Of,   Haine   Road,  
Manston   Green  785     50  100  100  100  100  100  100  100  35  0  0   
110910  Land   At   New   Haine   Road   (Eurokent)  
496        50  50  50  50  70  70  70  70  16     
171485  Eurokent   Land   At   New   Haine   Road  
RAMSGATE   
54        10  20  24                       
150250  Land   North   Of   Haine   Road   Broadstairs   And  
West   Of   Nash   Road    Margate   Phase   5  469        50  50  75  75  75  75  69           
140320  Land   North   Of   Haine   Road   Broadstairs   And  
West   Of   Nash   Road    Margate   Phase   4  204     50  50  50  54                       
170726  Land   North   Of   Haine   Road   Broadstairs   And  
West   Of    Nash   Road    Margate   Phase   3C  97     20  30  30  17                       
151303  St   Lawrence   College   College   Road  
Ramsgate  166     10  20  30  30  30  30  16              
150788  Westwood   Lodge   Poorhole   Lane  
Broadstairs  151        20  50  50  31                    
150187  Flambeau   Europlast   Ltd,   Manston   Road,  
Ramsgate,   Ct12   6hw  120        30  60  30                       
/03/1200  Pleasurama   Amusement   Park    Marina  
Esplanade   Ramsgate  107              20  30  30  27              
161374  St   Stephens,   Haine   Road,   Ramsgate,   100     5  15  30  30  20                    
/04/0700  Royal   Sea   Bathing   Hospital    Canterbury  
Road    Margate  91     20  30  30  11                       
/05/0018  St   Georges   Hotel   Eastern   Esplanade  
Margate  87              20  20  20  27              
100573  Former   Police   Station    Cavendish   Street  
Ramsgate  82              10  10  20  20  22           
 140518  Laleham   School   Northdown   Park   Road  
Margate  70  10  20  20  20                          
120210  Former   Allotment   Gardens   Manston   Road   
64  23  20  21                             
170152  Land   East   Of   40    Canterbury   Road   West  
Ramsgate  62     20  20  22                          
161715  Land   South   Of   Manston   Road   Adjacent   To  
The   Beacon   (Former   Car   Storage   Site)  
Manston   Road   Ramsgate  
48        10  20  18                       
181416  Land   Rear   Of   2   To   28   Kingston   Avenue  
Margate  43  20  23                                
170151  Land   North   Of   Cottington   Road   And   East   Of  
Lavender   Lane   Ramsgate   41     15  15  11                          
161522  Red   House   Farm   Manston   Court   Road  
Margate   40     10  20  10                          
151204  Land   Adjacent   And   Rear   Of   Ashbre   St  
Nicholas   At   Wade  39  1  10  10  10  8                       
160654  66   Monkton   Road   Minster   Ramsgate   35     10  10  15                          
150537  Cliffsend   Farm   Cottages    Cliffs   End   Road  
Ramsgate  31  3  10  10  8                          
171159  Westcliff   House   37a   Sea   Road   
Westgate  31        10  10  11                       
171447  Land   Adjacent   Little   Orchard   St   Nicholas   At  
Wade  30        10  10  10                       
150956  Land   Adjacent   Holy   Trinity   School   99  
Dumpton   Park   Drive   Broadstairs  28  13  15                                
171342  Land   North   East   Of   The   Length   ST  
Nicholas   At   Wade  25        5  10  10                       
161473  Land   South   Of   Briary   Close,   Margate  24        5  9  10                       
160417  Land   Between   ,   Adjoining   Manston   Green  
Industries   Ramsgate   23        5  8  10                       
 170150  Land   Adjacent   To   Oakland   Court    Cliffsend   23     10  13                             
170860  Farleys   46   -   S4   Chatham   Street    Ramsgate  23     10  4  5  4                       
171763  Manston   Court   Bungalows   5   Manston   Road  
Manston   Ramsgate  22        5  10  7                       
160003  67   -   69   Northdown   Road   Margate  21     21                                
160952  131-   137   King   Street    Ramsgate  18        14  4                          
170842  64   Edgar   Road   Margate   15  15                                   
160424  Sheridans   Cliff   Road   Broadstairs  14  14                                   
161416  Land   Adjoining   1   Chilton   Lane   And  
Canterbury   Road   East   Ramsgate  14  14                                   
170321  Court   Stairs   Country   Club    Pegwell   Road  
  Ramsgate  14     7  5  2                          
171231  Fard   Industries   Limited   237   Ramsgate  
Road  
Margate  14  14                                   
171508  81   -   85   High   Street   Ramsgate  14        7  7                          
181446PN 
06  Apollo   House   Chapel   Place   Ramsgate  14  14                                   
161752  Land   At   Haine   Lodge   Spratling   Lane  
Ramsgate   13        4  4  5                       
180459  Institute   Of   St   Anselms   Lonsdale   Court  
Hotel   51   -   61   Norfolk   Road   Margate  13     11  2                             
180790  24-   27   Marine   Terrace   Margate  13     6  7                             
160934  43   Star   Lane   Margate   12        6  6                          
 160967  Land   Adjacent   15   Southall   Close   Minster  12     2  5  5                          
171125  7   -   9   Addington   Road   Margate   12  6  6                                
171326  8-12   High   Street    Broadstairs  
12     6  6                             
171523  Land   West   Of   Hundreds   Farm   House  
Canterbury   Road   Westgate  12        12                             
130694  Bown   Of   London   1   Archway   Road   11  11                                   
160647  Shottendane   Nursing   Home,   Shottendane  
Road,   Margate  11        11                             
161289  5-6   Mansion   Street,   And   5-7   Fort   Road,  
Margate,   11        5  6                          
171216  Primark   46a   -   48   High   Street   Margate   11        5  6                          
180642  8   Beach   Avenue   Birchington  11  5  6                                
150770  Land   Rear   Of   Manor   Hall   And   Heritage  
Park   Manor   Road   St   Nicholas   At   Wade   10  5  5                                
160974  98   King   Street  
Ramsgate  10        10                             
161160  Disused   Railway   Line   College   Road  
Margate  
10  5  5                                
161290  Thornton   Bobby   Ltd   240   -   242   Northdown  
Road   Margate   10        7  3                          
180430  Land   Rear   Of   163   To   173   Pegwell   Road  
Ramsgate  10  4  6                                
180445  3-4   Chatham   Place   Ramsgate  10  10                                   
/03/0249  Land   Of   Manston   Road   Ramsgate  10  10                                   
 /03/0249  Manston   Court   Bungalows   5   Manston   Road  
Manston   Ramsgate  10  10                                   
140096  Garages   At   Kingston   Close    Ramsgate  
9  9                                   
150142  Cambay   Lodge    91   Kingsgate   Avenue  
Broadstairs  9  9                                   
170286  49   -   50   Hawley   Square   Margate  9        9                             
171691  White   Lodge   44   -   46   Madeira   Road  
Margate  9  4  4  1                             
180265  17   -   21   Warwick   Road   Margate  9  9                                   
180555  39   -   43   Sea   Road   Westgate  9        3  6                          
181480  17   Regency   Court   St   Augustines   Road  
Ramsgate  9        9                             
181503  Land   North   West   Of   Former   Seabathing  
Hospital   Canterbury   Road   Ramsgate  9     3  3  3                          
140976  2a   Park   Road    Ramsgate  
8  5     3                             
150532  Land   Adj   To   12-14   Fort   Road   Margate  8     4  4                             
161705  Garages   Adjacent   Pikes   Lane,   Sussex  
Street   Ramsgate  8     8                                
171755  6   No   Foreland   Road   Broadstairs   8     2  2  2  2                       
180518  Adams   Gas   2   Bath   Road   Margate  8        4  4                          
180608  41   -   43   Victoria   Road   Margate  8     4  4                             
181713PN 
06  Orbit   Housing   Associationfoy   House   27   -   29  
High   Street   Margate  8     8                                
 140404  Land   Adj   Clifftop   &   Redriff   North   Foreland  
Avenue  7        3  4                          
170358  Springfield   Nursing   Home   Hengist   Road  
Westgate  7        3  4                          
170792  3   Carlton   Avenue   Broadstairs   7  7                                   
171605  Land   On   The   South   Side   Of   Duke   Street  
Margate  7        7                             
180851  Redriff   Convent   North   Foreland   Avenue  
Broadstairs  7     7                                
131023  Garage   Block    34-36   St   Peters   Road  
Broadstairs  6        6                             
140847  140   King   Street    Ramsgate   
6     3  3                             
150087  139-141   High   Street    Ramsgate  
6           6                          
160377  125   Southwood   Road  
  Ramsgate   6  6                                   
170314  Land   East   Side   Of    Summer   Road  
  St   Nicholas   At   Wade  
6        3  3                          
171319  Land   At   57   59   61   63   And   67   Eaton   Road  
Margate   6           6                          
171673  45   -   49   Sea   Road   Westgate  6        3  3                          
180227  14   Cecil   Square   Margate  6  6                                   
180238  20   -   24   Harbour   Street   Ramsgate  6        6                             
100248  Cliff   Cottage    Herschell   Road    Birchington  
5           5                          
120270  Land   At   34   To   36   Bellevue   Road   And  
25-27   Bellevue   Avenue    Ramsgate  5     2  3                             
 141066  Lord   Nelson    11   Nelson   Place    Broadstairs  
5           5                          
150961  8   Westleigh   Road    Westgate   On   Sea  
  5  5                                   
160759  Land   Rear   Of   Orchard   House   17   Church  
Street   Broadstairs  5        2  3                          
161109  Land   On   The   East   Side   Of   Leicester  
Avenue   5     5                                
170941  18   Western   Esplanade   Broadstairs  5     5                                
171020  7   First   Avenue   And   2   Eastern   Esplanade  
Margate   5           5                          
171174  Seafields,   Cliff   Rd,   Birchington  5     2  3                             
180103  53   Albion   Road   Broadstairs   5        2  3                          
180757  Land   West   Of   33a   Alexandra   Road,  
Broadstairs  5        2  3                          
181203  Land   Adjacent   Brooksend   Lodge  
Canterbury   Road   Birchington  5     2  3                             
/06/0177  10-14   Vicarage   Crescent   Margate  
5           5                          
140875  31   Eastern   Esplanade    Margate  
4  4                                   
151293  Land   Rear   Of   33   Summerfield   Road  
Margate  4  2  2                                
151297  Ivor   Thomas   Amusements   Limited   100  
Grange   Road    Ramsgate  4  4                                   
160724  15a   Tothill   Street   Minster   Ramsgate   4     2  2                             
161067  22-23   Marine   Terrace    Margate  4     4                                
 170364  Margate   Royal   British   Legion   Club   Legion  
House   18   St   Johns   Road   Margate  4     4                                
170415  Winchmore   Guest   House   8   Grosvenor  
Place   Margate   4  4                                   
171008  12   Weigall   Place   Ramsgate   4        2  2                          
171305  130   Gladstone   Road   Broadstairs  4     2  2                             
180276  15   Warwick   Road   Margate  4  4                                   
180833  White   Stag   70   Monkton   Street   Monkton  4     4                                
180877    105   Grange   Road   Ramsgate   4  2  2                                
181098  135   Monkton   Road   Minster  4        4                             
181233  The   Old   Forge   High   Street   Garlinge  
Margate  4     2  2                             
110540  Land   Rear   Of   19   To   23   Harold   Road   And   9  
To   15    Albion   Road    Margate  3        3                             
120158  16   The   Vale    Broadstairs  
3     1  2                             
131013  30   Dalby   Square    Margate  
3  3                                   
140087  Garages   Adj   82-90   Chichester   Road  3  3                                   
140103  Garages   Rear   Of   5   And   7   St   Mary's   Road  
Minster    Ramsgate  3           3                          
140616  36-42   Marine   Terrace    Margate  
3  3                                   
160383  79   High   Street   Ramsgate  3        3                             
 160993  Land   Rear   Of   6   To   8   Parkwood   Close  
Broadstairs  3  1  1  1                             
161418  Yard   Rear   Of   8   Arnold   Road   Margate  3        3                             
170127  Bown   Of   London   1   Archway   Road  
Ramsgate  3  3                                   
170195  Land   Adjacent   12   To   14   Fort   Road   Margate  3     3                                
170212  5   Beach   Houses   Royal   Crescent   Margate   3  3                                   
170447  The   Yard   St   Annes   Gardens   Margate   3        3                             
170572  Green   Lawns   16   Sowell   Street    Broadstairs  3     1  2                             
171112  17   Upper   Dumpton   Park   Road   Ramsgate   3        3                             
171515  2   -   4   Arthur   Road   Margate   3  3                                   
171610  7   Westbrook   Road   Margate  3     3                                
180015  38   St   Mildreds   Rd   Westgate-On-Sea  3        3                             
180247  64   High   Street   Broadstairs  3     3                                
180587  15   -   16   Hawley   Square   Margate  3     3                                
180870  Essured   Cars   Uk   Limited   30   Albion   Road  
Broastairs  3  1  2                                
181383  2-4   Cowley   Rise   Margate  3     3                                
181545  Newington   Post   Office   85   Newington   Road  
Ramsgate  3  3                                   
 100041  10-14   Vicarage   Crescent    Margate  
2           2                          
110602  31   High   Street    Minster    Ramsgate  
2  1  1                                
120005  31   High   Street    Minster    Ramsgate  
2     2                                
120765  Land   Adjacent   30   And   32   High   Street   And   9  
Cavendish   Street    Ramsgate  2     2                                
130132  The   Acorn   Inn    6   Park   Lane    Birchington  
2              2                       
140242  Land   Rear   Of   1   To   7   Coronation   Close  
Broadstairs  2           2                          
150098  10   Effingham   Street   
Ramsgate  2           2                          
150202  1   Godwin   Road    Margate  
2     2                                
150310  Garages   To   Rear   Of   55   Newington   Road  
Ramsgate   2  2                                   
160545  101-   103   High   Street    Margate  2     2                                
160800  Hoo   Farm    147   Monkton   Road   Minster  2        2                             
161047  Land   At   Junction   Of   Sowell   Street  
Broadstairs  2     2                                
161151  7   Paragon   Ramsgate  
2  2                                   
161387  2-6   Station   Approach    Birchington  2  2                                   
161551  28   Ethelbert   Crescent   Margate   2        2                             
161716  Garage   Block   Between   108   And   110  
Clements   Road    Ramsgate  2  2                                   
 170295  Plots   5,   6   And   7   Youngs   Nursery   Arundel  
Road   Ramsgate  2  1  1                                
170305  Land   Rear   Of   Ashbre   Manor   Road   St  
Nicholas   At   Wade   Birchington  2        1  1                          
170400  46   St   Mildreds   Road   Westgate   On   Sea   2        2                             
170746  Land   Adjacent   35   Victoria   Parade  
Ramsgate   2        2                             
170892  85   Dane   Road   Margate   2     2                                
170931  Post   Office   48   High   Street   Ramsgate   2        2                             
171081  62   Princess   Margaret   Avenue   Ramsgate   2     2                                
171127  14   The   Parade   Margate  2     2                                
171291  Former   Builders   Yard   Rear   Of   28/30   High  
Street   Broadstairs   2     2                                
171713  4   Effingham   Street   Ramsgate  2     2                                
171795  Land   West   Of   Hazeldene   Ramsgate   Road  
Sarre   Birchington  2        2                             
180057  Euro   Parts   188   Northdown   Road   Margate  2     2                                
180544  Hoo   Farm   Monkton   Ramsgate  2     2                                
180676  171   Grange   Road   Ramsgate  2        2                             
180812  71   Eaton   Road   Margate  2     2                                
181025  115a   Canterbury   Road   Margate  2     2                                
 181179  2   Albert   Terrace   Margate  2     2                                
181275  Land   To   The   Side   Of   51   Holly   Lane  
Margate  2        2                             
181295  50   High   Street   Ramsgate  2        2                             
181301  52   Gordon   Road   Westwood   Margate  2     2                                
181324  E   J   Lovelt   And   Sons   20   Princes   Crescent  
Margate  2     2                                
181553  104   Northdown   Road   Margate  2     2                                
181727  Crown   And   Sceptre   The   Street   Acol  
Birchington  2  2                                   
190005  First   Steps   Nursery   25   -   29   Thanet   Road  
Margate  2        2                             
110615  19   High   Street    Margate  
1     1                                
121003  Land   Rear   Of   122    Grosvenor   Place  
Margate  1     1                                
130787  Land   Adjacent   To   39   High   Street    Minster  
Ramsgate   1        1                             
140178  Land   Between   26   And   30   Princes   Gardens  
Margate  1  1                                   
140241  Land   Adjacent    4   Oakdene   Road  
Ramsgate  1        1                             
140698  4   Bellevue   Road    Ramsgate  
1     1                                
140837  1   Knights   Avenue    Broadstairs   
1  1                                   
140880  Rear   Of   37    Palm   Bay   Avenue    Margate  
1  1                                   
 140934  Land   Rear   Of   31   Royal   Road    Ramsgate  
1        1                             
150348  42   Chatham   Street    Ramsgate  
1     1                                
150431  Land   Adjacent   To   34   St   Mildred’s   Avenue,  
Ramsgate   1     1                                
150809  9   Western   Esplanade    Broadstairs  1  1                                   
160066  144   Grange   Road   Ramsgate  
1        1                             
160140  47   Albert   Road    Ramsgate  1  1                                   
160171  Land   Rear   Of   1a   Minster   Road    Ramsgate  1        1                             
160194  6   Albion   Place   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
160284  Kingsgate   Newsagents   Parwood   George  
Hill   Road    Broadstairs  1     1                                
160300  Land   Adjacent   2   Shaftsbury   Street  
Ramsgate  1        1                             
160315  171   Westwood   Road   Broadstairs   1     1                                
160465  39a   High   Street    Ramsgate  1     1                                
160512  Land   Rear   Of   25   To   27   Buckingham   Road  
Margate  1  1                                   
160517  Land   Rear   Of   18   Saxon   Road    Westgate  1        1                             
160536  7   Grange   Road    Broadstairs  1     1                                
160568  58   Park   Road  
  Ramsgate  1  1                                   
 160611  36   Grange   Road    Ramsgate  1        1                             
160638  Land   Adjacent   2   Linden   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
160718  Cliff   Cottage   Coastguard   Cottages   Pegwell  
Road   Ramsgate  1        1                             
160746  5   Ramsgate   Road   Broadstairs  1     1                                
160837  9   Augusta   Road    Ramsgate  1  1                                   
161020  
1   Dellside   Wayborough   Hill   Minster   1     1                                
161091  1   Booth   Place    Margate  1     1                                
161102  Land   Rear   Of   13   And   15   Albion   Street  
Broadstairs  1        1                             
161105  Land   Rear   Of   24   Devon   Gardens   1     1                                
161209  31   Grosvenor   Place   Margate  1     1                                
161232  Mizuri   Norman   Road   Broadstairs  1  1                                   
161241  41   Crescent   Road    Ramsgate  1     1                                
161299  10   Sparrow   Castle,   Margate  1  1                                   
161322  15   -   16   The   Broadway   Broadstairs  1     1                                
161354  40   Canterbury   Road   West    Ramsgate  1     1                                
161361  7   Arthur   Road    Margate  1     1                                
 161403  59   Camden   Road    Broadstairs  1        1                             
161407  Post   Office   22-23   Cecil   Square    Margate  1     1                                
161471  17   Parsonage   Fields   Monkton  1     1                                
161517  Barn   Owls   Preston   Road   Ramsgate  1        1                             
161628  Land   Adjacent   84   Tivoli   Road   Margate  1        1                             
161641  Land   Adjacent   34   Brooke   Avenue   Margate   1     1                                
161648  11   Northdown   Road    Broadstairs  1  1                                   
161650  Land   Adjacent   To   11   Northdown   Road  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
161681  Building   Adjacent   To   Sheriffs   Court   Farm   
Sheriffs   Court   Lane    Minster  1     1                                
170253  42   Crescent   Road   Birchington   1     1                                
170257  Land   Adjacent   Wild   Thyme,    Bramwell  
Court  
  Minster    Ramsgate  
1     1                                
170303  9   Augusta   Road   Ramsgate   1  1                                   
170617  6   Shakespeare   Passage   Margate  
1  1                                   
170621  5   Clifton   Gardens   Margate   1     1                                
170715  16/16a   Cuthbert   Road   Westgate   On   Sea   1        1                             
170903  124   High   Street   Ramsgate   1        1                             
 170916  Garages   Between   22   And   26   Nash   Court  
Gardens   Margate  1  1                                   
170991  160a   Northdown   Road   Margate   1     1                                
171005  Land   Adjacent   4   Victoria   Road   Margate   1     1                                
171026  Public   Conveniences   Westbrook  
Promenade   Margate   1        1                             
171047  The   Forge   Bedlam   Court   Lane   Minster  
Ramsgate  1        1                             
171054  Land   Adjacent   7   Southwood   Gardens  
Ramsgate   1        1                             
171065  Land   Rear   Of   154   Grange   Road   Ramsgate   1  1                                   
171079  83   Sea   Road   Westgate   On   Sea   1        1                             
171090  27   Elm   Grove   Westgate   On   Sea   1        1                             
171257  61   Norfolk   Road   Margate   1     1                                
171271  Emmanuel   Church   Victoria   Road   Margate  1     1                                
171313  1   Ethel   Road    Broadstairs  1     1                                
171359  Homebasics   25   -   27   Queen   Street  
Ramsgate  1        1                             
171366  156   King   Street   Ramsgate  1     1                                
171554  21   The   Retreat    Ramsgate  1     1                                
171599  2a   Park   Road   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
 171664  Stone   Cottage   Haine   Road   Ramsgate   1        1                             
171670  Land   Adjacent   89    St   Johns   Avenue  
Ramsgate   
1     1                                
171699  146   Northdown   Road   Margate  1        1                             
171703  Lagny   Plumstone   Road   Acol   Birchington  1  1                                   
171772  145   Canterbury   Road   Margate  1  1                                   
171779  3   Royal   Esplanade   Margate   1  1                                   
171799  Thanet   Press    Margate   1     1                                
180001  Land   Side   Of   Bayview   Windsor   Rd  
Ramsgate  1     1                                
180011  King   Edward   Vii    Dane   Valley   Road  
Margate  1     1                                
180013  Land   East   Of   The   Granary   Upper   Hale  
Court   Canterbury   Road   St   Nicholas   At  
Wade  1        1                             
180061  Land   Adjacent   To   Albion   Road   Neame  
Road   Birchington  1     1                                
180082  Land   Adj   49   Manston   Rd   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180150  38   Rockstone   Way   Ramsgate  1        1                             
180167  Building   1    Bartletts   Farm   Cottage   Potten  
Street   ST   Nicholas   At   Wade  1  1                                   
180212  17   Victoria   Avenue   Westgate  1        1                             
180303  Land   Adjacent   To   Sub   Station   Effingham  
Stret   Ramsgate  1        1                             
 180317  Land   Rear   Of   10   Freemans   Road  
Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180335  Land   On   The   South   West   Side   Of  
Northdown   Road   Broadstairs   1     1                                
180338  Land   Adjacent   40   Canterbury   Road    West  
Ramsgate  1     1                                
180341  Land   Adjacent   To   59   Princess   Margaret  
Avenue   Ramsgate  1        1                             
180347  12   St   Johns   Crescent   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180388  Garages   Rear   Of   28   Augusta   Road  
Ramsgate  1     1                                
180449  Land   Adjacent   5   Westover   Rd   Broadstairs  1     1                                
180490  45   Ellington   Road   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180499  (Plot   13)   Land   Adjacent   To   Clifftop   North  
Foreland   Avenue   Broadstairs  1     1                                
180526  Land   Adjacent   To   47   Whitehall   Road  
Ramsgate  1        1                             
180548  3   Gallwey   Avenue   Brichington  1     1                                
180570  18   St   Mildreds   Road   Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180574  Morgans   46   High   Street   Margate  1        1                             
180576  Land   To   The   Side   Of   Mill   Haven   Mill   Row  
Birchington  1        1                             
180584  182   High   Street   Margate  1  1                                   
180605  58   Tothill   Street   Minster  1        1                             
 180610  Wellington   Cottage   Down   Barton   Road   St  
Nicholas   At   Wade  1     1                                
180628  21   Stone   Road   Broadstairs  1  1                                   
180672  Stable   Block   Adjacent   To   Dellside  
Wayborough   Hill   Minster  1        1                             
180694  Garage   Block   Dundonald   Road    Ramsgate  1  1                                   
180783  Land   Rear   Of   Walters   Hall   Oast   Monkton  
Street   Monkton  1  1                                   
180796  12   -   14   Garfield   Road   Margate  1     1                                
180806  Plot   9   Land   Adjacent   To   Clifftop   North  
Foreland   Avenue   Broadstairs  1     1                                
180829  Jims   Garage   Services   10   Clifton   Place  
Margate  1  1                                   
180834  Cliftonville   Court   Edgar   Road   Margate  1  1                                   
180837  85   Gladstone   Road   Broadstairs  1  1                                   
180850  38   Belgrave   Road   Margate  1     1                                
180856  Ivy   Cottage   The   Pathway   Broadstairs  1     1                                
180884  Land   Rear   Of   7   Kingsgate   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
180890  Land   Adjacent   1   Dellside   Wayborough   Hill  
Minster  1        1                             
180938  Land   Adjacent   51   Carlton   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1  1                                   
180941  32   Sea   View   Road   Broadstairs  1     1                                
 181074  Land   Rear   Of   35   Nelson   Place   Broadstairs  1     1                                
181099  Land   Adjacent   To   11   Manston   Road  
Ramsgate  1     1                                
181145  1   -   3   Alma   Road   Ramsgate  1     1                                
181254  Plot   12   Land   Adjacent   To   Clifftop   And  
Surrounding   Redriff   North   Foreland   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
181280  Plot   2   Land   Adjacent   To   Clifftop   And  
Surrounding   Redriff   North   Foreland   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
181331  Kreative   Kutz   43a   High   Street   St   Peters  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
181365  20   Queens   Avenue   Birchington  1     1                                
181373  Public   Conveniences   Viking   Bay   Harbour  
Street   Broadstairs  1  1                                   
181417  Plot   11   Land   Adjacent   To   Clifftop   And  
Surrounding   Redriff   North   Foreland   Avenue  
Broadstairs  1     1                                
181421  Land   Adjacent   2   Park   Place   Margate  1        1                             
181468  Land   Adjacent   25   Upper   Dane   Road  
Margate  1     1                                
181554  22   St   Mildreds   Road   Ramsgate  1        1                             
181631  68   King   Street   Margate  1     1                                
181647  Land   Rear   Of   2   Eaton   Road   Margate  1     1                                
181750  14   Welsdene   Road   Margate  1        1                             
 /05/0158  The   Forge    The   Length   St   Nicholas   At  
Wade  1        1                             
181127PN 
11  8   College   Road    Margate  1     1                                
190040PN 
06  44   -   46   Queen   Street   Ramsgate  1        1                             
150185  62   High   Street    Minster    Ramsgate  
0                                      
150699  145   Canterbury   Road  
  Margate   
 0     0                                
151335  Thalasa    Cliff   Road    Birchington  
0  0                                   
160340  (Land   Adj   To)   62   Princess   Margaret   Avenue   
Ramsgate   0                                      
161240  Land   Adjacent   12   To   14   Fort   Road    Margate  0                                      
161295  102   Park   Avenue    Broadstairs  0     0                                
170223  4   St   James   Avenue   Ramsgate   0     0                                
180098  Cedarholme   Epple   Bay   Avenue   Birchington   0  0                                   
180176  Seafields   Cliff   Road   Birchington  0        0                             
180293  Ashmount   Lower   Northdown   Avenue  
Margate  0     0                                
180360  10   Domneva   Road   Westgate   On   Sea   0  0                                   
181089  137   Monkton   Road   Minster  0        0                             
181604  7a   High   Street   Minster  0        0                             
 181675  Yelton   Second   Avenue   Broadstairs  0                                      
161638  18   Artillery   Road    Ramsgate  -1  -1                                   
170270  32   Ramsgate   Road   Margate   -1  -1                                   
170339  43   Alpha   Road   Birchington   -1     -1                                
170403  46   Hereson   Road   Ramsgate   -1     -1                                
170433  60   St   Peters   Road   Margate   -1     -1                                
170973  3   Augusta   Road   Ramsgate   -1  -1                                   
180005  St   Peters   Prestbytery   117   Canterbury   Road  
Westgate   On   Sea   -1        -1                             
180687  2   Emptage   Court   Dane   Hill   Margate  -1  -1                                   
180961  11   Canterbury   Road   Margate  -1     -1                                
181215  91   Norfolk   Road   Margate  -1  -1                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C - Parking Standards
 
Guidance on car parking provision (indicative maximum provision)
 
 
Retail
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Food retail up to 1,000m2
 
1 per 18m2 (includes staff parking)
 
Food retail over 1,000m2
 
1 per 14 m2 (includes staff parking)
 
Non food retail
 
1 per 25m2 (includes staff parking)
 
Financial and
 
Professional services
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
 
1 per 20m2 (includes staff parking)
 
Restaurants & cafes
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Restaurants
 
1 per 6m2 plus 1 per two staff
 
Transport cafes
 
1 per 15m2 plus 1 per two staff
 
Drinking establishments
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
 
1 per 10m2 plus 1 space per two staff
 
Hot food takeaways
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
 
1 per 8m2 plus 1 space per two staff
 
Business
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Offices up to 500m2
 
1 per 20m2
 
Offices 501m2 to 2,500m2
 
1 per 25m2
 
Offices over 2,500m2
 
1 per 30m2
 
High tech/Research/Industrial
 
1 per 35m2
 
General industrial
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Up to 200m2
 
3 spaces
 
Over 200m2
 
1 per 50m2
 
Storage & distribution
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Storage & Distribution
 
1 per 110m2
 
Wholesale Trade Distribution
 
1 per 35m2
 
Hotels
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Hotels, motels, boarding &
 
guest houses
 
1 per bedroom plus 1 per two staff
 
Other
 
1 per unit/pitch plus 1 per three units of
 
five person capacity or greater plus 1 per
 
two staff
 
Residential Institutions
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Nursing homes/residential
 
care homes
 
1 per six beds or residents plus 1 per
 
resident staff plus 1 per two other staff
 
Hospitals & Hospices
 
2 per three beds plus 1 per two staff
 
Residential schools,
 
colleges or training centres
 
1 per fifteen residents plus 1 per resident
 
staff plus 1 per two other staff
 
Non residential institutions
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Primary & secondary schools
 
1 per staff plus 10%
 
Further & higher education
 
1 per seven students plus 1 per staff
 
Libraries/art
 
galleries/museums/public
 
exhibition hall
 
1 per 60m2
 
Places of worship
 
1 per five seats
 Medical
 
centres/clinics/surgeries
 
(including veterinary surgeries)
 
4 per consulting room/treatment room
 
plus 1 per two staff
 
nurseries/crèches &
 
playschools
 
1 per 4 children plus 1 space per two
 
staff
 
Day care centres
 
1 per four attendees plus 1 per two staff
 
Law courts
 
6 per courtroom plus 1 per two staff
 
Assembly & Leisure
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Cinemas, concert halls,
 
conference centres, bingo
 
halls
 
1 per five seats
 
Social clubs, discotheques,
 
dance halls, ballrooms
 
1 per 22m2
 
Multi-activity sports & leisure
 
centres, swimming pools,
 
ice rinks, health & fitness
 
centres, gymnasia
 
 
1 per 22m2 plus 1 per fifteen seats
 
where appropriate
 
Marinas & other boating
 
facilities
 
1 per mooring or berth
 
Stadia
 
1 per 15 seats
 
Bowling greens/centres/alleys,
 
snooker halls, tennis/squash,
 
badminton clubs
 
3 per lane/court table plus 1 per
 
fifteen spectator seats where
 
applicable
 
Outdoor sports facilities,
 
playing fields
 
1 per two participants plus 1 per fifteen
 
spectators
 
Golf courses & driving ranges
 
3 per hole/bay
 
Equestrian centres, riding
 
stables
 
1 per stable
 
Historic house & gardens,
 
country parks
 
1 per 400 visitors
 
Theme parks/leisure parks
 
1 per two hundred visitors per annum
 
Other
 
1 per 22m2
 
Other
 
Indicative maximum spaces
 
Car sales
 
1 per 50m2 plus 1 per two staff
 
Petrol filling stations
 
1 per 20m2
 
Night clubs/casinos
 
1 per 22m2
 
Theatres
 
1 per 5 seats
 
Retail warehouse clubs
 
1 per 25m2
 
Amusement arcades
 
1 per 22m2
 
Residential hostels
 
1 per six residents plus 1 per resident
 
staff and 1 per two other staff
 
Vehicle servicing and repair
 
4 per service bay plus 1 per 2 staff
 
Taxi, vehicle hire, coach & bus
 
depots
 
1 per four registered vehicles plus 1 per
 
two staff
 
Open commercial use (e.g.
 
scrap yards, recycling centres)
 
To be assessed individually plus 1 space
 
per two staff
 
 
Guidance on cycle parking provision
 
 
Retail
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 Up to 1,000m2
 
1 per 200m2 customer & 1 per 200m2
 
employees
 
Up to 5000m2
 
1 per 400m2 customer & 1 per 400m2
 
employees
 
Over 5000m2
 
1 per 2500m2 customer & 1 per 2500m2
 
employees
 
Financial and
 
Professional services
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 1000m2 customer & 1 per 200m2
 
employees
 
Restaurants & cafes
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 10 seats customers & 1 per 20
 
seats employees
 
Drinking
 
establishment
s
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 10 seats customers & 1 per 20
 
seats employees
 
Hot food takeaways
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 10 seats customers & 1 per 20
 
seats employees
 
Business
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 200m2 employees & 1 per 1000m2
 
visitors
 
General industrial
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 200m2 employees & 1 per 1000m2
 
visitors
 
Storage & distribution
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 200m2 employees & 1 per 1000m2
 
visitors
 
Hotels
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
 
1 per 10 bed spaces
 
Residential
 
Institutions
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
Residential
 
institutions &
 
hospitals
 
1 per 10 bed spaces
 
Residential
 
schools,
colleges
 
 
and
training
 
 
centres
 
 
1 per 5 students.
 
Dwellings
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
​
1 per
 
dwelling
 
Individual residential
 
dwellings
 
1 per bedroom
 
Flats & maisonettes
 
1 per unit
 
Sheltered
 
accommodation
 
1 space per 5 units
 
Non
 
residential
 
institutions
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 Primary schools
 
1 per 50 pupils
 
Secondary schools and
 
further & higher
 
education
 
1 per 5 pupils/students
 
Medical
 
centres/surgeries
 
1 per two consulting/treatment rooms
 
Other (including
 
libraries and places of
 
worship)
 
1 per 50 seats or 100m2
 
 
 
Assembly & Leisure
 
Provision (cycle parking spaces)
 
Leisure and
 
entertainment venues
 
1 per 300 seats customers & 1 per 300
 
seats employees
 
Sports facilities
 
1 per 10 participants plus 10% plus 1 per 10
 
staff
 
 
 Appendix D - Glossary
 
Affordable housing: 
​
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to
 
eligible households whose needs are not met by the market.
 
Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private registered providers (as defined in
 
section 80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline target rents are
 
determined through the national rent regime. It may also be owned by other persons and provided
 
under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the
 
Homes and Communities Agency.
 
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered providers of social housing
 
to households who are eligible for social rented housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls
 
that require a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, where
 
applicable).
 
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social rent, but below
 
market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable Housing definition above. These can include
 
shared equity (shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate
 
rent, but not affordable rented housing.
 
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable housing, such as “low cost market”
 
housing, may not be considered as affordable housing for planning purposes.
 
 
Air Quality Management Areas: 
​
Areas designated by local authorities because they are not likely
 
to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant deadlines.
 
 
Article 4 direction: 
​
A direction which withdraws automatic planning permission granted by the
 
General Permitted Development Order.
 
 
Best and most versatile agricultural land: 
​
Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land
 
Classification.
 
 
Birds and Habitats Directives: 
​
European Directives to conserve natural habitats and wild fauna
 
and flora.
 
 
Climate change adaptation: 
​
Adjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or
 
expected climatic factors or their effects, including from changes in rainfall and rising temperatures,
 
which moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities.
 
 
Climate change mitigation: 
​
Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system,
 
primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions
 
 
Coastal Change Management Area: 
​
An area identified in Local Plans as likely to be affected by
 
coastal change (physical change to the shoreline through erosion, coastal landslip, permanent
 
inundation or coastal accretion).
 
 
Community Infrastructure Levy: 
​
A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or
 
developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area.
 
 
Community Right to Build Order: 
​
An Order made by the local planning authority (under the
 
Town and Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a site-specific
 
development proposal or classes of development.
 
 
Core Strategy: 
​
The Council produced a consultation document for a Core Strategy in 2009. The
 
Core Strategy was a high level document containing strategic policies. The Council is now
 
producing a local plan which will include strategic level policies, site allocations and development
 
management policies.
 Decentralised energy: 
​
Local renewable energy and local low-carbon energy usually but not
 
always on a relatively small scale encompassing a diverse range of technologies.
 
 
Designated heritage asset: 
​
A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building,
 
Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or Conservation Area
 
designated under the relevant legislation.
 
 
Development Management: 
​
Development Management is the process by which planning
 
applications are determined.
 
 
Development Plan: 
​
This includes adopted Local Plans and neighbourhood plans and is defined in
 
Section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
 
 
DPD: 
​
Development Plan Document. These are policy documents on a specific topic that make up
 
part of the Development Plan. The Cliftonville Development Plan Document was adopted by the
 
Council in February 2010.
 
 
Economic development: 
​
Development, including those within the B Use Classes, public and
 
community uses and main town centre uses (but excluding housing development).
 
 
Ecological networks: 
​
These link sites of biodiversity importance.
 
 
Ecosystem services: 
​
The benefits people obtain from ecosystems such as, food, water, flood and
 
disease control and recreation.
 
 
Edge of centre: 
​
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres of the
 
primary shopping area. For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300 metres of a town
 
centre boundary. For office development, this includes locations outside the town centre but within
 
500 metres of a public transport interchange. In determining whether a site falls within the definition
 
of edge of centre, account should be taken of local c circumstances.
 
 
EEA: 
​
Economic and Employment Assessment.
 
 
ELR: 
​
Employment Land Review.
 
 
European site: 
​
This includes candidate Special Areas of Conservation, Sites of Community
 
Importance, Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas, and is defined in
 
regulation 8 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010.
 
 
Geodiversity: 
​
The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms.
 
 
Green infrastructure: 
​
A network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural, which is
 
capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local
 
communities.
 
 
GTAA: 
​
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment. An assessment of the future need for
 
accommodation for the gypsy and traveller community.
 
 
Heritage asset: 
​
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree
 
of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest.
 
Heritage asset includes designated heritage assets and assets identified by the local planning
 
authority (including local listing).
 
 
Historic environment: 
​
All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between
 
people and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past human activity,
 
whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flora.
 HMOs
​
: Houses in Multiple in Occupation: Housing which is occupied by 3 or more unrelated
 
individuals sharing basic amenities.
 
 
HRA: 
​
Habitats Regulations Assessment. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
 
2010 transposes EU Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats of wild flora and
 
fauna into UK national law. The Regulations provide for the designation and protection of
 
'European sites', the protection of 'European protected species', and the adaptation of planning
 
and other controls for the protection of European Sites. Assessments for significant effects on
 
habitats must be carried out and mitigation measure identified.
 
 
International, national and locally designated sites of importance for biodiversity: 
​
All
 
international sites (Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection Areas, and Ramsar sites),
 
national sites (Sites of Special Scientific Interest) and locally designated sites including Local
 
Wildlife Sites.
 
 
Local Enterprise Partnership: 
​
A body, designated by the Secretary of State for Communities and
 
Local Government, established for the purpose of creating or improving the conditions for
 
economic growth in an area.
 
 
Local Plan: 
​
The plan for the future development of the local area, drawn up by the local planning
 
authorities in consultation with the community. In law this is described as the development plan
 
documents adopted under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
 
 
Localism Act: 
​
The Localism Act was introduced in 2011. Its aim was to devolve powers from
 
central government into the hands of individuals, communities and councils.
 
 
Main town centre uses: 
​
Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet
 
centres); leisure, entertainment facilities the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including
 
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and
 
fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism
 
development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference
 
facilities).
 
 
National Planning Policy Framework. National planning policy (NPPF): 
​
This is the
 
Government’s statement of planning policy with which all Local Plan’s must be in conformity.
 
Where a local plan is silent on an issue planning decisions will be made in accordance with
 
national policy. This document came into force in March 2012 and replaces the planning policy
 
statements and planning policy guidance notes (PPS’ and PPGs).
 
 
Neighbourhood plans: 
​
A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a
 
particular neighbourhood area (made under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004).
 
 
Older
people:
​
People
over
retirement
age,
including
the
active,
newly-retired
through
to
the
very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frail
elderly,
whose
housing
needs
can
encompass
accessible,
adaptable
general
needs
housing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for
those
looking
to
downsize
from
family
housing
and
the
full
range
of
retirement
and
specialised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
housing for those with support or care needs.
 
 
Open
space:
​
All
open
space
of
public
value,
including
not
just
land,
but
also
areas
of
water
(such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as
rivers,
canals,
lakes
and
reservoirs)
which
offer
important
opportunities
for
sport
and
recreation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and can act as a visual amenity.
 
 
Out of centre: 
​
A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily outside the
 
urban area.
 
 
Out of town: 
​
A location out of centre that is outside the existing urban area.
 
 People with disabilities: 
​
People have a disability if they have a physical or mental impairment,
 
and that impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on their ability to carry out
 
normal day-to-day activities. These persons include, but are not limited to, people with ambulatory
 
difficulties, blindness, learning difficulties, autism and mental health needs.
 
 
Plan Period: 
​
The plan period we are working on is 2011-2031.
 
 
Planning condition: 
​
A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission (in accordance with
 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) or a condition included in a Local Development Order or
 
Neighbourhood Development Order.
 
 
Planning obligation: 
​
A legally enforceable obligation entered into under section 106 of the Town
 
and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts of a development proposal.
 
 
Playing field: 
​
The whole of a site which encompasses at least one playing pitch as defined in the
 
Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2010.
 
 
Pollution: 
​
Anything that affects the quality of land, air, water or soils, which might lead to an
 
adverse impact on human health, the natural environment or general amenity. Pollution can arise
 
from a range of emissions, including smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, odour, noise and light.
 
 
Previously developed land: 
​
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including
 
the curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the whole of the
 
curtilage should be developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land
 
that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for
 
minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been
 
made through development control procedures; land in built-up areas such as private residential
 
gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land that was previously-developed but
 
where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the
 
landscape in the process of time.
 
 
Primary shopping area: 
​
Defined area where retail development is concentrated (generally
 
comprising the primary and those secondary frontages which are adjoining and closely related to
 
the primary shopping frontage).
 
 
Primary and secondary frontages: 
​
Primary frontages are likely to include a high proportion of
 
retail uses which may include food, drinks, clothing and household goods. Secondary frontages
 
provide greater opportunities for a diversity of uses such as restaurants, cinemas and businesses.
 
 
Priority
habitats
and
species:
​
Species
and
Habitats
of
Principle
Importance
included
in
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
England
Biodiversity
List
published
by
the
Secretary
of
State
under
section
41
of
the
Natural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006.
 
 
PSZ: 
​
Public Safety Zone. The Civil Aviation Authority is responsible for these zones. The policy
 
objective is the restriction of development near civil airports and no increase in the number of
 
people living, working or congregating in these zones.
 
 
Ramsar sites: 
​
Wetlands of international importance, designated under the 1971 Ramsar
 
Convention.
 
 
Regional
Spatial
Strategy:
​
The
Regional
Spatial
Strategy
for
the
South
East
is
the
South
East
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plan
adopted
in
2009.
This
was
produced
by
the
South
East
England
Regional
Assembly
which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
later
became
the
South
East
England
Regional
Planning
Body.
This
organisation
and
the
South
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
East Plan have been revoked under the Localism Act 2011.
 
 Renewable and low carbon energy: 
​
Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as
 
generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those energy flows that occur naturally and
 
repeatedly
in
the
environment
–
from
the
wind,
the
fall
of
water,
the
movement
of
the
oceans,
from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the
sun
and
also
from
biomass
and
deep
geothermal
heat.
Low
carbon
technologies
are
those
that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can help reduce emissions (compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).
 
 
Rural exception sites: 
​
Small sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not
 
normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local
 
community by accommodating households who are either current residents or have an existing
 
family or employment connection. Small numbers of market homes may be allowed at the local
 
authority’s discretion, for example where essential to enable the delivery of affordable units without
 
grant funding.
 
 
Saved policies: 
​
Policies from the Thanet Local Plan 2006 that are still in place and form part of
 
the Development Plan for Thanet, currently used for determining planning applications.
 
SCI: 
​
Statement of Community Involvement.
 
 
Shoreline Management Plans: 
​
A plan providing a large-scale assessment of the risk to people
 
and to the developed, historic and natural environment associated with coastal processes.
 
 
SHLAA: 
​
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment providing information to assess and
 
allocate the best sites for new homes.
 
 
SHMA: 
​
Strategic Housing Market Assessment.
 
 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI): 
​
Sites designated by Natural England under the Wildlife
 
and Countryside Act 1981.
 
 
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC): 
​
Areas given special protection under the European
 
Union’s Habitats Directive, which is transposed into UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of
 
Species Regulations 2010.
 
 
Special Protection Areas (SPA): 
​
Areas which have been identified as being of international
 
importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of
 
birds found within European Union countries. They are European designated sites, classified under
 
the Birds Directive.
 
 
Stepping stones: 
​
Pockets of habitat that, while not necessarily connected, facilitate the movement
 
of species across otherwise inhospitable landscapes.
 
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) and Sustainability Appraisal (SA): 
​
A procedure
 
(set out in the Environmental Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004) which
 
requires the formal environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes which are likely to
 
have significant environmental effects. The SA broadens this out to assess the economic, social
 
and environmental effects.
 
 
Sui Generis: 
​
Certain uses do not fall within any use class and are considered 'sui generis'. Such
 
uses include: betting offices/shops, pay day loan shops, theatres, larger houses in multiple
 
occupation, hostels providing no significant element of care, scrap yards. Petrol filling stations and
 
shops selling and/or displaying motor vehicles. Retail warehouse clubs, nightclubs, launderettes,
 
taxi businesses and casinos.
 
 
Supplementary planning documents: 
​
Documents which add further detail to the policies in the
 
Local Plan. They can be used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites, or on
 
particular issues, such as design. Supplementary planning documents are capable of being a
 material consideration in planning decisions but are not part of the development plan.
 
 
Sustainable
transport
modes:
​
Any
efficient,
safe
and
accessible
means
of
transport
with
overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low
impact
on
the
environment,
including
walking
and
cycling,
low
and
ultra
low
emission
vehicles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
car sharing and public transport.
 
 
Town centre: 
​
Area defined on the local authority’s proposal map, including the primary shopping
 
area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses within or adjacent to the primary
 
shopping area. References to town centres or centres apply to city centres, town centres, district
 
centres and local centres but exclude small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood
 
significance.
 
 
Transport assessment: 
​
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues
 
relating to a proposed development. It identifies what measures will be required to improve
 
accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for alternatives to the car such as
 
walking, cycling and public transport and what measures will need to be taken to deal with the
 
anticipated transport impacts of the development.
 
 
Transport statement: 
​
A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is agreed the
 
transport issues arising out of development proposals are limited and a full transport assessment is
 
not required.
 
 
Travel plan: 
​
A long-term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to deliver
 
sustainable transport objectives through action and is articulated in a document that is regularly
 
reviewed.
 
 
Use Classes: 
​
The 
​
Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987
​
 
​
(as amended) puts uses
 
of land and buildings into various categories known as 'Use Classes'.
 
 
 
Part A
 
A1 Shops
 
A2 Financial and professional services
 
A3 Restaurants and cafés
 
A4 Drinking establishments
 
A5 Hot food takeaways
 
Part B
 
B1 Business
 
B2 General industrial
 
B8 Storage or distribution
 
Part C
 
 
 
C1 Hotels
 
C2 Residential institutions
 
C2A Secure Residential Institution
 
C3 Dwellinghouses
 
C4 Houses in multiple occupation
 
Part D
 
D1 Non-residential Institutions
 
D2 Assembly and leisure
 
 
 
Wildlife corridor: 
​
Areas of habitat connecting wildlife populations.
  
Windfall
sites:
​
Sites
which
have
not
been
specifically
identified
as
available
in
the
Local
Plan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process.
They
normally
comprise
previously-developed
sites
that
have
unexpectedly
become
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available.
 
 