Places  
For Everyone
Joint Development Plan Document – Bolton, Bury, Manchester, 
Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, Tameside, Trafford, Wigan
Publication StageAugust 2021ANDY BURNHAM                              PAUL DENNETT
Mayor of Greater Manchester        GM Portfolio Lead Housing, Homelessness and Infrastructure
GMCONSULT.ORG 1Places for Everyone6 Introduction1.
9Places for
Everyone:
Publication Plan
16Relationship with
District Local
Plans
17Process for
Producing the
Places for
Everyone Plan
18How to Get
Involved
21 Context2.
25Core Growth
Area
25International
Connections
27 A Top Global City
28 HS2
29The Northern
Powerhouse
31 Inclusive Growth
35 Vision 3.
38Strategic
Objectives
43 Strategy4.
44 Inclusive Growth
46 Spatial Strategy
48Core Growth
Area
56Inner Area
Regeneration58Boosting
Northern
Competitiveness
65Sustaining
Southern
Competitiveness
73Main Town
Centres
75Strategic Green
Infrastructure
76A Sustainable
and Integrated
Transport
Network
80Sustainable
and Resilient
Places5.
81Sustainable
Development
82Addressing
Climate Change
90 Resilience
92Flood Risk and
the Water
Environment
94 Clean Air
99Resource
Efficiency
103Places for
Jobs6.
104Supporting
Long-Term
Economic
Growth
110Employment
Sites and
Premises
2 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone111Office
Development
115Industry and
Warehousing
124Places for
Homes7.
125 Housing Need
126Housing Land
Supply
130Distribution of
New Housing
130Phasing of New
Housing
133Affordability of
New Housing
134Type, Size and
Design of New
Housing
137Housing
Densities
141Greener
Places8.
142Valuing
Important
Landscapes
144Our Green
Infrastructure
Network
161Biodiversity and
Geodiversity
164 The Green Belt
167Safeguarded
Land171Places for
People9.
172Promoting
Inclusion
173Sustainable
Places
176 Heritage
178 Culture
179Retail and
Leisure
181Education, Skills
and Knowledge
183 Health
185Sport and
Recreation
190Connected
Places10.
191An Integrated
Network
201 Public Transport
205 Our Streets
210Transport
Requirements of
New
Development
216 Allocations11.
222Cross-Boundary
Strategic
Allocations
254Strategic
Allocations in
Bolton
259Strategic
Allocations in
Bury
GMCONSULT.ORG 3Places for Everyone272Strategic
Allocations in
Manchester
275Strategic
Allocations in
Oldham
305Strategic
Allocations in
Rochdale
324Strategic
Allocations in
Salford
338Strategic
Allocations in
Tameside
354Strategic
Allocations in
Trafford
368Strategic
Allocations in
Wigan
382Delivering the
Plan12.
383 Implementation
385Infrastructure
Strategy
386Delivering New
Infrastructure
389 Monitoring
Appendices
398Replaced
District Local
Plan PoliciesA.
399Replaced
District Local
Plan Policies408Additions to
the Green
BeltB.
409All Additions to
the Green Belt
413Additions to the
Green Belt in
Bolton
415Additions to the
Green Belt in
Bury
429Additions to the
Green Belt in
Oldham
430Additions to the
Green Belt in
Rochdale
438Additions to the
Green Belt in
Salford
443Additions to the
Green Belt in
Tameside
455Additions to the
Green Belt in
Trafford
456Additions to the
Green Belt in
Wigan
464Places for
Everyone
Policies MapC.
465Places for
Everyone
Policies Map
4 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 5Places for Everyone1.1 In January 2019 Greater Manchester set out bold plans to give people, communities and
businesses hope and confidence for the future. They described how a pioneering Greater
Manchester was ‘open for business’  globally, how we would thrive and prosper into the
future, how we would support everyone to reach their full potential, and how we would ensure
that nobody was left behind - the Future of GM.
1.2 Collectively our plans are focused on delivering the ambitions in the Greater Manchester
Strategy: a good start in life for everyone; good opportunities for our young people to equip
them for life; good work and the best jobs in a valuable, productive, zero carbon economy;
safe, secure housing in inclusive and diverse communities; a good cultural and leisure offer
for everyone; a green city-region; good health and support for people to live fulfilling lives,
with quality care for those who need it; to be a good place to grow older and to be a place
where everyone is connected – socially, digitally and by a clean, integrated and accessible
transport system.
1.3 Those plans have been put into action, delivering:
Significant falls in homelessness 
An increase in new homes;
An economic plan for the city region, agreed with Government in a Local Industrial
Strategy, delivering growth in GM’ s world-leading sectors, and tacking low pay and
insecure work through our Good Employment Charter;
The delivery of a new Metrolink line, and Opportunity Pass giving young people free
bus travel;
Help for many people to get back into employment through our Working Well programmes
of support;
Improvements to connectivity including through promotion of active travel and the
extension of full fibre;
Programmes to support increased levels of school readiness.
1.4 Since we set out that vision and plans for the Future of GM, Covid-19 has had an
unprecedented health and economic impact on the city region as a whole. It has affected
every person and every business in every part of our boroughs, however the impact has
been unequal and unfair, starkly highlighting and deepening the inequalities we know have
existed for many years and which we were beginning to change. There is now a substantive
body of evidence proving that more deprived areas and our ethnic minority communities are
experiencing higher mortality rates from Covid than other areas and communities.
1.5 The health impacts are ongoing, however the impacts on the economy are only just beginning
to be understood. Many more people in our boroughs are now experiencing unemployment,
businesses have closed or reduced staff numbers, with far more redundancies and business
closures anticipated.
1.6 Covid 19 has had a major impact on the way people live and work over the shorter term with
a high degree of uncertainty over its impact in the long term. In response the Government
has been very clear that we need to positively plan for recovery.The Government first made
GMCONSULT.ORG 7Places for Everyonecommitments to supporting economic recovery in mid-2020, for example with the Prime
Minister's Build, Build, Build announcement at the end of June 2020 setting a context for
England as we recover from Covid-19.
1.7 Additionally, the Chancellor’ s Statement at the beginning of July sought to kick-start the UK’ s
economic recovery. A three point Plan for Jobs was unveiled to support, protect and create
jobs, with total fiscal support amounting to £30 billion. Since then the Government has made
a number of further announcements, committing to supporting the recovery of the economy
post-pandemic, including within the Covid-19 Response - Spring 2021 and the March 2021
Budget.
1.8 Whilst the arrival of Covid 19 was not anticipated and its impact is very significant, our
approach needs to be flexible to address unpredictable challenges that will arise over the
course of any long-term strategy. The Greater Manchester Independent Prosperity Review:
One Y ear On report acknowledges that there is a high degree of uncertainty about the speed
and pace of the economic recovery from Covid 19, let alone what the final impact will be,
however the chair of the panel, Professor Diane Coyle concludes: “All of us agree with
Professor Ed Glaeser’ s crucial observation that now is not the time to lose confidence in the
driving role that major city-regions have always played in improving collective prosperity and
in leading national recovery from major traumas. ”
1.9 The emergence of a global pandemic in March 2020 rightly resulted in the Greater Manchester
authorities pausing the production of the then joint development plan, the GMSF 2020, to
understand what, if any, actions should be taken in relation to the level of development being
proposed. An initial assessment of the potential impacts of Covid-19 on the economy,
including the housing market, was carried out prior to the draft GMSF 2020 being considered
by the Greater Manchester authorities. At that time it was considered there was insufficient
evidence (either at a national or local level) to change the assumptions behind our growth
targets. An update to that initial assessment has since been carried out to inform the
production of this Plan and although slightly over a year has passed since the pandemic
emerged, the update concluded that there remains insufficient evidence to amend the
assumptions behind the growth targets underpinning the Places for Everyone Plan.
1.10 Whilst it is recognised that the country is still in a state of flux, it is very clear that to delay
the production of a strategic plan of this nature further could have a negative effect on the
proper planning of the nine boroughs and therefore their recovery. Instead it is considered
appropriate to proceed as a plan of the nine boroughs, excluding Stockport, but to use the
process of plan review to monitor the situation and if necessary to undertake a formal review
outside of statutory review timetable.
1.11 It is vital that we have bold plans, shaping a better future for our communities – building back
better - rather than a future being shaped by others, building back the same. Covid has
exposed economic and societal issues to address, and the need for a new approach with
people at its heart, which embraces diversity, tackles inequalities, builds resilience and
rebuilds productivity.
8 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneA renewed vision
1.12 In these extremely challenging times, the need for bold ambitious plans for good quality
employment are critical. We are striving to define our new ‘normal’  however we know that
we need to continue to invest in our city and town centres to drive our recovery. We need
to continue to develop our Research and Development capabilities underpinned by our
excellent academic institutions as well as investing in strengthening existing, and creating
new, employment locations so that we are all able to contribute to, and benefit from, growth
as part of a thriving Northern Powerhouse.
1.13 Jobs are not enough however if our residents lack the skills to take advantage of the
opportunities. It is essential we create the conditions for everyone to reach their full potential.
We need to both develop a skills offering that meets the needs of employers to support
growing innovative businesses as well as support companies and individuals who need to
work differently/in different sectors as a result of Covid. Of course, we need to underpin all
of this this with quality education, work and skills provision across the Plan area: using
science and digital to engage people at a young age; developing a clear light of sight to
opportunities; guaranteeing opportunities for all young People; and support those furthest
from the labour market back into work.
1.14 Our vision is to have capitalised on the opportunities highlighted by the recent pandemic,
for example the increase in cycling and walking and the acceleration in flexible working, and
harnessed this to cement real benefits for our towns and cities.This offers a real opportunity
to support the transition of our centres as they experience the continued (and possibly
accelerated) decline in their traditional retail role. Our boroughs need to be places where
we can meet the housing needs of our residents, where all of our people can access the
services they require through high quality digital communications. And one of the biggest
lessons of the pandemic is the importance of good quality greenspace close to where people
live. This is particularly important in our densely populated and deprived neighbourhoods.
Urban greenspace is under pressure and needs to be protected and enhanced wherever
possible. The proposals for the first city centre park at Mayfield is leading the way.
1.15 Our ambitions to be carbon neutral by 2038 have never been more necessary – we need
to support the creation of resilient, liveable places where walking and cycling are the obvious
choice for shorter journeys, where facilities and services are accessible and close at hand
and where the past  dependency on the car is superseded by a reliable and responsive
public transport system.
1.16 The Places for Everyone: Publication Plan is our spatial plan to underpin our recovery.
Places for Everyone: Publication Plan
1.17 Up until December 2020 a joint development plan document of the ten Greater Manchester
local authorities was being prepared, Greater Manchester’ s Plan for Jobs, Homes & the
Environment (known as the “GMSF”). However, the decision at Stockport Council’ s meeting
on 3 December to not submit the GMSF 2020 to the Secretary of State for independent
GMCONSULT.ORG 9Places for Everyoneexamination following the consultation period, and the subsequent resolution at its Cabinet
meeting on 4 December not to publish the GMSF 2020 for consultation, in effect signalled
the end of the GMSF as a joint plan of the ten.
1.18 S.28(6)-(9) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 and regulation 32 of the
Town and Country Planning Local Plan Regulations apply where one authority withdraws
from an agreement to prepare a joint DPD. Together they enable a joint plan to continue to
progress in the event of one of the authorities withdrawing, provided that the plan has
“substantially the same effect”  on the remaining authorities as the original joint plan.
1.19 Consequently, at its meeting on the 11th December 2020, members of the AGMA Executive
Committee asked officers to report back on the implications and process of producing a joint
DPD of the nine remaining Greater Manchester (GM) districts (Bolton, Bury, Manchester,
Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan). After that meeting, in February
and March 2021, each of the nine districts agreed to establish a Joint Committee responsible
for the preparation of a joint Development Plan Document.
1.20 Producing such a plan would enable the nine districts to continue to:
progress the strategic policies in GMSF 2020, for example net zero carbon development,
affordable housing and space and accessibility standards for new housing
maximise the use of sustainable urban/brownfield land and limit the need for Green Belt
to accommodate the development needs of the nine
align with wider Greater Manchester strategies for transport and other infrastructure
investment
utilise the evidence base already commissioned and completed, minimising the cost of
producing further evidence
spread the cost jointly of the independent examination
1.21 The text of the GMSF2020 has been revised following the withdrawal of Stockport. The
revisions to the PfE2021 (as compared to GMSF 2020) fall into 5 broad categories:
i. As a direct result of the withdrawal of Stockport Council from GMSF
ii. As a direct result of changes to government policy since October 2020
iii.As a direct result of new evidence/information being made available since October 2020
iv. Clarification of policy wording
v. Minor typographical changes
1.22 The impact of the five different categories of changes above, together with that of their
cumulative impact was considered and it was determined that the PfE 2021 would result in
a plan which has a substantially the same effect on the participating nine districts as GMSF
2020. In this context, it is important to note that, “substantially the same effect”  does not
mean “the same effect”. It allows for flexibility to address the fact that the plan now covers
a different geographical area, with consequently different levels of needs and resulting
changes to allocations.
10 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.23 The changes made between GMSF 2020 and PfE 2021 are not insignificant in numerical
terms, indeed all sections of the plan have seen some form of change. However, in
determining the cumulative impact of these multiple changes, it is important to consider what
impact they have had on the overall Vision, Objectives and Spatial Strategy of PfE 2021
compared to GMSF 2020, particularly for the decision maker in implementation terms.
1.24 The conclusion of the above assessment was that the resultant impact of the changes on
the overall strategy of the joint plan and its effect on the remaining nine districts is limited.
On this basis, it has been concluded that the PfE2021 has substantially the same effect on
the nine boroughs as the GMSF 2020.
1.25 The Places for Everyone Plan (PfE 2021) provides an important opportunity to create the
conditions for inclusive economic growth, provide opportunities for provision of much needed
homes and protect and enhance the natural environment. The Plan is not being prepared
in isolation. It is supported by the Transport 2040 Delivery Plan, which will outline the
interventions required to achieve the transport vision for the city region and is one of a suite
of strategic documents setting out how Greater Manchester can achieve the ambition set
out in the Greater Manchester Strategy. It sits alongside the Local Industrial Strategy, Housing
Strategy, 5 Y ear Environment Plan, Digital and Cultural Strategies.
1.26 This is our plan for sustainable growth in the nine boroughs, it:
sets out how they should develop up to the year 2037;
identifies the amount of new development that will come forward in terms of housing,
offices, and industry and warehousing, and the main areas in which this will be focused;
identifies the important environmental assets which will be protected and enhanced;
allocates sites for employment and housing outside of the urban area;
supports the delivery of key infrastructure, such as transport and utilities;
defines a new Green Belt boundary for the nine boroughs.
1.27 The Places for Everyone Plan reinforces our ambition to bring forward brownfield land, it
reduces the net loss of Green Belt further from previous versions of the GMSF by reducing
the number of sites being allocated, identifying a Broad Location and provides stronger
protection for our important environmental assets. It enables us to meet our Local Housing
Need, supports increased provision of affordable housing, promotes our new approach to
town centres, supports wider strategies around clean air, walking and cycling and underpins
the ambition to be a carbon neutral city-region by 2038.
Spatial Strategy 
1.28 The Places for Everyone spatial strategy seeks to deliver sustainable, inclusive growth. It
has 4 key spatial elements:
Significant growth in jobs and housing at the core – continuing development in that part
of the ‘core growth area’  encompassing the city centre and beyond to the Etihad in the
GMCONSULT.ORG 11Places for Everyoneeast, through to the Quays, Trafford Park and Port Salford in the west. The majority of
commercial employment growth is proposed in this area;
Inner Area Regeneration of those parts of Manchester, Salford and Trafford surrounding
the Core Growth Area. Together with the Core Growth Area, around 50% of overall
housing supply is found here;
Boosting the competitiveness of the northern districts – addressing the disparities by
the provision of significant new employment opportunities and supporting infrastructure
and a commitment that collectively the northern districts meet their own local housing
need;
Sustaining the competitiveness of the southern districts – supporting key economic
drivers, for example around Wythenshawe hospital and the Airport and realising the
opportunities offered by national infrastructure investment, e.g. HS2, whilst recognising
the important green infrastructure assets in the area.
Good jobs
1.29 In extremely challenging times, the need for bold ambitious plans for good quality employment
are critical. We are striving to define our new ‘normal’  however we know that we need to
continue to invest in our city and town centres to drive our recovery. We need to continue
to develop our Research and Development capabilities underpinned by our excellent academic
institutions as well as investing in strengthening existing, and creating new, employment
locations so that we are all able to contribute to, and benefit from, growth as part of a thriving
Northern Powerhouse.
1.30 Opportunities for ‘re-shoring’, that is bringing manufacturing activity back to the UK, and the
increasing demand for logistics and warehousing, could lead to opportunities to provide good
employment opportunities across the Plan area. Meeting market demand for sites and
infrastructure is essential however as all places in the UK will be seeking to capture growth
to offset the impact of the economic downturn and the loss of jobs in our current growth
sectors.
1.31 Greater Manchester has developed a Local Industrial Strategy, agreed with Government 
which sets out how the city region will build on its unique strengths and opportunities and
capitalise on the creativity of its people to create a digital-enabled, green city region. This
plan seeks to support Greater Manchester’ s economic ambitions by providing land to meet
the widest range of employment opportunities helping to ensure that Greater Manchester
remains as competitive as possible in uncertain times.
1.32 The majority of new jobs will be in the City Centre and wider Core Growth Area stretching
from Port Salford in the west to the Etihad campus in the east as well as around Manchester
Airport. This area encompasses established employment areas such as Trafford Park,
locations such as MediaCity which has seen strong growth over more recent times and our
Universities which are driving growth in world leading research and development.
12 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.33 Our ambition is to deliver more inclusive growth to benefit all our boroughs.We are currently
not fully realising the possibilities of our key assets, for example the outstanding research
base has much greater potential to support business activity and growth across the
conurbation. Further improvements in transport connections and skills development are
required to ensure that everyone can contribute to and share in the benefits of economic
activity, helping to deliver genuinely inclusive growth.
1.34 Through this plan we are looking to create more favourable conditions for growth by providing
sites for advanced manufacturing, digital and tech jobs in areas where the urban land supply
cannot support the scale or quality of development required. In response to comments
received both in 2016 and further in 2019, the amount of employment land identified in the
PfE Plan area, up to 2037 has been significantly reduced since the 2016 GMSF (by approx.
40%) to keep the release of Green Belt to a minimum and in order that the level of
employment growth broadly correlates with our new housing requirement for Greater
Manchester. Several of the sites are large in scale and will be partially delivered beyond
2037. We have also identified a potential growth area in north east Oldham as a Broad
Location rather than an allocation to provide flexibility for the future.
Good homes
1.35 The Greater Manchester Housing Strategy sets out our vision for new homes and seeks to
ensure that we consistently deliver the right homes in the right places, providing the number
and mix of new homes for our future needs.
1.36 A key objective of the Places for Everyone Plan is to meet our Local Housing Need – using
the Government’ s standard methodology this equates to almost 165,000 homes over the
plan period (2021-2037). Government has been very clear that deviation from the standard
methodology can only be justified in ‘exceptional circumstances’. No exceptional
circumstances have been identified to justify deviation from the standard methodology in
this Plan.
1.37 By working together we have been able to direct development to the most sustainable areas
– primarily the city and town centres – and enable most efficient use of our brownfield land
supply.
1.38 The plan sets out an ambition for the boroughs to enable delivery of their share of Greater
Manchester's 50,000 additional affordable homes over the plan period as well as a
requirement for all homes to meet the nationally described space standards and the
‘accessible and adaptable’  standard as set out in Part M of the Building regulations.
Good places
1.39 This Plan sets out our aspirations for our neighbourhoods –inclusive, well designed, resilient,
safe and well served by local services. Connection to high quality and well managed green
infrastructure is key – we are seeking to protect our most valuable green spaces and  improve
them by delivering a net gain in biodiversity assets. We are piloting the development of a
Local Nature Recovery Network Strategy with Natural England.
GMCONSULT.ORG 13Places for Everyone1.40 As part of this work we have identified our most important ‘Green Infrastructure’  – for example
our parks, open spaces, trees, woodlands, rivers and canals which provide multiple benefits
and make a huge contribution to quality of life, promote good mental and physical health
and supports economic growth. Our strategic Green Infrastructure network is extensive.
Around 60% is within the Green Belt and therefore is afforded significant policy protection.
The remaining 40% does not meet the tests of Green Belt but it is very important for the
continued wellbeing of our boroughs.
Brownfield preference 
1.41 As part of this consultation we are being as transparent as possible about the land we have
identified within the urban area. The land supply position for the nine districts is published
alongside this consultation. Districts have looked to maximise the contribution of brownfield
land by applying higher densities in the most accessible locations, reviewing the employment
land supply and seeking to identify more opportunities in our town centres. By working
together the nine districts have been able to maximise the supply of the brownfield land at
the core of the conurbation and limit the need extent of Green Belt release.
1.42 The majority of development between 2021 and 2037 (the "plan period") will be on land
within the urban area, most of which is brownfield land. Within the plan period around 90%
of housing, 99% of offices and 47% of industrial and warehousing development is within the
urban area.
1.43 National planning policy does not support an explicit ‘brownfield first’  approach, as Local
Authorities are required to be able to provide a 5 year supply of housing sites which are
available and deliverable. If we cannot demonstrate that our brownfield land is available and
then we are required to identify other land which is – this may be Protected Open Land or
Green Belt.
1.44 We are however adopting a ‘brownfield preference’  policy – we will do all that we can to
make sure that our brownfield sites come forward in the early part of the plan period however
to do this we need to continue to press Government for support to remediate contaminated
land, to provide funding for infrastructure and to support alternative models of housing
delivery.
1.45 Our Strategic Viability Study  identifies challenges with a significant proportion of our land
supply and this is acknowledged within the plan by the provision of a land supply ‘buffer’.
The recently announced Brownfield Land Fund is targeted at Combined Authorities and
begins to help to address viability issues across the conurbation, but it is not enough. We
are bidding for more funding but further discussions with Government are critical to enable
the full potential of our brownfield land supply to be realised.
1.46 The plan supports the continuing renewal of our town centres, with an increase in the supply
of land identified for housing. Our strategic approach to town centres is complemented by
initiatives co-ordinated by the GMCA. Government has also recognised the need to strengthen
the role of town centres and several of our towns have been successful in accessing funding
through the Future High Street Fund and Towns Fund.
14 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGreen Belt
1.47 Given the lack of sufficient land to ensure that our overall housing and employment needs
can be met, it is considered that there is a strategic exceptional circumstances case to be
made to release Green Belt for development. However, this release has been kept to the
minimum and has been done in locations which will help to meet our overall vision and
objectives. The strategic case and the detailed case for each strategic allocation is set out
in the ‘The Green Belt Topic Paper’.
1.48 The release of Green Belt has not been proposed lightly and evidence  has been prepared
to demonstrate how the harm that this could cause to the remaining Green Belt land can be
mitigated, including identifying opportunities to improve and enhance green infrastructure
within the remaining Green Belt land. We are also proposing to add new Green Belt where
we have identified land that meets the purposes of Green Belt. These proposals have been
incorporated into the Places for Everyone Plan as part of the overall proposals.
Net loss
1.49 The net loss of Green Belt has been reduced by nearly 60% since 2016 through:
reducing the number of proposed sites
reducing the loss of Green Belt within sites 
proposing ‘new’  Green Belt additions
1.50 The net amount of Green Belt land proposed for release is 1,754 hectares – in relation to
the nine districts preparing this Plan, this means a 3.3% reduction in the size of the Green
Belt compared to an 8.1% reduction in 2016.
1.51 The nine boroughs cover some 115,084 hectares, almost half (46.7%) is designated as
Green Belt. The proposals in the Places for Everyone: Publication Plan 2021 would result
in Green Belt covering just over 45% of the nine districts.
Becoming Carbon Neutral by 2038
1.52 This Plan sets out proposals to support the Greater Manchester ambition to be a carbon
neutral city-region by 2038. A key element of this is to require all new development to be
net zero carbon by 2028 at the latest – we do not want to build homes and workplaces which
require retrofitting in the future and we have set an ambitious target, backed up by our
evidence to achieve this as soon possible. Our commitment to keep fossil fuels in the ground
remains, at this time therefore we will not support fracking.
GMCONSULT.ORG 15Places for EveryoneInfrastructure required to support scale and pattern of growth 
1.53 Many of the responses raised the issue of the impact of new development on existing
infrastructure. As the majority of new development will be in the urban area, the capacity of
the existing infrastructure is particularly important. We have looked at the major challenges
that we consider our existing infrastructure networks will have to respond to and have
produced an Infrastructure Framework setting this out.
1.54 Since the 2019 GMSF consultation we have undertaken significant work on our transport
evidence base, both in relation to the urban area and the strategic allocations. A refreshed
Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040, Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan
(2020-2025) and Local Implementation Plans are published alongside this Plan. Our Transport
Delivery Plan sets out all the transport projects we hope to achieve in the next five years to
ensure that the planned new housing and employment can be sustainably integrated into
Greater Manchester’ s existing transport infrastructure as far as possible. We have an
unparalleled track record in delivery of transport projects, and a large number of  projects
are identified for delivery in the next five years, including Metrolink capacity improvements
through the introduction of 27 new trams; better rail infrastructure including on the Castlefield
corridor, Transpennine Route Upgrade to Leeds and ‘Access for All’  station improvements;
bus network and town centre improvements; new walking and cycling infrastructure across
all ten districts; expanding the city-region’ s electric vehicle charging network; and development
of the Clean Air Plan.
1.55 Our Transport Delivery Plan also sets out how we plan to deliver our longer-term aspirations
for an integrated transport network that supports future growth. It includes, amongst other
things, plans for improved orbital public transport links, capacity enhancements to the rail
and metrolink networks, clean air measures, transformative investment in walking and cycling,
and reform of the bus market and rail franchising. All of these will contribute to our carbon
reduction goals and delivery of our transport vision.
1.56 The detailed policies for site allocations and the thematic policies for new development,
together, set out the necessary infrastructure requirements and sites will not come forward
unless it can be demonstrated this will be provided. Proposals for new Metrolink stops,
improved walking and cycling connections, and new or improved public transport services,
all form part of the package for the allocations – which, when combined with the investment
proposals flagged in Our Transport Delivery Plan, will enable a significant change in the
sustainability of the transport network.
Relationship with District Local Plans
1.57 The Places for Everyone Plan is the strategic spatial plan for our nine boroughs and as
such sets out our planning policy framework. All policies within the plan are "strategic policies".
It is being prepared as a Joint Development Plan Document of the nine local planning
authorities. It is a strategic plan and does not cover everything that a district local plan would.
16 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneDistricts will continue to produce their own Local Plans setting out more detailed policies
reflecting local circumstances. Appendix A sets out the policies in the relevant GM district
local plans which will be replaced by the Places for Everyone Plan.
1.58 Once the Places for Everyone Plan is adopted it will form part of the relevant authority’ s
development plan.The evidence that underpins the Places for Everyone Plan will also inform
district level plans.
Process for Producing the Places for Everyone Plan
1.59 The Places for Everyone Plan began life as a joint Development Plan Document of the ten
Greater Manchester districts. Following a recommendation from AGMA Executive Board in
November 2014, the 10 Local Planning Authorities in Greater Manchester (Bolton, Bury,
Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan) agreed
to prepare a joint Development Plan Document to set out the approach to housing and
employment land across Greater Manchester for the next 20 years.
1.60 Four consultations have taken place in relation to the GMSF . The first, in November 2014
was on the scope of the plan and our initial evidence base, the second in November 2015,
was on the vision, strategy and strategic growth options, and the third, on a Draft Plan in
October 2016.
1.61 The fourth and most recent consultation on The Greater Manchester Plan for Homes, Jobs
and the Environment: the Greater Manchester Spatial Framework Revised Draft 2019 (GMSF
2019) took place in 2019. It received over 17,000 responses. The responses received
informed the production of GMSF 2020. The withdrawal of Stockport Council in December
2020 prevented GMSF 2020 proceeding to Regulation 19 Publication stage and instead
work was undertaken to prepare PfE 2021.
1.62 Where a local planning authority withdraws from a joint plan and that plan continues to have
substantially the same effect as the original joint plan on the remaining authorities, s28(7)
of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 provides that any step taken in relation
to the plan must be treated as a step taken by the remaining authorities for the purposes of
the joint plan.  On this basis, it is proposed to proceed directly to Publication stage under
Regulation 19 of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) England Regulations
2012.
1.63 At this stage, whilst anyone can make a representation on any point, only those pertaining
to ‘soundness’  will be taken into account by the Inspector(s). The term 'sound' is used to
describe a Local Plan that has been prepared in accordance with what Government expects
of local planning authorities. These expectations are set out in paragraph 35 of the National
Planning Policy Framework:
"Positively prepared - the plan should be prepared based on a strategy which seeks to
meet objectively assessed development and infrastructure requirements, including
unmet requirements from neighbouring authorities where it is reasonable to do so and
consistent with achieving sustainable development". This means that the nine councils
GMCONSULT.ORG 17Places for Everyonemust produce a plan which promotes economic growth and makes provision for
the homes, employment and infrastructure which it determines is needed.
"Justified - the plan should be an appropriate strategy, when considered against the
reasonable alternatives, based on proportionate evidence". This means that the nine
councils must have considered other policies and determined its approach based
upon the most up to date and robust evidence including population figures,
economic forecasts, Strategic Housing Market Assessment, land availability etc.
"Effective - the plan should be deliverable over its period and based on effective joint
working on cross-boundary strategic priorities". This means that the nine councils
must be confident that the policies within the Plan can be achieved within the
Plan period (2021 to 2037).The nine councils must also work with neighbouring
authorities such as Stockport, Rossendale, Cheshire East, Warrington and
Derbyshire.
"Consistent with national policy - the plan should enable the delivery of sustainable
development in accordance with the policies within the National Planning Policy
Framework". The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the Government's
policies for planning in England. Policies within the Places for Everyone Plan
must not conflict with these policies.
Submissions will also be considered by the Inspectors appointed to carry out the independent
Examination in Public, concerning legal compliance issues, for example the Integrated Assessment,
the Habitats Assessment Regulation and the Duty to Co-operate.
1.64 At the end of the consultation period, the draft joint DPD and all representations received
are then sent to the Secretary of State (the “Submission stage”) pursuant to Reg. 22 of the
Local Planning Regulations. Submission is likely to happen in summer 2021. The Secretary
of State will pass these on to the Planning Inspectorate who will arrange an Examination
into the plan.
How to Get Involved
1.65 The consultation will run for 8 weeks, beginning in August 2021.
1.66 The consultation portal gmconsult.org will become live at the beginning of the consultation.
1.67 All responses will be forwarded electronically for consideration at the Examination in Public
(EiP). The easiest way to respond is online. This is easy to do via our online portal.Y ou can
access the online consultation at gmconsult.org. once the consultation has formally begun.
This will help all of us to stay safer both in terms of responding but also when staff are
handling the responses. However, we know that some people will not be able to respond
via the portal. Therefore, details of how to respond by email or post will be made
available. Please note that personal details of those making representations, including name
and contact information must be published and shared with the Programme Officer and
Planning Inspectorate for those that wish their representations to be considered through the
18 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneExamination in Public process. A full privacy notice is available, explaining how your data
will be shared. It is strongly advised that this is read before submitting any representation
to this Plan.
1.68 If you have any questions about the process, how to access the documents or how to respond
when the consultation opens, you can email
planningandhousing@greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk or leave a message on the following
number 0161 778 7006 and someone will get back to you.
GMCONSULT.ORG 19Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 20Places for EveryoneOur Plan Area
2.1 As part of Greater Manchester we have a long and proud history. Greater Manchester
became the world’ s first industrial city, when its position as the global hub for textile
manufacturing led to rapid urbanisation and numerous technological innovations, including
the world’ s first steam passenger railway. It has also been at the forefront of hugely influential
social and political movements, being the birthplace of both the modern cooperative movement
and the suffragettes, as well as leading the campaign to repeal the Corn Laws in the
nineteenth century which ushered in the start of the modern global economy. England's first
civic university, the University of Manchester, was established in the city-region and the area
is now home to four universities that play a leading role in social and economic progress .
2.2 Today, Greater Manchester is a vibrant, dynamic and diverse city-region, which continues
to play an important role in the economic and social fabric of the country and the wider world.
2.3 Our Plan area covers nine of the ten Greater Manchester local authority areas: of Bolton,
Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan. It is located
at the heart of the UK, with easy access to all its constituent nations and is only a short
distance from other major cities such as Leeds and Liverpool. Manchester Airport is the UK's
third largest airport, London is only two hours away by rail, and there are also direct rail
connections to other major cities of the North of England. Greater Manchester has good
motorway infrastructure providing links across the country.
22 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneFigure 2.1 The Places for Everyone Plan boundary within the Greater Manchester context
2.4 Greater Manchester is home to around 2.8 million people, and has seen an increase of
almost 200,000 residents in the last decade alone(1). The population of the nine districts in
PfE 2021 is approximately 2.5 million, having grown by almost 185,000 in a decade. The
population of Greater Manchester is forecast to have grown by around another 190,000
people by 2037 (of which just over 170,000 will be within the nine districts making up the
PfE Plan area). This growth, in turn, will contribute to a significant increase in households.
69% of the population growth is expected to be in those aged 65 and over, and approximately
40% of the growth will be amongst those aged 75 and over. Growth in the working age
population (18-64) will be lower (approximately 40% of the total growth), but still significant
at around 75,000. This concentration of growth is likely to continue in the future, with
Manchester, Salford and Rochdale forecast to account for around 47% of Greater
Manchester's population growth over the period up to 2037 or just over 50% of the population
growth in the PfE Plan area.
1 ONS 2019-midyear estimates Population estimates for the UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - Office for National Statistics
(ons.gov.uk)
GMCONSULT.ORG 23Places for Everyone2.5 Greater Manchester is one of the most economically diverse conurbations in the UK.(2) It is
the main driver of the Northern economy, generating nearly 40% of total output (GVA) in the
North West and almost 20% across the North of England, of which the districts in the PfE
Plan area contribute nearly 90%.
2.6 Around 1.5 million jobs are provided within Greater Manchester (with just under 1.4 million
within the PfE Plan area), with considerable growth over the last few decades in service
sector employment such as professional services and administration. There has been a
considerable reduction in manufacturing jobs, but this sector continues to be one of the most
productive in Greater Manchester. The baseline economic forecast foresees an increase of
around 100,000 jobs by 2037 (of which approximately 90% is forecast to be within the PfE
Plan area). Similar changes in the sectoral mix to the recent past are forecast, although a
more ambitious accelerated growth scenario estimates an increase of just over 170,000 jobs
across Greater Manchester. Employment opportunities are unevenly dispersed across
Greater Manchester, with by far the most significant concentration currently being in the City
Centre and adjoining areas such as Salford Quays, which collectively account for around
20% of all jobs. Baseline economic trends(3) suggest the majority of the employment growth
would be in Salford, Manchester and Trafford. The remaining districts would see only
modest change in employment in the period 2020-37, with some districts (Oldham, Rochdale,
Tameside and Wigan) seeing small decreases in total employment in this period.
2.7 There are two significant challenges which will impact our districts over the coming years:
the exit of the UK from the European Union and the Covid-19 pandemic.There are significant
uncertainties over future trade and customs arrangements, the level and type of international
migration, future exchange rate movements and the impacts that all of this could have for
business investment, job creation and labour supply as a result of the UK exit from the
European Union.
2.8 As set out in the Independent Prosperity Review, ’One Y ear On’  report, the COVID-19
pandemic has significantly added to the uncertainty: “At the time of writing, there remains a
high degree of uncertainty about the speed and pace of the economic recovery from
COVID-19, let alone what the final impact will be. There have been a succession of
assessments of the likely impact of COVID-19 on the UK economy by a range of private
forecasting consultancy, research firms and think tanks such as the Institute for Fiscal Studies
(IFS) and National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR), and by the Bank of
England and by the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR). All those attempting any
assessment of likely economic effects emphasise the extraordinary level of uncertainty at
present. The normal forecasting tools and models are not well designed to assess a shock
like COVID-19. This stems from the fact that this is a health-driven economic shock which
is unlike previous economic shocks (such as the 2008 Great Financial Crisis) so we cannot
simply apply the lessons from previous recessions.The OBR summarises these uncertainties
as being:
The course of the pandemic and the development of effective vaccines and treatments 
2 ONS (2016) Krugman Specialisation Index
3 GMFM 2018
24 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneThe speed and consistency with which the government can lift public health restrictions
(ie “lockdown”  measures) 
The response of individuals and businesses as it does so (in terms of consumer
confidence etc), and 
The effectiveness of the policy measures put in place to protect viable businesses,
foster new opportunities and sustain employment. ”
2.9 However, Professor Diane Coyle, Chair of the Independent Prosperity Review Panel
concludes; “All of us agree with Professor Ed Glaeser’ s crucial observation that now is not
the time to lose confidence in the driving role that major city-regions have always played in
improving collective prosperity and in leading national recovery from major traumas."
Core Growth Area
2.10 This covers the City Centre and the Quays and extends eastwards to include Central Park
and the Etihad campus, and westwards through Trafford Park which is one of Europe’ s
largest industrial estates. This area provides a huge scale and diversity of economic
opportunity, which is accessible from across the Plan area and beyond.
2.11 The Core Growth Area offers the conditions to boost the role of Greater Manchester as a
Global City. It is the home of many global businesses and continues to attract high profile
companies seeking to invest. Conditions for growth are in place, with high rates of productivity,
innovation and global competitiveness. The Core Growth Area offers businesses, residents
and visitors access to a highly skilled population, a wide range of premises and
accommodation, digital infrastructure, excellent accessibility, a high quality environment,
cultural and retail opportunities.
2.12 The growth potential of the Core Growth Area will continue through higher density
development, building in opportunity areas, The Oxford Road Corridor, the existing office
sectors, HS2 station proposals and improving the connections to other areas of Greater
Manchester, which will all assist growth within our boroughs. However, it will be particularly
important that it has outstanding local and global connections supporting its wider reach.
2.13 The universities and the knowledge economy are other important assets for us, with a high
concentration of students, research activity and scientific institutions.This activity is primarily
focused within the City Centre, with The Oxford Road Corridor being an internationally
important location in this regard. Our strong cultural identity is another distinguishing factor,
with a global reputation for sports and the arts. Once again, the greatest concentration is
within and around the Core Growth Area, but importantly it is also seen across the rest of
our boroughs with a diverse range of identities and activities.
International Connections
2.14 Manchester Airport is the third busiest passenger airport in the UK, and the largest outside
London, handling c. 28 million passengers in 2019 and adding £1.4bn GVA to the regional
economy and supporting c. 25,000 jobs on-site. It is the only airport in the country other than
Heathrow to have two full length runways, but with the key advantage of having significant
GMCONSULT.ORG 25Places for Everyonespare capacity, and the potential to grow to some 55 million passengers a year. Unique
among non-London airports, it has the infrastructure, connectivity and scale to sustain a
growing network of medium and long-haul routes. This enables northern Britain to benefit
from a major international air gateway for both business and leisure traffic, passengers and
freight. This is a vitally important role not just for us but also for a much wider area across
the North and Midlands, enabling businesses and residents to access opportunities across
the globe and providing a key access point for international visitors to the UK. The airport
is a key factor in realising the wider growth agenda for the North and unlocking the economic
potential of cities and regions within its catchment area with approximately 22 million people
living within two hours of it. More locally, the emerging Airport City development (part of the
Greater Manchester Enterprise Zone) is creating a major new economic asset, attracting
global occupiers and investment attracted by the unrivalled connectivity.
2.15 Excellent international freight connections will also support our global role, enabling the
large-scale import and export of goods and components.The Manchester Ship Canal provides
a direct shipping route from Greater Manchester to the Port of Liverpool, where post-Panamax
facilities can accommodate the largest container vessels from around the world. Port Salford
will provide an integrated tri-modal facility on the ship canal, with excellent rail and road
links, enabling the benefits of easy port access. This will be complemented by maintaining
and enhancing freight connections to other major ports by rail and motorway, including the
Humber ports, Felixstowe, London Gateway and Southampton.
2.16 This Plan seeks to enhance and take advantage of these outstanding international
connections, supporting our long-term growth and the ability of residents to share in its
benefits. We are therefore ideally placed to help drive growth in the North of England, and
help provide a balance to the strength of London and the South East. However, this will not
only require an appropriate scale and distribution of development and infrastructure investment
within our boroughs, but also major improvements in transport connections to other parts of
the North, including Northern Powerhouse Rail and motorway network enhancements.
26 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneFigure 2.2 A Global City
A Top Global City
2.17 By the end of the Plan period, Greater Manchester aims to be a top global city.(4)To do this
it will require a range of attributes, including a strong economy, skilled residents, a high
quality of place and the environment, and a diverse portfolio of investment and development
opportunities. Through this plan we can play a vital role in delivering Greater Manchester's
ambition of becoming a top global city.
2.18 Having a stronger international outlook will be an essential aspect of this. As part of Greater
Manchester we will be a key gateway into and out of the UK, trading across the world. It will
be capable of competing internationally for investors, visitors, businesses, skilled workers,
academic talent and students. At the same time, ensuring that the resident population can
take advantage of the associated opportunities will be a high priority. S upporting growth in
high value activity in sectors and on assets that are, or have the potential to be, world-leading
and globally distinctive is a key part of Greater Manchester's Local Industrial Strategy.
4 GMCA, The Manchester Growth Company and Greater Manchester Local Enterprise Partnership (2017) The Greater Manchester
Internationalisation Strategy 2017-2020  GMCA, Our People, Our Place: Greater Manchester Strategy (2017)
GMCONSULT.ORG 27Places for Everyone2.19 If Greater Manchester can realise its ambition to be a top global city then this would put the
UK in the enviable position of having two global cities within 200 miles of each other. London
is already established as one of the most successful cities in the world, often appearing in
the top two in international indices along with New Y ork. Both Greater Manchester and
London acting as global cities could be hugely beneficial for the national economy, providing
an outstanding scale, diversity and quality of activity. Maximising connections between the
two will be vital to realising this potential, offering additional agglomeration economies.
2.20 At the same time, it will be important to maintain the distinctiveness and independence of
Greater Manchester and avoid it being seen as a satellite of London. Greater Manchester
will be a different type of global city to London, smaller and more affordable, retaining its
innovative character and with a strong emphasis on inclusion and quality of place. The fact
that it can offer a more cost-effective option to London in a high quality environment,
complementing the capital and regional cities, will help it to attract investment that would
otherwise not come to the UK.
2.21 Greater Manchester has agreed a Local Industrial Strategy with Government. The Local
Industrial Strategy has two key objectives:
Supporting our globally competitive strengths - Building on our globally competitive
research strengths and emerging industrial opportunities, enabling us to pioneer emerging
sectors, create significant global competence and add value to our local economy as
new sectors grow and flourish.
Strengthening the foundations of our economy  - Strengthening our people,
infrastructure, business environment, innovation ecosystems and places, enabling all
sectors and all places in Greater Manchester to be productive and prosperous.
2.22 We need to grasp global opportunities emerging from changes to world markets and develop
industries of the future, while also ensuring competitiveness and job quality in our high
employment, low productivity sectors.
HS2
2.23 Greater Manchester currently benefits from good links to London, with a number of direct
rail routes taking around two hours. The proposed HS2 high-speed rail connections will
reduce journey times to London to 67 minutes from the City Centre and just over an hour
from Manchester Airport.They would also bring the major regional city of Birmingham within
41 minutes by train. These enhanced connections will help to deliver a more integrated
national economy, opening up much greater business opportunities to support UK growth.
The timely delivery of HS2 will have major benefits for the Country as a whole as well as for
Greater Manchester. The benefits of HS2 are multiplied when combined with Northern
Powerhouse Rail (NPR) and other committed investments in our rail networks. To capitalise
on the opportunity, Greater Manchester is proposing a series of complementary investments
to bring maximum benefits from high speed rail to residents. The Greater Manchester HS2
and Northern Powerhouse Rail Growth Strategy – The Stops Are Just The Start sets out
our proposals for local infrastructure investment to support the HS2 and NPR facilities which
28 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonewill embed them within our wider strategic plans, ensuring that people are well connected
to the new homes and job opportunities that these investments offer and delivering the right
training and skills to empower the next generation to continue to make our city-region
successful.
The Northern Powerhouse
2.24 The concept of the Northern Powerhouse is central to the overall strategy for delivering more
even and inclusive growth across the UK, counterbalancing the dominance of London and
the South East. The Government has described the Northern Powerhouse as “a vision for
joining up the North’ s great towns, cities and counties, pooling their strengths, and tackling
major barriers to productivity to unleash the full economic potential of the North”.(5)
2.25 The strength and strategic location of Greater Manchester puts it in an ideal place to act as
the primary driver for the Northern Powerhouse. Equally, Greater Manchester would benefit
significantly from nearby locations in the North being more economically prosperous, as this
would provide access to a wider range and diversity of businesses opportunities and to an
even larger pool of skilled labour. Hence it will be important to deliver relatively high levels
of growth across the Plan area for the wider benefit of the North.
5 HM Government (November 2016) Northern Powerhouse strategy
GMCONSULT.ORG 29Places for EveryoneFigure 2.3 Geography of jobs across the Northern Powerhouse (source: Centre for Cities (June 2015) Northern
Powerhouse factsheet: Key figures on the city regions in the Northern Powerhouse, p.5)
2.26 Improving connections between Greater Manchester and other parts of the North, and to
other areas such as the Midlands, will be central to delivering the vision for the Northern
Powerhouse. Transport for the North published their Strategic Transport Plan  in February
2019. The Plan seeks to enable the North to achieve its full potential and is an opportunity
to address decades of under investment and provide a legacy for future generations. The
fundamental challenge for the North’ s economy is to improve the economic interaction
between the key economic assets and clusters of the North to improve the sharing of
knowledge, supply chains, resources, and innovation to drive agglomeration benefits and
productivity. The major northern cities of Liverpool, Leeds and Sheffield are within 40 miles
of Greater Manchester, as are other significant settlements such as Bradford, Preston,
Warrington, Chester and Stoke-on-Trent. At present connectivity between the North’ s towns
and cities, and beyond, restricts growth and opportunities. Commuting between Manchester
and Leeds is 40% lower than expected when compared to city pairs that are similar distances
30 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneapart in the UK. Better transport connectivity increases the physical proximity of firms, workers
and consumers and concentrates economic activity in clusters. Improving transport
connections between the North’ s cities, towns, economic centres, infrastructure and assets
allows for greater opportunities for employment, collaboration and knowledge sharing.
Importantly, it would also enable other parts of the North to take advantage of Greater
Manchester’ s key assets and its role as a key international gateway and emerging top global
city, connecting more people to Manchester Airport and the proposed HS2 services to
London.
2.27 The Northern Powerhouse Rail proposals will dramatically improve journey times to 30
minutes or less from the City Centre and Manchester Airport to Liverpool, Leeds and Sheffield,
through a combination of new and improved lines. This will bring these surrounding major
cities within an easy commuting time of Greater Manchester. The M62 motorway is already
an important east-west spine within the North, connecting Greater Manchester with Leeds
and Liverpool, and further east through to Hull and the Humber ports. The ongoing North
West Quadrant Study will identify how capacity, journey times and reliability can be improved
on the M62/M60 around Greater Manchester, further aiding the integration with Leeds and
Liverpool. The proposed Trans Pennine Tunnel has the potential to deliver similar benefits
for road transport between Greater Manchester and Sheffield. In the southern part of Greater
Manchester, the study at the Airport around the M56 and the proposed study of the M60
corridor in the south-east will also be key.These transport schemes will play a very important
role in realising the potential of our boroughs, Greater Manchester, as a whole, and the wider
North.
2.28 As part of Greater Manchester, we are therefore ideally placed to drive growth in the North
of England, and help provide a balance to the strength of London and the South East.
However, this will not only require an appropriate scale and distribution of development and
infrastructure investment within our boroughs, but also major improvements in transport
connections to other parts of the North, including Northern Powerhouse Rail and motorway
network enhancements.
Inclusive Growth
2.29 Over recent years, growth across the Plan area has been concentrated in the three local
authority areas of Manchester, Salford and Trafford. For example, over the period 2001-2016,
they accounted for two-thirds of the growth in population, employment and economic activity
(measured by GVA) in Greater Manchester.(6) Population increased by around 20% across
Manchester, Salford and Trafford over that period compared to just over 6% across the
remaining six districts (combined) of the PfE Plan area, although this contrasts with the
preceding half century when Manchester and Salford lost well over one-third of their
population.(7)This concentration of growth is likely to continue in the future, with Manchester,
Salford and Trafford forecast to account for 45% of population growth over the period
6 ONS mid-year population estimates, and Greater Manchester Forecasting Model 2018
7 GB Historical GIS / University of Portsmouth, Bolton District through time | Population Statistics | Total Population, A Vision of Britain through
Time, 1951-2001
GMCONSULT.ORG 31Places for Everyone2020-2037, around 60% of GVA growth, and 90% of the increase in employment.(8)This
would consolidate the concentration of growth in the central and southern areas of Greater
Manchester.
2.30 Picture 2.2 '2019 Index of Multiple Deprivation' , produced by the Government, with the
darkest colours showing the most deprived areas. It indicates high levels of deprivation
across many parts of the Plan area, including those areas that have seen a concentration
of growth over recent years and in parts of otherwise affluent boroughs.There is a particularly
high concentration of deprivation in the central areas, with Manchester the second most
deprived local authority area in England on two measures.(9)
Picture 2.2 2019 Index of Multiple Deprivation
8 ONS 2018-based sub-national population projections, and Greater Manchester Forecasting Model 2018
9 Measured by the ‘rank of ranks’, where each local authority is ranked for each of the seven domains of the index, and then an average rank is
produced
32 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2.31 An analysis by the Office for National Statistics of over 100 towns and cities in England and
Wales identified Oldham, Salford and Rochdale amongst some of the most deprived areas
in the country.(10)When a broad range of socio-economic measures are considered, such
as levels of economic activity, qualifications, occupation, household incomes, house prices,
poor health, population change and housing development, in overall terms the northern
areas of Greater Manchester excluding Bury (Wigan, Bolton, Rochdale, Oldham and
Tameside) perform significantly worse overall than the southern areas.
2.32 Although both the central areas and the northern parts of Greater Manchester suffer from
high levels of deprivation, there are differences between them in terms of how this manifests
and the development pressures that they face. The inner areas surrounding the City Centre
and the Quays have seen much higher levels of recent population growth, being a key focus
for inward international migration. Just 22 wards in that area (out of a total of 215 wards in
Greater Manchester) accounted for two-thirds of the increase in residents aged under 18 in
Greater Manchester over the period 2002-2016, and the area saw an increase of one-third
in those aged 30-44 whereas the sub-region as a whole had a reduction in that age group.
The number of people aged 65 and over declined in this inner area, whereas the six northern
districts had a one-quarter increase.(11)
Key challenges for the Places for Everyone Plan
2.33 In light of these issues, the PfE Plan will need to:
Deliver high levels of economic growth to support the prosperity of Greater Manchester,
whilst ensuring that all parts of our boroughs and all our residents share in the benefits;
Deliver the highest possible quality of life for all our residents, and address existing
problems such as health disparities and air quality that currently detract from it.
10 Office for National Statistics (March 2016) Towns and cities analysis, England and Wales, March 2016, p.18 – based on the proportion of lower
super output areas in the most deprived 20% in England and Wales, using the 2015 Index of Multiple Deprivation
11 ONS: Ward-level population estimates (Experimental Statistics) 2002-2016 (released October2017).
GMCONSULT.ORG 33Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 34Places for Everyone3.1 The vision for Greater Manchester is set out in the Greater Manchester Strategy:
Our vision is to make Greater Manchester one of the best places in the world to grow up,
get on and grow old:
A place where all children are given the best start in life and young people grow up inspired
to exceed expectations.
A place where people are proud to live, with a decent home, a fulfilling job, and stress-free
journeys the norm. But if you need a helping hand you’ll get it.
A place of ideas and invention, with a modern and productive economy that draws in
investment, visitors and talent.
A place where people live healthy lives and older people are valued.
A place at the forefront of action on climate change with clean air and a flourishing natural
environment.
A place where all voices are heard and where, working together, we can shape our future.
3.2 Through this Plan we are committed to supporting the achievement of this vision in our
boroughs. However, this Plan is one of many ways in which the vision will be delivered, and
many of the necessary actions will lie outside the scope of the Plan.
3.3 Figure 3.1 'Key Diagram'  illustrates the Plan's spatial strategy, showing the locations that
will be the main focus for development up to 2037.
36 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneMANCHESTER SHIP CANAL
M62
M60
M60M61M61
M58
M6M6
M6M62
M56M67
M56M60M66
M62CHORLEY
ST HELENS
WILMSLOWWARRINGTONCulcheth
LymmBillinge
HaydockAdlington
Skelmersdale
Newton-le-Willows
RUNCORNWIDNES
HandforthWiganBoltonRochdale
Ashton-
under-LyneBury
Oldham
AltrinchamSalford
ManchesterBOLTONROCHDALE
TAMESIDE
SALFORD
HAL TONLANCASHIRELANCASHIRE
CHESHIRE
EASTWEST
YORKSHIRE
DERBYSHIRE
WARRINGTONBLACKBURN
WITH DARWEN
MERSEYSIDE
MANCHESTERWIGAN
TRAFFORDBURY
OLDHAM
Links to Port of
Liverpoolto ShefﬁeldTo Leeds
to Liverpool
ManchesterAirportGlobal Links
Contains OS data © Crown copyright and database right 2020Manchester
AirportM602
Core Growth
Inner Area RegenerationKEY
Maintain Southern Competitiveness
Boost Northern Competitiveness
Principal Town Centre
Proposed Green Belt
Strategic Allocation
Strategic Location
Broad Location
Potential Rapid Transit (bus/metro/tram-train)
HS2
Existing Rapid Transit (bus/metro/tram-train)
Existing MotorwayKEY DIAGRAM
Figure 3.1 Key Diagram
GMCONSULT.ORG 37Places for EveryoneStrategic Objectives
Objective 1
Meet our housing need.
We will:
Increase net additional dwellings;
Increase the number of affordable homes;
Provide a diverse mix of housing.
Objective 2
Create neighbourhoods of choice.
We will:
Prioritise the use of brownfield land;
Focus new homes in the Core Growth Area and the town centres;
Focus new homes within 800m of public transport hubs;
Ensure that there is no increase in the number of homes and premises at a high risk of
flooding;
Prioritise sustainable modes of transport to reduce the impact of vehicles on communities.
Objective 3
Playing our part in ensuring a thriving and productive economy in all parts of Greater
Manchester.
We will:
Ensure there is adequate development land to meet our employment needs;
Prioritise the use of brownfield land;
Ensure there is a diverse range of employment sites and premises;
Facilitate the development of high value clusters in prime sectors such as:
Advanced manufacturing;
Business, financial and professional services;
Creative and digital;
38 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneHealth innovation;
Logistics.
Objective 4
Maximise the potential arising from our national and international assets.
We will:
Focus development in the Core Growth Area, Manchester Airport and key economic
locations;
Improve visitor facilities in the City Centre, Quays and Manchester Airport and our
international and national sporting assets;
Enhance our cultural, heritage and educational assets;
Improve sustainable transport and active travel access to these locations;
Improve access for local people to jobs in these locations;
Ensure infrastructure provision supports growth in these locations;
Increase graduates staying in Greater Manchester.
Objective 5
Reduce inequalities and improve prosperity.
We will:
Ensure people in all of our neighbourhoods have access to skills training and employment
opportunities;
Prioritise development in well-connected locations;
Deliver an inclusive and accessible transport network;
Strengthen the competitiveness of north Greater Manchester;
Reduce the number of our wards in the 10% most deprived nationally.
Objective 6
Promote the sustainable movement of people, goods and information.
We will:
GMCONSULT.ORG 39Places for EveryoneEnhance our existing transport network;
Focus new development within 800m of sustainable transport hubs;
Ensure new development is designed to encourage and enable active and sustainable
travel;
Expand our transport network to facilitate new areas of sustainable and inclusive growth;
Capitalise on national and regional investment in transport infrastructure;
Improve opportunities for sustainable freight;
Ensure new development provides opportunities for affordable, high quality digital
infrastructure.
Objective 7
Playing our part in ensuring that Greater Manchester is a more resilient and carbon neutral
city-region.
We will:
Promote carbon neutrality of new development by 2028;
Promote sustainable patterns of development that minimise the need to travel and contribute
to cleaner air;
Locate and design development to reduce car dependency;
Facilitate provision of infrastructure for cleaner vehicles;
Improve energy efficiency and the generation of renewable and low carbon energy.
Objective 8
Improve the quality of our natural environment and access to green spaces.
We will:
Enhance special landscapes, green infrastructure, biodiversity and geodiversity;
Improve access to the natural environment and green spaces including parks;
Promote the role of green space in climate resilience and reducing flood risk.
Objective 9
Ensure access to physical and social infrastructure.
We will:
40 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneEnsure that our communities and businesses are supported by infrastructure;
Improve the capacity and network coverage of digital, energy, telecoms, transport and water
in key growth locations;
Ensure new development is properly served by physical and social infrastructure including
schools, health, social care, sports and recreation facilities.
Objective 10
Promote the health and wellbeing of communities.
We will:
Ensure new development is properly served by health care services that meet the needs
of communities;
Improve access to healthy food options for all communities;
Reduce the health impacts of air pollution through accessibility of sustainable travel such
as public transport, cycling and walking;
Maximise the health benefits of access to the natural environment and green spaces;
Coordinate with and support the delivery of local and Greater Manchester wide health
strategies.
GMCONSULT.ORG 41Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 42Places for EveryoneInclusive Growth
4.1 The central theme of our spatial strategy is to deliver inclusive growth across the city region,
with everyone sharing in the benefits of rising prosperity. There are three main aspects to
this:
Making the most of the key locations and assets best-placed to support economic
growth;
Creating more favourable conditions for growth by providing high quality investment
opportunities that help to address disparities; and
Creating places which will be more resilient to climate change.
Making the Most of Key Locations and Assets
4.2 As globalisation continues and the pace of technological change accelerates, there will be
increasing competition between cities for investment, jobs and skilled people. If Greater
Manchester is to flourish in the long run then it will need to make the most of its key assets
and advantages, which can differentiate it from other places.The growth potential of a small
number of locations that can boost international competitiveness will need to be maximised
in order to support the prosperity of Greater Manchester as a whole.
4.3 Key locations and assets include:
The huge agglomeration of economic activity at the centre of Greater Manchester,
focused on the City Centre and the Quays but also extending westwards through Trafford
Park and eastwards to Central Park and the Etihad campus, which provides an enormous
number and range of jobs;
Manchester Airport, which is the largest airport in the country outside London and the
South East, and offers routes across the world;
Connections to the post-Panamax facilities at the Port of Liverpool, via the Manchester
Ship Canal, rail and motorways, enabling access to global shipping routes and the
largest vessels;
The universities and the knowledge economy, with a high concentration of students,
research activity and scientific institutions.The Oxford Road Corridor is an internationally
important location in this regard, whilst the University of Salford and the Crescent area
have huge potential for further investment;
The strong cultural identity of Greater Manchester and its constituent cities and towns,
with a global reputation for sports and the arts; and
The strong network of green and blue infrastructure including river valleys, lowlands
uplands and woodlands.
4.4 The strength of these locations and assets will be further enhanced by significant investment
in both national and sub-regional important public transport schemes.
44 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAddressing Disparities
4.5 Over recent years, growth has been concentrated in the three local authority areas of
Manchester, Salford and Trafford, and this is forecast to continue in the future. The potential
for an uneven pattern of growth is reinforced by the fact that the key assets and locations
discussed above are focused very much in the central parts of Greater Manchester, with
the airport on the southern edge of the sub-region and the potential associated with the Port
of Liverpool towards the west.
4.6 When a broad range of socio-economic measures are considered, such as levels of economic
activity, qualifications, occupation, household incomes, house prices, poor health, population
change and levels of housing development, the northern areas of Greater Manchester with
the exception of Bury (i.e. Wigan, Bolton, Rochdale, Oldham and Tameside) perform
significantly worse than the southern areas.The low forecast growth rates for these northern
areas risks reinforcing rather than tackling those problems.
4.7 However, despite the economic success of the City Centre, the largest concentration of
severe deprivation is in the central areas that surround it. In contrast with the northern areas,
these deprived central parts face very high development pressures, and have been the
primary focus for inward international migration to Greater Manchester in recent years.
Efficient Use of Land Resources
4.8 A key role of this Plan is to manage the conflicting demands on our finite land resources.
The need for new housing, employment, facilities and infrastructure has to be accommodated,
whilst at the same time protecting the environment, urban green spaces, the countryside
and the identity of different places.
4.9 The rate of expansion experienced over the last 150 years cannot be continued indefinitely.
In order to minimise future outward growth of the built-up area, it will be important to ensure
that land resources are used efficiently and effectively, and this is a key principle behind the
spatial strategy set out in this document.
4.10 An essential aspect of the efficient and effective use of land will be to prioritise the reuse of
previously-developed (brownfield) land when meeting development needs. This will help to
address dereliction and bring investment into existing urban areas, supporting their
regeneration and enhancement. Abnormal costs such as those associated with addressing
land contamination can have a negative impact on the viability of developing brownfield
sites, and so securing funding to support remediation will be a priority.
4.11 Development will need to be undertaken at an appropriate density and with suitable provision
for green infrastructure. Securing higher densities in the most accessible locations will help
to maximise the ability of people to travel by walking, cycling and public transport, and reduce
reliance on the car.
GMCONSULT.ORG 45Places for Everyone4.12 Maximising the reuse of previously-developed land and delivering higher densities in the
most accessible locations will together help to reduce the total amount of land required for
new buildings and hence minimise the need for development of greenfield sites.
4.13 This focus on utilising previously-developed land and increasing densities in accessible
places further reinforces the importance of delivering high levels of growth in the Core Growth
Area, as locations such as the City Centre and the Quays are already characterised by high
density development and have the greatest potential to be well-connected by public transport
to residents across Greater Manchester. The town centres across the plan area will also be
well-placed in this regard.
4.14 However, even with increasing densities and the reuse of brownfield land, the scale and
distribution of development required to meet our needs has necessitated the need for selective
removal of Green Belt and the use of other land previously safeguarded from development.
Opportunities and Challenges
4.15 Different parts of Greater Manchester can therefore be seen to be facing different challenges.
In broad terms:
The central areas have a combination of a high concentration of key growth assets with
large levels of past and forecast growth, but considerable deprivation;
The southern area also has significant forecast growth, but with typically higher levels
of prosperity, as for example shown by average household incomes and house prices,
lower levels of deprivation (though there are still some concentrations), and the key
economic asset of Manchester Airport; and
The northern areas typically have lower recent and forecast growth, extensive areas of
deprivation and, although there are some important infrastructure assets such as the
M62 motorway and significant levels of manufacturing activity, the growth opportunities
are currently more limited than in the rest of Greater Manchester.
4.16 Our spatial strategy responds to this variation, whilst also recognising both the commonalities
between places and the diversity within each of them.This is essential to delivering inclusive
growth that secures greater prosperity and quality of life for everyone in the city region.
Spatial Strategy
4.17 The overall spatial strategy of the Plan seeks to take advantage of the opportunities for
delivering high levels of economic growth, whilst addressing the challenges for securing
genuinely inclusive growth and prosperity.
4.18 Making the most of the key assets at the core of the conurbation is central to the approach,
as this will be essential to maximising the competitiveness of Greater Manchester and driving
economic growth across the city region. Securing major investment in the surrounding inner
areas will be important to addressing the extensive deprivation in those neighbourhoods,
as well as supporting the successful functioning of the core areas.
46 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone4.19 If the forecast patterns of growth continue unchecked, reinforcing past trends, then Greater
Manchester will become increasingly southward focused, with greater disparities between
its northern and southern areas. This is not considered to be consistent with delivering
inclusive growth, and would adversely impact on the long-term prospects for Greater
Manchester. Hence, the Plan seeks to boost significantly the competitiveness of the northern
parts of Greater Manchester, whilst ensuring that the southern area continues to make a
considerable contribution to growth by making the most of its key assets.
4.20 This approach is summarised in Figure 4.1 'Spatial Strategy'  and explained in more detail
in the rest of this chapter.
SPATIAL STRATEGY
BOOST NORTHERN COMPETITIVENESS
 SUSTAIN   SOUTHERN   CORE
GROWTHINNER AREA
REGENERATION
 COMPETITIVENESS   
Figure 4.1 Spatial Strategy
4.21 The areas identified in the above diagram do not have firm boundaries.There is some overlap
between them, and they are likely to evolve over time. However, in broad terms they can be
described as follows:
Core Growth Area: central Manchester, south-east Salford, and north Trafford
Inner Area Regeneration: surrounding inner parts of Manchester, Salford and Trafford
GMCONSULT.ORG 47Places for EveryoneBoost Northern Competitiveness: Bolton, Bury, Oldham, Rochdale, Tameside, Wigan,
and west Salford
Sustain Southern Competitiveness: Most of Trafford and south Manchester but also
Stockport, who will play a vital role in this through its own Local Plan.
4.22 The rapid transit routes and strategic green infrastructure, which are also an important part
of the spatial strategy, extend through all of these areas. The main town centres are located
within the northern and southern areas.
Core Growth Area
4.23 The huge agglomeration of economic activity at the centre of Greater Manchester is perhaps
the city region’ s greatest strength. At the heart of this is the City Centre, which is the most
significant economic location and largest office market in the country outside London.
Immediately to its south-west is the Quays, which provides an internationally significant
cluster of digital and creative uses. The wider central economic area  extends beyond the
City Centre and the Quays, eastwards to include Central Park and the Etihad campus, and
westwards through Trafford Park, which is one of Europe’ s largest industrial estates, to Port
Salford.This area provides a huge scale and diversity of economic and residential opportunity,
which is accessible from across Greater Manchester and beyond.
48 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneM60
M62M602
M60MANCHESTER   SHIP   CANALCORE GROWTH AREA
ETIHAD 
CAMPUS
OLD 
TRAFFORDTRAFFORD 
CENTRETRAFFORD 
PARKCITY
CENTRE
THE
QUAYS
PORT
SALFORDCENTRAL PARKFigure 4.2 Core Growth Area
4.24 A strong focus of growth in the Core Growth Area, particularly the City Centre and the Quays,
is fundamental to our overall strategy. This is the area with the largest concentration of key
assets, and which has seen the highest level of market interest over a prolonged period of
time. It provides the greatest growth potential and best opportunity to increase the international
competitiveness of the city region. It offers a significant opportunity to create jobs for existing
local communities, particularly those from the more deprived communities, thereby reducing
poverty and delivering inclusive growth. Despite the challenges currently facing the nation
as a result of the health crisis resulting from the Coronavirus pandemic, delivering high levels
of employment growth in this area will be crucial to maximising the accessibility of jobs to
residents across Greater Manchester in a sustainable way. This continuing agglomeration
of activity will provide the scale, quality and profile of activity necessary for Greater
Manchester to become a top global city.
4.25 There is also an opportunity to continue to grow significantly the residential role of  this core
area, including a broader range of dwelling types and an increase in the supply of affordable
housing. Securing large numbers of new homes in this part of the sub-region will enable
more people to live near to a variety of employment, business and leisure opportunities, and
GMCONSULT.ORG 49Places for Everyonereduce pressure on greenfield and Green Belt land elsewhere in Greater Manchester.
However, it will be important to ensure that this complements rather than displaces the
economic functions.
4.26 Development within the City Centre and the Quays will typically be delivered at high densities,
reflecting the accessibility and prominence of those locations. There will remain extensive
areas of lower density employment development such as within Trafford Park and at Port
Salford, providing a diverse range of employment and business opportunities. Separate
policies are set out below for the City Centre, the Quays, and Port Salford.
Policy JP-Strat 1
Core Growth Area
The economic role of the Core Growth Area will be protected and enhanced, with sustainable
development supporting major growth in the number of jobs provided across the area providing
opportunities to create jobs for local communities.
Complementary to, but not at the expense of, its economic function it will see a significant
increase in the number and range of homes in areas with good connections to employment,
training and education facilities. These homes will be supported by necessary green spaces
and social infrastructure and will be of an appropriate design. In total sufficient land has been
identified in the Core Growth Area for almost 98,000 new homes.
Infrastructure provision will support the growth and continued capacity of the Core Growth Area
having particular regard to the Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh and
accompanying Delivery Plans.
City Centre
4.27 The City Centre lies at the heart of Greater Manchester, straddling the boundary between
Manchester and Salford. It is mainly contained within the Inner Relief Road but also extends
beyond, including along Oxford Road to the south and along Chapel Street and the Crescent
to the west.
4.28 The City Centre plays a key role in Greater Manchester's economy, and that of the North of
England more generally, providing around 10% of all jobs in the sub-region. It offers a large
range of employment, shopping, leisure and tourism opportunities, attracting significant
numbers of visitors to Greater Manchester. It also has a high concentration of
knowledge-based activities, with three universities, several major research centres, and a
large supply of graduates, as well as a valuable historic environment with numerous heritage
assets. The completion of major transport infrastructure schemes towards the end of the
Plan period, such as HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail, will dramatically reduce journey
times to London, Birmingham and major cities in the North, further enhancing the
50 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneattractiveness and potential of the City Centre. Improved connectivity between the City
Centre and adjacent areas, such as between The Quays and Salford Crescent, will support
growth across the City Centre, as well as in edge-of-centre locations that benefit from this
improved connectivity and become increasingly suitable for higher density and the expansion
of further knowledge based clusters of development.
4.29 Although there is already a very high level of activity within the City Centre, the area has
significant development potential and will be the largest source of new jobs and homes in
Greater Manchester over the next few decades.The City Centre offers significant opportunity
to maximise the use of previously developed land. It will enable the delivery of a range of
types of homes so that people can live close to a major source of jobs, education and
amenities, reducing the need to travel. This will make it essential that major improvements
in public transport continue to be provided, ensuring that residents from across Greater
Manchester and beyond can easily access the opportunities within the City Centre without
increasing congestion, and enabling employers to take advantage of the large and diverse
labour market.
Policy JP-Strat 2
City Centre
The role of the City Centre as the most significant economic location in the country outside
London will be strengthened considerably. The City Centre will continue to provide the primary
focus for business, retail, leisure, culture and tourism activity in Greater Manchester, but the
increasingly important residential role of the City Centre will be expanded considerably by a
range of high density new homes, supported by necessary infrastructure. Development will
enable people to take advantage of the access to education and training and the extensive
public transport offer, reducing the need to travel to work whilst supporting economic growth
and reducing levels of poverty.
It will be a priority for investment in development and infrastructure. This will include addressing
current network capacity issues in the City Centre which will enable the future expansion of the
rapid transit public transport network across Greater Manchester. Improvements in the public
realm, walking and cycling facilities, and green infrastructure will help to enhance the local
character and environmental quality of the City Centre so that it can rival city centres across the
globe, enabling it to compete effectively at the international level for investment, businesses,
skilled workers, residents and tourists. A broad range of commercial accommodation will be
delivered, helping the City Centre to capture growth across key economic sectors.
The new functions within the City Centre will be delivered in a way that complement, rather than
displace the area’ s non-residential functions and will seek to protect and enhance the city centre’ s
historic environment and assets.
GMCONSULT.ORG 51Places for EveryoneOver the period 2020-2037, land to accommodate around 2,200,000 sqm of office floorspace,
around 56,000 new dwellings and minimal industry and warehousing (just over 35,000 sqm)
has been identified within the City Centre.
CITY CENTRE
   MANCHESTER  SHIP  CANAL      RIVER     IRWELL
HS2
67 MIN TO LONDONSALFORD 
CRESCENTSALFORD 
CENTRALMANCHESTERVICTORIA
DEANSGATE
MANCHESTER
OXFORD ROADMANCHESTERPICCADILLYTHE MEADOW
WHITWORTH
PARKTHE OXFORD ROAD CORRIDORThe QuaysUNIVERSITY 
OF SALFORDPEEL
PARK
Retail Core
Figure 4.3 City Centre
The Quays
4.30 The Quays is located just to the south-west of the City Centre, in Salford and Trafford,
focused around the Manchester Ship Canal and a series of bays and basins.
4.31 Since the 1980s, the Quays has gradually been transformed from a derelict docklands into
a vibrant mixed-use area with well-established tourism, employment, retail and residential
functions taking advantage of the high quality environment and waterside setting. The
development of MediaCityUK over the last decade has helped to establish an internationally
significant cluster of digital and media uses, including the BBC and ITV, but the area also
has a wider business function and is one of the primary office locations in Greater Manchester.
52 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneThe Salford side of the Quays benefits from several Metrolink stops and the Trafford side
now also benefits from the recent expansion of the Metrolink network through the completion
of the new £350m Trafford Park Line in 2020.
4.32 Although the Quays has seen very significant levels of investment in recent years, there is
still enormous development potential within the area across all of its functions, including
major expansion of the digital/creative cluster and significant residential opportunities. It
offers significant opportunity to maximise the use of previously developed land by delivering
large scale residential development close to a major source of jobs, education supported
by the necessary infrastructure and amenities. Substantial improvements in transport
infrastructure, particularly public transport, will be required if the Quays is to realise its full
potential and residents across Greater Manchester are to take maximum advantage of its
success. It will also be important to improve the connections between the Quays and the
City Centre, as this would further strengthen the success of both strategic locations, providing
an enormous concentration of integrated activity and maximising their agglomeration benefits.
Policy JP-Strat 3
The Quays
The Quays will continue to develop as an economic location of national significance, characterised
by a wide mix of uses. Its business, housing, leisure and tourism roles will all be significantly
expanded, in a mutually supportive way, reinforcing the area’ s interest, vibrancy and unique
identity to reduce levels of unemployment and poverty in our communities.The high environmental
quality of the Quays (including its public realm, green infrastructure, wildlife sites and heritage
assets) will be protected and enhanced as its essential distinguishing features, and excellent,
distinctive design will continue to be a priority.
Over the period 2020-2037, land to accommodate around 192,000 sqm of office floorspace,
around 12,500 new dwellings and minimal industry and warehousing (around 6,000 sqm) has
been identified within the Quays. The new homes will be a range of high density homes, close
to major sources of jobs and education, supported by the necessary infrastructure and
amenities. Major improvements in accessibility by public transport, cycling and walking will be
sought, including much better links to key rail stations and greater connectivity with the City
Centre.
GMCONSULT.ORG 53Places for EveryoneTHE QUAYS
IMPROVED LINKS TO CITY 
CENTRE AND RAIL STATIONS
MANCHESTER  SHIP  CANALECCLES  METROLINK
TRAFFORD  PARK  METROLINK
OLD TRAFFORDIMPERIAL
WAR MUSUEM
NORTHTHE LOWRY
BRIDGEWATER  CANALTrafford
ParkMediaCityUKPOTENTIAL
METROLINK EXTENSION
TO SALFORD CRESCENT
POTENTIAL METRO/
TRAM-TRAINFigure 4.4 The Quays
Port Salford
4.33 Port Salford is currently under construction and will be the UK’ s first tri-modal inland waterway
port. It is located on the Manchester Ship Canal, which is a unique 36-mile long seaway
extending from the heart of Greater Manchester westwards to the Mersey Estuary, however,
this location offers significant opportunity for further economic growth. Supported by
sustainable transport it will ensure the economic growth at this location is accessible to a
wide range of residents and will reduce levels of poverty in Greater Manchester, particularly
in the surrounding “inner areas”.
4.34 New canal berths at Port Salford will enable direct shipping services to the Port of Liverpool,
where post-Panamax facilities can accommodate the world’ s largest vessels, providing
access to global markets and suppliers. A new rail spur from the main Manchester-Liverpool
line into the heart of the Port Salford site and alongside the canal, together with the provision
of a major container terminal, will enable easy movement of goods between water, rail and
road.
54 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone4.35 The first warehouse has been constructed and occupied, and the first phases in a series of
major highway works have been completed including a new lifting bridge across the
Manchester Ship Canal. A further three large-scale buildings to the south of the A57 have
planning permission, and this plan takes land out of the Green Belt to the north of the A57
to enable a major expansion of the scheme. Port Salford as a whole could provide around
500,000 sqm  of high quality floorspace within an integrated facility by the end of the Plan
period.
4.36 The tri-modal facilities at Port Salford have the potential to deliver major benefits for Greater
Manchester, not only supporting a larger and more sustainable logistics sector but also
enabling the more efficient and cost-effective movement of components and products for
manufacturers.
4.37 A key strength of Port Salford is its location near to the junction of the M60, M62 and M602
motorways. It is likely that major enhancements to the motorway network around Port Salford
will be required, both to support the scheme and address wider congestion issues. The
ongoing Manchester North West Quadrant Study is investigating the options for broader
motorway network improvements, and it will be important to coordinate the development of
Port Salford with any emerging proposals.
Policy JP-Strat 4
Port Salford
Port Salford will be developed as an integrated tri-modal facility, with on-site canal berths, rail
spur and container terminal as essential elements of the scheme.
The overall facility will provide around 500,000 sqm of employment floorspace. This will include
an extension of the permitted scheme onto land to the north and west of Barton Aerodrome, as
allocated under Policy JP Allocation 29 'Port Salford Extension' .
The development of Port Salford must ensure that necessary transport infrastructure is delivered,
including highway improvements to accommodate the likely scale of traffic generation, in a way
that is compatible with proposals for the enhancement of the wider motorway network and the
provision of appropriate sustainable travel opportunities to meet the needs of the employees
accessing the site.
GMCONSULT.ORG 55Places for EveryoneCANAL
BERTHSPORT SALFORD
M602
M62M60
M60
MANCHESTER  SHIP  CANAL 
A57A57MANCHESTER - LIVERPOOL RAIL LINE
LIFTING BRIDGE 
AND HIGHWAYSIMPROVEMENTS
FURTHER WESTERN
GATEWAY HIGHWAY
INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTSFURTHER WESTERN
GATEWAY HIGHWAY
INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS
RAIL SPURJ12/J1J2
J11
J10
J9PORT
SALFORDPORT
SALFORD
EXTENSIONTrafford
ParkPOTENTIAL
METROLINK EXTENSIONCITY AIRPORT 
(BARTON
AERODROME)
TRAFFORD
CENTREAJ BELL
STADIUMECCLES
PATRICROFT
BUSINTERCHANGEBUS
INTERCHANGEECCLES METROLINK
TRAFFORD PARK METROLINKPOTENTIAL NEW
JUNCTION
POTENTIAL 
LINK ROADIMPROVED LINKS BETWEEN ECCLES RAIL, METROLINK & BUS STATIONS
Eccles
town centreFigure 4.5 Port Salford
Inner Area Regeneration
4.38 The inner areas of the city region, surrounding the City Centre and the Quays, benefit from
a position adjacent to an enormous concentration of economic activity. However, despite
this proximity, these inner areas are characterised by high levels of deprivation, with extensive
parts being amongst the 10% most deprived neighbourhoods in the country.
4.39 The challenges faced by the inner areas are quite different to most other deprived areas in
Greater Manchester. Over the last 15 years, the 22 wards(12) at the heart of the inner area
have collectively seen an increase in population of 38% compared to growth of 11% across
the rest of the city region, and these wards have been the primary focus for international
migration into Greater Manchester. The age profile of this population change has also been
distinctive, with increases of 36% in 0-17 year olds, 42% in 18-29 year olds and 37% for
12 Ancoats and Clayton, Ardwick, Bradford, Cheetham, Crumpsall, Fallowfield, Gorton North, Gorton South, Harpurhey, Hulme, Levenshulme,
Longsight, Miles Platting and Newton Heath, Moss Side, Old Moat, Rusholme, Whalley Range, Withington (all in Manchester), Broughton,
Irwell Riverside, Langworthy (in Salford), and Clifford (in Trafford). There are 215 wards in Greater Manchester.
56 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone30-44 year olds, compared to figures of 3%, 15% and -7% respectively for the rest of Greater
Manchester. In contrast, the area saw a reduction in residents aged 65 and over, whereas
the rest of the city region had an increase of more than one-fifth.(13)
4.40 The high growth in population has led to significant development pressures, not just in terms
of new build developments but also more intensified use of existing properties such as
conversions to houses in multiple occupation (HMOs). The proposed scale of job growth in
the Core Growth Area, and the excellent location of the inner areas in relation to them, make
it likely that there will continue to be significant pressures from population growth within this
part of Greater Manchester.
4.41 Increasing housing provision in the inner areas would enable more people to access easily
the opportunities of the Core Growth Area by walking, cycling and public transport and
thereby reducing the need to travel. Maintaining a good supply of affordable housing will be
especially important, helping to reduce travel costs for those on lower incomes who need
access to the Core Growth Area for employment and services.
4.42 The high levels of deprivation highlight the need for sustained neighbourhood regeneration,
with investment in improving the quality of existing housing (including its energy efficiency
and access to amenity space) as well as providing a good mix of new homes. Although there
is a need for significant levels of development to meet demand and to maximise the use of
brownfield land, it will be essential that the network of open spaces and other green
infrastructure is improved, contributing to the long-term attractiveness of these
neighbourhoods. Raising the quality of these places will depend on tackling issues such as
traffic congestion and air quality, which are typically more severe than in many other parts
of the city region. There are also quite significant areas of flood risk.
Policy JP-Strat 5
Inner Areas
The continued regeneration of the inner areas will be promoted and will be linked to reducing
levels of deprivation and poverty and supporting the improved health and wellbeing of the
communities. High levels of well-designed new development will be accommodated in this highly
accessible and sustainable location, prioritising the use of previously developed land.
New development will be of high quality, predominantly, residential (in a mix of size, type and
tenure). It will be supported by necessary infrastructure, including high quality open space and
improved access to the wider green infrastructure network, together with improved transport
and social infrastructure.
13 ONS ward-based mid-year population estimates (experimental) 2002-2017 - see
www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcomm unity/populationandmig ration/populationestimates/datasets/w ardlevelmidy earpopulationestimatese xperimental .
GMCONSULT.ORG 57Places for EveryoneWhere a mix of uses is being proposed it will seek to protect the amenity of existing and new
residents and it will seek to protect and enhance the location’ s historic and natural environment
and assets.
New development will be integrated with existing communities, enhancing the quality of places
and their local character, including through good quality design, enhanced green infrastructure
(and access to it) and improvements in air quality.
Over the period 2020-2037, land to accommodate around 270,000 sq m of office, around 132,000
sq m of industry and warehousing and around 30,000 new dwellings has been identified within
the inner areas.
Boosting Northern Competitiveness
4.43 Over recent years, the northern areas of Greater Manchester have seen relatively low levels
of growth overall compared to other parts of the city region, and this is forecast to continue.
These northern areas have many strengths, such as their distinctive landscapes, proud
communities, a strong manufacturing base and the opportunity for links to areas of economic
prosperity beyond Greater Manchester, but their potential is not currently being fully realised.
If current trends continue then disparities between the northern and southern areas will
increase, and this will be harmful not only to the prospects for the north but also to those of
Greater Manchester.
4.44 The northern areas are diverse, but there are considerable areas of deprivation within most
districts. Deprivation is particularly extensive across the north-east, with relatively high levels
through much of Rochdale, Oldham, and Tameside, extending into north Manchester. This
north-eastern area is characterised by relatively low incomes, low house prices, low
qualifications, low economic activity, low proportions in higher managerial/professional
occupations, and poor average health. There are also significant pockets of deprivation
elsewhere in the northern areas, particularly around the main town centres, which share
similar problems to the north-east. However, there are also more prosperous areas across
the north, especially in suburban and rural areas towards the edges of each district, with the
district of Bury sharing many of the attributes of the wealthier southern areas of Greater
Manchester.
4.45 Some significant interventions will be required to address the extensive deprivation and the
relatively low levels of growth, economic activity and prosperity. Investment will be required
across the northern areas, with the provision of a good supply of high quality development
sites and major transport improvements across all districts to support greater competitiveness.
However, it will be vital that this is done in a sensitive way that protects the character and
identity of the north, and the quality of key landscapes such as the uplands and river valleys.
58 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone4.46 Two locations have been identified as being especially important, having the potential to
deliver significant benefits over a wider area and make a major contribution to raising the
competitiveness of the northern areas as a whole: the north-east growth corridor; and the
Wigan-Bolton growth corridor. These are discussed in more detail below.
4.47 Investment in the town centres of the northern districts will be vital, particularly the main
town centres of Ashton-under-Lyne, Bolton, Bury, Oldham, Rochdale and Wigan. There is
a need to increase the density of high quality public transport routes to match that found in
the southern areas. Improving connections between places in the north, and to key economic
locations such as those within the Core Growth Area and Manchester Airport, would help
to deliver a more integrated Greater Manchester economy where everyone can benefit fully
from growth.
4.48 It will be important to increase the attractiveness of the northern areas to a wider range of
people. In particular, there is the potential to increase the number of higher income households
who choose to live in the north. The influx of more entrepreneurs and skilled workers could
help to increase business creation and support local economic activity, as well as reducing
pressures in the southern areas which currently have high levels of demand. This Plan
allocates a small number of sites in the northern areas specifically to increase attractiveness
of the northern areas to highly paid, highly skilled workers, including at such sites as Chew
Brook Vale ( Robert Fletchers) in Oldham (Policy JP Allocation 15 'Chew Brook Vale (Robert
Fletchers)' ), Bamford/Norden in Rochdale ( Policy JP Allocation 19 'Bamford / Norden' ) and
East of Boothstown in Salford (Policy JP Allocation 27 'East of Boothstown') although many
other sites have the potential to attract skilled workers and hence boost the competitiveness
of the north.
Policy JP-Strat 6
Northern Areas
A significant increase in the competitiveness of the northern areas will be sought. There will be
a strong focus on prioritising the re-use of brownfield land through urban regeneration, enhancing
the role of the town centres and increasing the mix, type, quality and range of residential offer.
This will be complemented by improvements to transport connectivity and the selective release
of Green Belt and previously safeguarded land in key locations that will help to boost economic
opportunities and diversify housing provision (GM-Strat 7 and GM-Strat 8). Improving transport
connections and accessibility by public transport, cycling and walking will be a priority to ensure
access to key employment opportunities. In supporting the principles of inclusive growth, the
significant increases in economic growth in this location will help to reduce deprivation.
Development in this location will be of good quality and design, supported by the necessary
infrastructure and amenities including improved access to green spaces.
GMCONSULT.ORG 59Places for EveryoneDevelopment in this location, particularly that on land which is being proposed to be released
from the Green Belt, will seek to identify opportunities to protect and enhance the natural and
historic environments to improve the local character.
North-East Growth Corridor
4.49 The most significant proposed intervention in the northern areas is focused on the M62
corridor from Junction 18 (the confluence with the M60 and M66) to Junction 21 (Milnrow),
extending across parts of Bury, Rochdale and Oldham (GM-Strat 7).The scale of this initiative
is considered necessary in order to transform perceptions of, and opportunities within, the
north of Greater Manchester. There are two major sites where land is removed from the
Green Belt through this Plan, as well as a significant development on land outside the Green
Belt through the completion of the Kingsway Business Park. Developments in this location
are not reliant on each other. The Northern Gateway site is of a transformative scale in its
own right, but collectively they have the potential to significantly change the economic growth
potential of the wider area.
4.50 This location has been selected for large-scale intervention for three main reasons. Firstly,
this part of its corridor already has well-known established employment locations such as
Heywood, Pilsworth, Stakehill and Kingsway Business Park. Additionally, the M62 is a key
piece of transport infrastructure connecting Greater Manchester with the major cities of
Liverpool and Leeds, and beyond. As such, it has the scale, connectivity and profile required
to attract a broad range of high quality occupiers and major inward investment. This will not
only provide a better range of good quality jobs but will also offer opportunities for premises
for new and growing sectors for example advanced manufacturing. Secondly, the corridor
is close to a substantial residential population, many of whom live in deprived wards with
poor connectivity to employment opportunities.Whilst Stakehill Industrial Estate has a strong
reputation as an employment location and has excellent access to the motorway network,
only the western edge of the site is currently served by good public transport links. In other
directions, particularly to and from the Oldham borough, it requires improvement. New
investment in this location, in particular that which delivers improved public transport, could
therefore make a major contribution to regeneration and addressing inequalities, whilst also
offering employers easy access to a very large labour market.Thirdly, it includes opportunities
for large-scale development which together will have the critical mass to enable major
investment in infrastructure and attract high quality businesses, jobs and housing. Collectively,
these factors will ensure that the area has the ability to make a major contribution to the
overall, inclusive growth of Greater Manchester, as well as specifically helping to improve
the performance of the northern areas of the city region.
4.51 Works to improve the capacity of Simister Island (the junction of the M62, M60 and M66
motorways) are already planned, but additional investment in the motorway network will be
required to support the scale of development proposed within the North-East Growth Corridor,
60 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneincluding improvements to Junction 3 of the M66. The area may also be the subject of
proposals to improve the performance of the whole length of the M62/M60 through Greater
Manchester.
4.52 Major public transport improvements will be required to ensure that surrounding communities
can take advantage of the new jobs, and new residents can access key locations such as
the City Centre, nearby main town centres and key employment locations. This provides an
opportunity to deliver a more extensive and integrated public transport network in the
north-east of Greater Manchester, connecting existing communities that are currently poorly
served. Improvements to the Calder Valley Line have received commitments to be delivered
and the North-East Growth Corridor will also benefit from additional local bus services as
well as proposed Bus Rapid Transit to serve the new developments. Work is also on-going
into the future development of Bus Rapid Transit connections from the North-East Growth
Corridor and surrounding towns to the City Centre.
4.53 In addition to the transport investments needed to directly support the level of development
proposed, consideration is being given to delivering infrastructure that will benefit the wider
area, including options for tram-train operation along the route of the East Lancashire Rail
line, alongside the Heritage Railway and options for a Metrolink or Bus Rapid Transit extension
to Middleton.
Policy JP-Strat 7
North-East Growth Corridor
Lying within the area and policy framework covered by JP-Strat 6, the North-East Growth Corridor
which extends eastwards from Junction 18 of the M62 will deliver a nationally-significant area
of economic activity and growth which will be supported by a significant increase in the residential
offer in this location, including in terms of type, quality and mix, thereby delivering truly inclusive
growth over the lifetime of the Plan.
Over the period 2020-2037, land to accommodate almost 1 million  sqm  of new employment
floorspace and around 19,000 new dwellings has been identified within the whole Growth
Corridor.
Specifically this Plan allocates two major sites within the area, and makes associated changes
to the Green Belt boundaries, to support this growth:
Policy JP Allocation 1.1 'Heywood / Pilsworth (Northern Gateway)'
Policy JP Allocation 1.2 'Simister and Bowlee (Northern Gateway)'
Policy JP Allocation 2 'Stakehill'
In addition to these two allocations, there is considered to be a potential opportunity for further
expansion of the economic and residential offer in the eastern most part of this key gateway
location. As such the Key Diagram identifies the High Crompton Broad Location. The land will
GMCONSULT.ORG 61Places for Everyoneremain in the Green Belt until such time that a review of this Plan and / or the Oldham Local
Plan can demonstrate that it is necessary. The opportunity presented by the High Crompton
Broad Location would serve to meet future employment and housing needs and demand of
businesses and local communities in this part of the conurbation well beyond the end of the
Plan period. Well designed, sustainable development at this Broad Location would diversify
further the employment and housing offer in Oldham by ensuring truly inclusive growth could
be achieved which would help to reduce further the levels of deprivation and poverty.
The development of the area must ensure that necessary infrastructure is delivered to
accommodate the likely scale of development.
M66
M62
M60
M60M62
A627(M)
A627(M)NORTH EAST GROWTH CORRIDOR
BURY   METROLINKOLDHAM - ROCHDALE  METROLINKCASTLETONROCHDALE
MILLS HILLNORTHERN
GATEWAY
STAKEHILL
HEATON
PARKCITY
FOREST
PARKCALDER VALLEYRAIL LINE
NEWJUNCTIONJ2
J3
J18 
IMPROVEMENTSJ20J21
J19
J20J17PILSWORTHINDUSTRIALESTATEHEYWOOD DISTRIBUTION PARK
STAKEHILL
INDUSTRIAL
ESTATEKINGSWAYBUSINESSPARK
 CAPACITY 
IMPROVEMENTS
J19POTENTIAL METRO/
TRAM-TRAIN
POTENTIAL
NEW STATION
POTENTIAL METROLINK
EXTENSION TO MIDDLETONPOTENTIAL BUS RAPID TRANSITNETWORK
HIGH CROMPTON
BROAD LOCATION
Bury
town centreRochdale
town centre
Oldham
town centreMiddleton
town centre
Picture 4.2 North-East Growth Corridor
Wigan-Bolton Growth Corridor
4.54 The Wigan-Bolton Growth Corridor is located in the north-west of Greater Manchester, and
complements the North-East Growth Corridor ensuring that there are significant investment
opportunities across the northern areas, helping to boost the competitiveness of all parts of
62 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonethe north and delivering inclusive growth. The Wigan-Bolton Growth Corridor proposals are
smaller in scale than the North-East Growth Corridor, but are nevertheless important in
supporting long-term economic prosperity. The M6 logistics hub in Wigan (extending into
Warrington, St Helens and West Lancashire) provides a major cluster of warehousing and
distribution activity with easy access to the Port of Liverpool via the M58.
4.55 This growth corridor is focused around improved transport links. These include new roads
and a Wigan to Bolton Quality Bus corridor and, the more intense use of the Wigan – Atherton
– Manchester and the Wigan – Bolton – Manchester rail lines. New road infrastructure will
improve east-west connectivity between Junction 26 of the M6 (which is also the junction
for the M58 motorway that provides a direct connection to the Port of Liverpool) and Junction
5 of the M61. This transport infrastructure will significantly improve highway connections in
the north-west of Greater Manchester, and better integrate the strong logistics functions
along the M6 and M61 into the wider city region, as well as helping to address local congestion
issues. The increased use of the existing rail lines could include conversion to tram-train
use on the Atherton line and electrification on the Bolton line. This would increase capacity
and, along the Atherton line has the potential to increase the number of stations. The rail
lines and new road infrastructure extend through and near a series of deprived
neighbourhoods across central Wigan and into south Bolton and will greatly improve access
to employment opportunities, and hence will have a major regenerative role and reduce
levels of deprivation.
4.56 There are numerous development sites already identified along this corridor, including some
major brownfield sites such as those to the north of Leigh, south of Hindley and at Westwood
Park. However, in order to maximise the contribution of this corridor to boosting the
competitiveness of the northern areas, support the economic prospects of Wigan and Bolton,
and maximise the benefits of new transport infrastructure, there is also selective release of
land from the Green Belt for employment and housing development.
4.57 There are two significant assets at the eastern end of this growth corridor. Hulton Park is
the proposed site for a Ryder Cup golf course and the Royal Bolton Hospital is a significant
employer and the site of the Bolton College of Medical Sciences. The development of land
at the hospital will enable its evolution and provide additional opportunities, including new
health technology related activities, which would benefit from this location, alongside new
housing development.The corridor also benefits from its proximity to other important assets.
Wigan Town centre lies just to the north, which provides direct rail access to London, with
the current journey times of 2 hours set to reduce substantially with the arrival of HS2 services.
The lowland wetland and mosslands are just to the south, forming part of the strategic green
infrastructure network.
GMCONSULT.ORG 63Places for EveryonePolicy JP-Strat 8
Wigan-Bolton Growth Corridor
Lying within the area and policy framework covered by JP-Strat 6, the Wigan – Bolton Growth
Corridor will deliver a regionally-significant area of economic and residential development.
New highway infrastructure will connect Junction 26 of the M6 and Junction 5 of the M61 including
public transport provision. Measures to improve the provision of bus services and to increase
the use of rail lines will be implemented, potentially including a Wigan to Bolton Quality Bus
Transit corridor, conversion of the Atherton line to allow for metro/tram-train services, and the
electrification of the Bolton to Wigan line.
Over the period 2020-2037, land to accommodate just over 1milion sqm of new employment
floorspace and approximately 13,000 new dwellings has been identified within the area.
The majority of this new development will be on previously-developed land, within the urban
area. However, in order to meet the overall spatial strategy, this Plan allocates the following
sites within the area, and makes associated changes to the Green Belt, to further support the
success of the growth corridor:
Policy JP Allocation 4 'Bewshill Farm'
Policy JP Allocation 5 'Chequerbent North'
Policy JP Allocation 6 'West of Wingates / M61 Junction 6'
Policy JP Allocation 34 'M6 Junction 25'
Policy JP Allocation 37 'West of Gibfield'
In addition, the following will also be supported:
The restoration of Hulton Park, and the provision of a Ryder Cup standard golf course and
associated leisure and tourism facilities
The development of land at Royal Bolton Hospital, including a health village.
64 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneWIGAN-BOLTON GROWTH CORRIDOR
M6
                                                                                                                 ATHERTON RAIL LINEM58M61
HULTON
PARK
WEST OF 
GIBFIELDWEST OF 
WINGATES
JUNCTION 
25CHEQUERBENTNORTH
LINK ROADLINK ROADJ6
J5
J4 BEWSHILL FARM
J26
J25POTENTIAL METRO/
TRAM-TRAIN
POTENTIAL
STATIONPOTENTIAL
STATIONPOTENTIALSTATIONBolton
town centre
Wigan
town centre
Leigh
town centreFigure 4.6 Wigan-Bolton Growth Corridor
Sustaining Southern Competitiveness
4.58 The southern areas of Greater Manchester are typically characterised by high levels of
demand and forecast growth, and include some of the city region’ s most popular
neighbourhoods. Large parts of the south, extending into north Cheshire, have high house
prices and relatively high household incomes, but also significant issues of affordability.
Nevertheless, there are pockets of deprivation across the southern areas, and hence
significant disparities between communities.
4.59 Some areas of the south have good rapid transit connections to the City Centre, however
there are opportunities to improve connectivity.The area also benefits from the international
connections of Manchester Airport. Following the development and completion of HS2 and
Northern Powerhouse Rail, parts of Greater Manchester, including the City Centre and
Manchester Airport will be amongst the best-connected locations in the country, and the
southern areas will be well-located to take advantage of this.
GMCONSULT.ORG 65Places for Everyone4.60 The landscape of the southern areas contrast with the upland landscape of the northern
parts of Greater Manchester. The southern areas contain important strategic green
infrastructure assets, including major river valleys such as the Mersey and Bollin and some
extensive areas of woodland.
4.61 Our overall spatial strategy seeks to spread prosperity to all parts of the city region. However,
this must be balanced with the need to ensure that the competitiveness of the southern
areas is sustained, and the potential of key assets such as the main town centres and
Manchester Airport is realised. It is essential that this is done in a sensitive way that protects
the character and quality of key landscapes which will also help to deliver broader
sustainability objectives.
4.62 A significant amount of investment in both development and new and improved transport
infrastructure will be focused around two of Manchester’ s key assets, Manchester Airport
and Wythenshawe Hospital. This will include the selective release of Green Belt for new
employment and housing around the airport, including the Davenport Green area around
the proposed HS2 station and beyond to the hospital and southern edge of Timperley.
Development in this location will need to be cognisant of and complementary to the aspirations
of existing businesses in the locality.
4.63 An additional location in this area which has been identified as being especially important
to Greater Manchester, is the proposed development focused around the former chemicals
complex at Carrington in Trafford, which will enable a significant amount of contaminated
land to be restored. It will make a significant contribution to the area’ s new housing and
economic growth as well as supporting the regeneration of neighbouring Partington and
Sale West. Separate policies on the Manchester Airport area and New Carrington are set
out below.
4.64 Our southern areas benefit from their proximity to prosperous locations, such as Cheshire
East and Warrington, and taking opportunities to increase further the economic and functional
connections between these areas supports their mutual success. Given the proximity of
development outside the Greater Manchester boundary, to the south, to the need to work
with our partners to coordinate major development close to the boundaries of Greater
Manchester, particularly in terms of transport implications.
4.65 Although policies in this plan do not apply to land within Stockport, it is necessary to
acknowledge and welcome the role Stockport will play in sustaining the southern areas,
including delivering sustainable communities at its heart. Stockport Council has signalled
its intentions in this regard, with the creation of the first Mayoral Development Corporation
(MDC) which will help to improve the residential, retail, leisure, office and industrial offer in
and around the Town Centre. In delivering a new community of up to 3,500 homes and
approaching 100,000 sqm of commercial space over the next 15-20 years, it is clear the role
that this MDC will play in sustaining the competitiveness of the southern area.
66 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-Strat 9
Southern Areas
The economic competitiveness, distinctive local neighbourhood character and environmental
attractiveness of the southern areas will be protected and enhanced. There will be a strong
emphasis on prioritising the re-use of brownfield land and promoting the roles of the areas’  town
centres and its other key assets, including education and training facilities enabling people to
gain access to employment opportunities.There will be an increase in the mix, type, quality and
range of residential offer and a strengthening of its economic role. This will be complemented
by improvements to transport connectivity, local character and the selective release of Green
Belt in key locations.
The economic potential of, and benefits of investment in Altrincham, Trafford's Main Town Centre
and Manchester Airport, along with associated transport infrastructure will be maximised.There
will be an emphasis on improving transport connections and accessibility by public transport,
cycling and walking, ensuring access to key employment opportunities in this area. Development
in these areas will contribute to reducing poverty and will be inclusive.
Development in these locations will be of good quality and design, supported by the necessary
infrastructure and amenities and will seek to identify opportunities to protect and enhance the
natural and historic environments and to improve the local character.
Manchester Airport
4.66 Manchester Airport is the third busiest passenger airport in the UK, and the largest outside
London, handling c. 28 million passengers in 2019 and adding £1.4bn GVA to the regional
economy and supporting c. 25,000 jobs on-site. It is the only airport in the country other than
Heathrow to have two full length runways, but with the key advantage of having significant
spare capacity, and the potential to grow to some 55 million passengers a year. Unique
among non-London airports, it has the infrastructure, connectivity and scale to sustain a
growing network of medium and long-haul routes. This enables Northern Britain to benefit
from a major international air gateway for both business and leisure traffic, passengers and
freight. This is a vitally important role not just for Greater Manchester but also for a much
wider area across the North and Midlands, enabling businesses and residents to access
opportunities across the globe and providing a key access point for international visitors to
the UK. The airport is a key factor in realising the wider growth agenda for the North and
unlocking the economic potential of cities and regions within its catchment area. More locally,
the emerging Airport City development (part of the Greater Manchester Enterprise Zone) is
creating a major new economic asset for Greater Manchester, attracting global occupiers
and investment attracted by the unrivalled connectivity.
GMCONSULT.ORG 67Places for Everyone4.67 A major (£1bn) investment programme is underway to transform the airport and improve its
facilities to create a much improved customer experience and meet the changing needs of
passengers and airlines. Its expanding route network and growth are supported by the
Government's policy(14) to make best use of the UK's runway capacity and maintain the UK's
international connectivity and place in the global market. This could also help to reduce
pressure on congested airports in London and the South East. Growth and an expanding
route network could see throughput growing to make best use of its existing runways and
handle around 55 million passengers per annum. In 2020 Manchester Airport Group (MAG)
published a new Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Strategy.(15) In producing the CSR,
MAG recognises that aviation will be one of the hardest industries to decarbonise and as
such their new Strategy sets out a commitment to achieving “net zero carbon”  emissions
from their airport operations by 2038, ahead of the 2050 national target. The CSR has been
developed at this important time, with growing awareness of the need to tackle both global
and local challenges. The CSR sets out MAG’ s ambitious commitments which will guide the
sustainable development of the airport. It sets out ways MAG will achieve zero carbon status;
how MAG will create quality employment opportunities for all and; how MAG will engage
with communities.
4.68 To maximise the contribution of the airport to the wider growth agenda, it needs to be
well-connected to the key towns and cities that it serves. High quality reliable and speedy
journeys are crucial to spreading the economic stimulus that it creates and encouraging the
growth in long haul services. This requires further investment in the North's strategic road
and rail corridors, as part of a wider strategy to better connect the region's key gateways
and economic centres. The M56 J6 to J8 smart motorway scheme will serve to maximise
the benefits of recent/ongoing investment in the A556 and M6 J19 improvements. Highways
England have also commenced a South Manchester Highways and Transport Study which
is exploring options for improvements to transport links to mitigate the impact on the M56
of proposed growth in this location. The provision of a new HS2 station with journey times
to London of just over an hour, and the planned Northern Powerhouse rail network will
significantly improve the airport's connectivity, reduce journey times and make the
airport  area one of the best-connected locations in the country. Journeys to the Airport will
also be enhanced by the completion of the Metrolink Western Leg and proposed Bus Rapid
Transit service(s) along new spine roads linking development in Timperley Wedge and
Medipark into the existing urban areas of Altrincham and Wythenshawe. This improved
connectivity, along with improved links and services across Greater Manchester, will not
only be vital to increasing the proportion of passengers and staff who access the airport by
public transport, but will also support wider business opportunities and investment, attract
inbound visitors and help to spread the employment opportunities at the airport to communities
across the conurbation reducing inequalities and poverty.
4.69 Guided by Manchester City Council's local plan, Manchester Airport's Sustainable
Development Strategy and long-term Airport master plans, the airport therefore provides a
major opportunity to boost the competitiveness and prosperity of Greater Manchester, and
14 Beyond the Horizon. Making best use of existing runways. DfT June 2018 -
see www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/a viation-str ategy-making-best-use-of-e xisting-r unways
15 https://www .magair ports.com/responsib le-business/our-responsibility-plans/
68 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonethe wider UK, and support higher levels of economic growth. Although Aerodrome
safeguarding to protect the safe operation of the airport and the noise footprint associated
with aircraft noise place restrictions on the acceptable type of development in certain areas,
there is considerable potential to increase the scale of economic activity and housing near
to the airport and the proposed HS2 station, enabling more residents and businesses to take
advantage of the outstanding connectivity in an area of high market demand.
Policy JP-Strat 10
Manchester Airport
Lying within the area and policy framework covered by JP-Strat 9 this policy seeks to maximise
the benefits of the continued operation and sustainable growth of Manchester Airport and its
surrounding locality. Development which is in line with:
Government policy
Manchester's Local plan policies and
Manchester Airport Group's Corporate Social Responsibility Strategy
will be supported delivering a sustainable world class airport which will help to address issues
raised by climate change. With high quality services and facilities it will be the UK’ s principal
international gateway outside London.The airport and its surrounding locality will make a major
contribution to the competitiveness of the North, Midlands and Wales by supporting inward
investment, international trade and tourism, high quality new homes and supporting our economic
and social regeneration. It will be central to raising our global profile and economic performance.
The accessibility and connectivity of the area will be greatly enhanced, including through:
A. The development of a new HS2 station immediately to the west of the airport;
B. Northern Powerhouse Rail connections to other city regions;
C. The construction of the Western Leg extension of Metrolink via the proposed HS2 station,
connecting through Davenport Green back to the existing line near Wythenshawe Hospital;
D. Improved local public transport services and connections such as Bus Rapid Transit links
by a new spine road through the Timperley Wedge allocation towards Altrincham;
E.Improved local public transport services and connections, including to Stockport and Cheshire
East areas;
F . The provision of a network of cycling and walking routes.
The benefits of the exceptional connections will be maximised, including by:
GMCONSULT.ORG 69Places for Everyone1.Completing the development of Airport City immediately around the airport, which will provide
a total of around 500,000 sqm of office, logistics, hotel and advanced manufacturing space;
2. Continuing to develop Medipark and Roundthorn Industrial Estate as a health and biotech
cluster, taking advantage of the research strengths of the adjacent Wythenshawe Hospital
and the wider Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust;
3. Delivering approximately 60,000 sqm of office floorspace around the new HS2 station;
4. Providing a minimum of 1,700 new homes to the west of the M56 at Timperley Wedge, up
to 2037;
5. Providing sufficient development opportunities to take full advantage of the introduction of
HS2 and NPR into this location.
This Plan allocates three sites near the airport, and makes associated changes to the Green
Belt boundaries, to support these developments:
Policy JP Allocation 3.1 'Medipark'
Policy JP Allocation 3.2 'Timperley Wedge'
Policy JP Allocation 10 'Global Logistics'
70 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneM56M60MANCHESTER
AIRPORT
ROUNDTHORN & MEDIPARK
H
TIMPERLEY WEDGE
 ALLOCATION
TO LONDONAIRPORT
CITY SOUTH
ALLOCATIONAIRPORTRAIL STATIONHS2 STATIONMETROLINKTO THECITY CENTRE
J8 J7
J6J5J4J3 J2J1POTENTIAL METRO/
TRAM-TRAIN
HIGHWAY
IMPROVEMENTS
J5-J6
M56 J6–J8
SMART MOTORWAYMETROLINK EXTENSION
TO DAVENPORT GREEN
METROLINK
EXTENSION TO T2
POTENTIAL 
BUS RAPID TRANSITPOTENTIAL 
BUS RAPID TRANSITFigure 4.7 Manchester Airport
New Carrington
4.70 New Carrington provides a significant opportunity in this part of Greater Manchester to deliver
a transformational mixed use development. This location in the western part of Trafford
enables the redevelopment of the extensive former Shell Carrington industrial estate, support
the regeneration of neighbouring Partington and Sale West. It will deliver the scale and mix
of development and associated infrastructure necessary to ensure the development is
sustainable and delivers inclusive growth. The release of some Green Belt land is required
to achieve these objectives.
GMCONSULT.ORG 71Places for Everyone4.71 The inclusion of a large amount of employment development and local facilities, as well as
a diverse range of housing, will enable New Carrington to function as a sustainable
neighbourhood within Greater Manchester rather than an isolated community. However, it
will be important to ensure that it is fully integrated into the existing Partington and Sale West
areas, so that its regenerative potential is maximised and existing and new communities are
not separated.
4.72 The area is currently served relatively poorly by public transport, and significant investment
will be required to ensure that residents and workers in the area can travel sustainably. The
former railway line that runs through the site has considerable potential in this regard, offering
the opportunity to deliver a sustainable transport corridor through the site to Timperley /
Altrincham in the east and also extending through to Irlam / Cadishead in Salford to enable
better movement across the Manchester Ship Canal. Major improvements in highway access
will also be required, including the proposed Carrington Relief Road as well as upgrades to
the Carrington Spur and Junction 8 of the M60 which connect into the development area.
4.73 New development in this location will adopt sustainable principles, maximising opportunities
to mitigate environmental impacts and deliver inclusive growth for the benefit of local
communities. Development in this location will extend beyond the end of the Plan period.
Policy JP-Strat 11
New Carrington
Lying within the area and policy framework covered by JP-Strat 9 this policy seeks to deliver a
significant mixed use development. Over the period 2020-2037 land to accommodate around
4,300 dwellings and 350,000 sqm of employment floorspace has been identified and will be
delivered together with a new local centre.
New development will be fully integrated with the existing communities of Carrington, Partington
and Sale West, enhancing the quality of places and their local character, including through good
quality design, enhanced green infrastructure (and access to it) ensuring that maximum
regeneration benefits are secured.
Major investment in active travel, public transport and highway infrastructure, such as the
Carrington Relief Road, improvements to Junction 8 of the M60 and public transport corridors
will be delivered to support the development of New Carrington, ensuring it is well-connected
to the rest of Greater Manchester.
Policy JP Allocation 33 'New Carrington' allocates the development site and provides more
detailed requirements for its implementation.
72 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneJ7J8
CARRINGTON
SPURM62
M6MANCHESTER  SHIP  CANAL
RAIL LINENEW CARRINGTON
M60JUNCTION 
IMPROVEMENTS
CARRINGTON 
RELIEF ROAD
                                                                                 METROLINKSALE WESTBUS CORRIDORPartingtonNEW
CARRINGTONURMSTONCHASSEN
ROAD
FLIXTON
IRLAM
POTENTIAL MULTI-MODALCORRIDORPOTENTIAL METRO/
TRAM-TRAIN
Altrincham
town centreFigure 4.8 New Carrington
Main Town Centres
4.74 We have seven main town centres: Altrincham, Ashton-under-Lyne, Bolton, Bury, Oldham,
Rochdale and Wigan. They are immensely important to their host districts, and Greater
Manchester as a whole, as a source of local identity and pride, the prime location for shops
and services, and a major supply of employment and leisure opportunities. They are
complemented by a diverse collection of smaller town centres and local centres across the
nine districts.
4.75 The main town centres are amongst the most accessible locations by public transport, walking
and cycling. Each centre benefits from relatively large catchment populations, which makes
them suitable locations for a range of office, retail, leisure and tourism development, but
their role in acting as a location for residential use is increasing. It also means that they
function as important transport gateways to the wider Greater Manchester area and beyond
but services to the City Centre are generally better than between the town centres.
GMCONSULT.ORG 73Places for Everyone4.76 Changes in the retail market and the way that both public and private services are delivered
have placed pressures on town centres, for example resulting in the closure of some shops
including historic ‘anchor’  stores. The main town centres will need to adapt and respond to
changing circumstances if they are to continue to flourish and successfully meet the needs
of surrounding communities.The long-standing retail, leisure, cultural and community functions
will remain central, but the way they are provided is likely to evolve. Businesses, service
providers, community groups and other actors working together in partnership can enhance
both the local economy and the popularity of centres. The Mayor's Town Centre Challenge
is positively promoting our town centres' evolution.
4.77 Expanding the resident population of the main town centres will become increasingly
important, helping to generate the necessary footfall and vibrancy to sustain facilities and
enhance the attractiveness of the centres. Increasing the numbers of residents in town
centres will also enable more people to take advantage of their transport connections and
for brownfield land to be prioritised in development. This residential market is quite poorly
developed in most of the centres at present, but the potential in each is significant.The main
town centres offer the opportunity to provide a more affordable alternative to the City Centre
and the Quays, both for businesses to locate and skilled workers to live, whilst providing
excellent access to services and facilities. The public transport corridors into the main town
centres will also have an important function, especially as a location for new housing, further
increasing the number of people with easy access to town centre facilities by sustainable
modes of transport.
Policy JP-Strat 12
Main Town Centres
The role of the main town centres as local economic drivers will continue to be developed,
providing the primary focus for office, retail, leisure and cultural activity for their surrounding
areas. Development here will offer a significant opportunity to reduce levels of poverty and
deliver inclusive growth.
Opportunities to further increase the population catchments of these centres will be taken,
including significantly increasing the resident population of the main town centres by providing
a mix of type and size of dwellings supported by the necessary infrastructure and amenities
including new and improved public spaces and green infrastructure. This will be achieved
alongside, rather than displacing, the range of non-residential uses in the centres. Housing
growth along the key public transport corridors into the main town centres will also be promoted,
further increasing the population catchments of those centres.
The role of the main town centres as major public transport hubs will be developed and supported
by a network of active travel routes, enabling residents to have improved access to opportunities
across Greater Manchester as well as within the centres themselves.
74 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneDevelopment will be carefully managed to ensure that the local distinctiveness of each main
town centre is retained and enhanced. Opportunities will also be taken to protect and enhance
natural and historic assets in the town centres.
A new town centre is proposed for designation at Salford Quays in the Publication Draft Salford
Local Plan: Development Management Policies and Designations. Should that designation
become part of Salford's Adopted Local Plan, development in that location will be subject to this
policy.
Strategic Green Infrastructure
4.78 Green infrastructure (the network of green and blue spaces and features) provides a range
of vital environmental services, contributing to quality of life, supporting economic growth,
and promoting good health by enabling recreation and active travel. It is an essential
component of attractive and liveable places, and hence its importance must not be
underestimated. More details on the approach to green infrastructure are set out in a later
chapter titled ‘Greener Places' ( 8 'Greener Places' ).
4.79 Protecting and enhancing the green infrastructure network throughout Greater Manchester
(including its accessibility) is central to the overall vision for the city region, but there are a
small number of green infrastructure assets that are of particular significance and hence
need to be seen as an integral element of this Plan. They make a major contribution to the
character of different parts of Greater Manchester, are key components of the wider network
of habitats, and often fulfil other important functions such as managing flood risk, providing
recreation opportunities and sequestering carbon.
Policy JP-Strat 13
Strategic Green Infrastructure
The following strategic green infrastructure assets will be protected and enhanced as key features:
1. River valleys and waterways (see Policy JP-G 3 'River Valleys and Waterways' )
2. Lowland wetlands and mosslands (see Policy JP-G 4 'Lowland Wetlands and Mosslands' )
3. Uplands (see Policy JP-G 5 'Uplands' )
4. Trees and woodland (see Policy JP-G 7 'Trees and Woodland' ).
The protection and enhancement of these key strategic green infrastructure assets is
complemented by a suite of policies to protect and enhance our network of green infrastructure,
including protecting and enhancing sites of ecological value. This will enable our residents to
access and maximise the benefits of green infrastructure on their health and wellbeing.
GMCONSULT.ORG 75Places for EveryoneA Sustainable and Integrated Transport Network
4.80 The strength and future success of Greater Manchester as a whole and the strategically
important locations identified in this Plan will depend partly on the quality of public transport
connections. Such links are vital for enabling businesses to take advantage of the city region’ s
huge labour market and skills base, and for residents from all parts of Greater Manchester,
and particularly those living in deprived neighbourhoods, to access the large number of jobs,
leisure opportunities, social infrastructure (such as education and health care) and other
facilities, as this will help to reduce levels of poverty.
4.81 Improved public transport between Greater Manchester and other cities will help reduce
long-distance car use, support business, and open-up a wider range of employment and
leisure opportunities for residents. Proposals for HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail will
consolidate the position of Greater Manchester as one of the most connected areas in the
UK and will support existing businesses, inward investment and job creation. Together they
will provide high speed rail connections to London via Birmingham and faster direct routes
to Leeds, Sheffield and Liverpool.
4.82 Within Greater Manchester rapid transit routes, such as rail, Metrolink and Bus Rapid Transit,
are especially important, as they provide the type of frequent, fast, high quality services that
are a particularly attractive alternative to the car. Greater Manchester is already relatively
well-served by rapid transit networks, but there is considerable scope for further expansion
and enhancement including the development of orbital links. The focus of such routes is
typically the City Centre - which is why there is an urgent need to increase the capacity of
the network in the central area - but there are also important links between other centres
and key social infrastructure facilities.
4.83 The significance of these rapid transit routes, and the costs involved in constructing and
operating them, make it essential that their benefits are maximised. Delivering a significant
increase in the number of residents that have easy access to such routes is therefore a
central priority for this Plan, including optimising development densities and improving the
network of cycling and walking routes within the urban area to enable as many people as
possible to live close and/or to have easy access to sustainable travel options, thereby
reducing the need to travel by car.
4.84 Almost 76% of public transport trips in Greater Manchester are by bus across a very broad
network of services, which means there is also a strong imperative to improve and strengthen
our bus network for existing passengers and to encourage new users. Greater Manchester
is currently assessing options for integrated ticketing, reform of the bus market and whole
route upgrades, which have the potential to bring significant benefits to the network.
4.85 Currently around half of the trips made by our residents are less than 2km in length with
over 40% of these trips being made by car. There is therefore great potential for increasing
cycling and walking across the Plan area, which will be fundamental in achieving the city
76 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneregion’ s overall transport vision. High-quality new and improved walking and cycling routes
and infrastructure will be needed, and the barriers that currently discourage people from
walking and cycling will need to be removed. The Greater Manchester Cycling and Walking
Investment Plan “Change a Region to Change a Nation”  sets out our ambition to become
the first city-region in the UK to have a fully joined up walking and cycling network.
Policy JP-Strat 14
A Sustainable and Integrated Transport Network
The transport network will be improved so that half of all daily trips can be made by public
transport, cycling and walking, especially those shorter journeys around neighbourhoods.
An ambitious programme of investment in our transport network will be crucial to ensure much
greater access for people across the Plan area to high quality, high frequency, easy-to use,
public transport services, and benefit from healthy and active streets. The local programme of
investment needs to be complemented by significant national and regional projects such as HS2
and Northern Powerhouse Rail to ensure that connectivity is significantly improved to key
locations outside of the conurbation, such as London, Liverpool, Leeds, Sheffield and Birmingham.
Collectively this will ensure that our residents will have access to economic opportunities.
The creation of a much larger, integrated, rapid transit network – incorporating bus, Metrolink,
tram/train and rail services – will be supported by policies that focus new development in locations
close to existing and proposed public transport connections. And initiatives such as integrated
smart ticketing, reform of the bus market, rail refranchising and increasing capacity at city centre
bottlenecks  will ensure all new routes function effectively as part of the overall network.
Higher densities will typically be appropriate in locations with good access to rapid transit
connections.
New development will have a significant role in delivering our future sustainable and integrated
transport network in order to reduce car dependency and increase levels of walking, cycling and
public transport.
GMCONSULT.ORG 77Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 78Places for EveryoneSustainable Development
5.1 The purpose of the planning system as set out in legislation and the National Planning Policy
Framework (2019) is to contribute to the achievement of sustainable development and to
maintain a presumption in favour of such development as part of plan making and decision
taking. At a very high level, the objective of sustainable development can be summarised
as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations
to meet their own needs.
5.2 Achieving sustainable development means that the planning system has three overarching
objectives, which are interdependent and need to be pursued in mutually supportive ways
(so that opportunities can be taken to secure net gains across each of the different objectives).
5.3 This idea of delivering economic, social and environmental benefits together, in a mutually
reinforcing way rather than sacrificing some objectives to deliver others is at the heart of
achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals(16) and central to this Plan
and will contribute to Greater Manchester tackling climate change.
5.4 This Plan can contribute to achieving many of these objectives, as well as supporting the
overarching goal of sustainable development. This is reflected in the overall strategy, the
proposed scale and location of development, and the individual policies and allocations. It
includes protecting and enhancing key environmental resources, following the waste hierarchy,
reducing waste generation, using sustainable construction techniques, combating and
adapting to climate change, reducing carbon emissions to meet Greater Manchester's 2038
carbon neutrality target date, supporting high levels of economic growth in a way that can
benefit all residents, and delivering sustainable patterns of development that minimise the
need to travel and reliance on the car.
Policy JP-S 1
Sustainable Development
To help tackle climate change, development should aim to maximise its economic, social and
environmental benefits simultaneously, minimise its adverse impacts, utilise sustainable
construction techniques and actively seek opportunities to secure net gains across each of the
different objectives.
Preference will be given to using previously-developed (brownfield) land and vacant buildings
to meet development needs.
In bringing forward previously developed sites for development, particular attention will be paid
to tackling land contamination and stability issues, ensuring that appropriate mitigation and
remediation is implemented to enable sites to be brought back into use effectively.
16 https://www .un.org/sustainab ledevelopment/sustainab le-de velopment-goals/
GMCONSULT.ORG 81Places for EveryoneAddressing Climate Change
5.5 Greater Manchester's Vision is to be at the forefront of action on climate change and to make
its fair contribution to international commitments(17) by becoming a carbon neutral city region
by 2038. In acknowledgment of climate change, by 2020, all 10 districts and the Greater
Manchester Combined Authority have declared a climate emergency. To support this vision
a 5 Y ear Environment Plan(18)was launched in 2019 to identify the urgent actions that are
needed to ensure Greater Manchester can follow the required pathway for carbon neutrality.
5.6 To meet our carbon commitments we will need to:
Be carbon neutral by 2038 
Hold cumulative carbon dioxide emissions to within our carbon budget
Initiate a programme of mitigation to reduce emissions including by:
Significantly upscaling solar photovoltaic energy;
Reducing heat demand in homes;
Moving away from carbon intensive gas as the primary source of heat;
Reducing heating and cooling demand for public and commercial buildings;
Increasing biofuel use;
Enable sustainable choices for travel and decarbonise transport;
Significantly upscaling building retrofit; and
Increase the delivery of nature based solutions and biodiversity net gain.
5.7 In supporting our ambitions, climate change is a key theme running throughout the plan,
rather than being reduced to a single policy, and it is only through this combination of actions
that it can be properly addressed. In particular we set out:
Methods to de-carbonise the city region through new and existing development, effective
land management and through the provision of infrastructure and new technologies Policy
JP-S 2 'Carbon and Energy' ;
The delivery of renewable and low carbon energy schemes Policy JP-S 3 'Heat and
Energy Networks' ;
Measures that will be taken to future proof the city region to mitigate environmental
challenges, including climate change Policy JP-S 4 'Resilience' ;
Water based measures to adapt and reduce the impacts of climate change Policy JP-S
5 'Flood Risk and the Water Environment' ; and
Measures to help achieve a circular and zero-waste economy Policy JP-S 7 'Resource
Efficiency' .
17 A Greater Manchester carbon budget compliant with the Paris Agreement was developed by Tyndall (2019) -
https://www .research.manchester .ac.uk/por tal/files/83000155/T yndall_Quantifying_P aris_for_Manchester_Repor t_FINAL_PUBLISHED_re v1.pdf
18 https://g reater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1986/5-y ear-plan-br anded_3.pdf
82 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneCarbon and Energy
5.8 The vast majority of the existing homes in Greater Manchester will still be in existence in
2050. Existing domestic buildings contribute 33% of Greater Manchester’ s carbon dioxide
emissions whilst existing non-domestic buildings contribute 35%.(19)Retrofitting the existing
building stock therefore presents a significant opportunity to help meet the 2038 carbon
neutrality target. This can also contribute to the reduction of fuel poverty when targeted
appropriately.
5.9 Without any mitigation, new development is estimated to result in around a 3% increase in
energy demand.(20) However, new development also enables carbon reduction through the
delivery of sustainable patterns of growth(21), which can support new public transport
investment, the establishment of new energy centres and decentralised heat infrastructure,
and nature based solutions to sequester carbon, which also provide multi-benefits, as well
as opportunities to deliver high standards of energy efficiency through good design. Clean
growth is essential to meet future emission targets and to avoid costly retrofit programmes
at a later date. Making this happen will require a co-ordinated approach towards carbon
reductions through new and existing buildings and strategic energy infrastructure.
5.10 Meeting the 2038 carbon neutrality target will require a radical transformation across a range
of sectors to drive carbon reduction. Within this, new development will have a critical role to
play and all new homes and commercial/industrial buildings will need to achieve net zero
carbon by 2028. The definition of net zero carbon development has been established by the
UK Green Building Council.(22) It is expected that development in the Plan area will apply a
net zero carbon approach to operational emissions up until 2028, thereafter emissions in
construction should be considered. Minimum carbon reduction targets will be set in line with
the Future Homes Standard of 80% or until such a time this is superseded.
5.11 To provide further confidence in decision making, supporting research(23) was commissioned
to outline how the pathway to 2028 can be achieved for ‘net zero in operation’(24) by setting
out critical milestones and measures that would be expected when following the energy
‘hierarchy’  and adopting a fabric first approach. For overall carbon reduction targets it was
recommended that these follow the trajectory as advised within the Future Homes Standard
of 31% (2020) and 80% (2025).
5.12 As the electricity grid becomes more decarbonised the ability of renewable energy to offset
carbon emissions minimises. However the contribution of such technologies to energy
demand reduction and running costs become significant as services move to all electric
solutions.The research has shown that in a low carbon context, the use of heat pumps alone
19 Energy Systems Catapult (2016), Greater Manchester Spatial Energy
Plan: https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1363/spatial_energy_plan_e xec_summar y.pdf
20 Energy Systems Catapult (2016), Greater Manchester Spatial Energy
Plan:https://es .catapult.org.uk/pub lications/g reater-manchester-spatial-energy-plan-full-repor t
21 https://www .rtpi.org.uk/research/2018/ma y/settlement-patter ns-urban-f orm-and-sustainability/
22 https://www .ukgbc.org/ukgbc-w ork/net-z ero-carbon-b uildings-a-fr amework-definition/
23 Currie and Brown/Centre for Sustainable Energy (2020), GMCA Energy and Carbon Implementation Study
24 https://www .ukgbc.org/ukgbc-w ork/net-z ero-carbon-b uildings-a-fr amework-definition/
GMCONSULT.ORG 83Places for Everyonecould lead to higher runner costs (as they consume energy, not generate), increasing the
potential for more households being in fuel poverty, production of waste heat and an increased
risk of creating local network capacity issues.
5.13 For Greater Manchester to meet its carbon neutrality commitments there has to be an
increase in renewable energy generation. Community initiatives are likely to play an
increasingly important role in the uptake of renewable energy and should be encouraged
as a way of providing positive local benefits to wider society. The advantages of increasing
renewable and low carbon energy capacity will need to be balanced against any potential
impacts such as on residential amenity, local environment and landscape character, sites
of conservation and heritage value, telecommunications and aviation equipment and air
quality.
5.14 Based on the evidence which has informed the 5 Y ear Environment Plan and achieving net
zero carbon in new development, this has shown that there will need to be a significant
increase in photovoltaic technology. Therefore in Greater Manchester the following targets
will be sought in relation to reducing energy demand and onsite renewable energy generation.
Renewable Energy
Generation TargetsHot Water Energy
Demand(26)Space Heat
Demand(25)
*Photovoltaic
installation: 20%
ground floorspace20% energy demand
reduction (compared to
Part L 2013)Houses (30kWh/m2)
Flats (25kWh/m2)2021 - 2025
*Photovoltaic
installation: 40%
ground floorspace^20% energy demand
reduction (compared to
Part L 2020)Houses (20kWh/m2)
Flats (15kWh/m2)2025 - onwards
*Ground floorspace used as a proxy for available roof area.
^will need to be reviewed with Future Homes Standard 2025 to determine if savings already
embedded.
Table 5.1 Targets For Reducing Energy Demand and Onsite Renewable Energy Generation
26 Reduction in expected DHW grid energy demand  compared to the Part L concurrent notional building. Takes into account the efficiency of
the domestic hot water generating system, on-site energy generation and direct use, and any other passive hot water energy recovery systems
installed.
25 As calculated within SAP2012, Space Heating Requirement (Box98 or equivalent at later SAP versions). It does not take into account the
efficiency of the space heating system. It is based on a fabric first approach (insulation and airtightness)
84 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5.15 Unregulated emissions (e.g. those associated with plug loads/appliances) are expected to
be assessed as part of the requirement to meet ‘net zero carbon’  in operation from 2025
onwards.The only way that this can be deliverable will be through the use of on site electricity
generation or through carbon offsetting (‘allowable solutions’) as occupants lifestyle choices
are not pre-determined by energy efficiency measures associated with construction standards.
5.16 By following the energy hierarchy, new development will need to achieve net zero carbon
through the maximisation of on-site measures first. However, in circumstances where a
development has demonstrated that the hierarchy has been followed and there are no
reasonable alternatives to meet the minimum carbon reductions, then payment to offset
remaining emissions will also be required. Such payments should be expected to fund other
carbon saving programmes within Greater Manchester to help meet the 5 Y ear Environment
Plan targets (such as energy efficiency retrofit and renewable energy installations). The
Mayor of Greater Manchester is developing an Environment Fund, which will provide a
mechanism for carbon offset payments to be made. Districts may also develop alternative
approaches within Local Plans.
5.17 When considering a whole life approach for any new building, embodied emissions from
construction can account for up to half of the carbon impacts associated with its lifecycle.(27) In
addition, other emissions can be attributed to the end of life stages such as demolition, repair
or refurbishment.
5.18 It is also important that post occupancy evaluation is considered as part of a monitoring
programme to ensure buildings function as they are designed and mitigation measures can
be identified to address any performance gap (where a buildings modelled energy and carbon
performance does not equate to actual in-use operation). Various industry initiatives(28) are
also beginning to address this issue so that this can be minimised as part early as part of
the design and build process. Supplementary planning guidance can also help developers
and planning officers to identify the level of information required to meet these requirements
as well as wider policy implementation.
5.19 Greater Manchester seeks to promote investment in new zero-carbon technologies, to reduce
the reliance on carbon based fuels to accelerate the speed at which such new technologies
become financially viable and/or technically feasible.Work undertaken by the Tyndall Climate
Change Research Centre(29) has shown that the continued extraction of fossil fuels will not
be compliant with a carbon emissions reduction pathway that is aligned with international
commitments within the ‘Paris Agreement’. It is therefore considered prudent to not exploit
new sources of hydrocarbons and keep fossil fuels in the ground so at this point in time we
will not support hydraulic fracturing (fracking).
27 https://www .rics.org/uk/upholding-prof essional-standards/sector-standards/b uilding-sur veying/whole-lif e-carbon-assessment-f or-the-b uilt-en vironment/
28 Such as BSRIA Soft Landings Framework, Better Buildings Partnership Design for Performance initiative and the Governments Soft Landings
(GSL)
29 Report to inform Greater Manchester Spatial Framework – Carbon and Energy Policy, Tyndall (2019)
GMCONSULT.ORG 85Places for EveryonePolicy JP-S 2
Carbon and Energy
The aim of delivering a carbon neutral Greater Manchester no later than 2038, with a dramatic
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, will be supported through a range of measures including:
1. Promoting the retrofitting of existing buildings with measures to improve energy efficiency
and generate renewable and low carbon energy, heating and cooling;
2. Promoting the use of life cycle cost and carbon assessment tools to ensure the long term
impacts from development can be captured;
3. Taking a positive approach to renewable and low carbon energy schemes, particularly
schemes that are led by, or meet the needs of local communities;
4. Keeping fossil fuels in the ground;
5.Planning for a balanced and smart electricity grid by identifying geographical locations which
could support energy assets(30);
6.Increasing the range of nature based solutions including carbon sequestration through the
restoration of peat-based habitats, woodland management, tree-planting and natural flood
management techniques;
7. Development of Local Area Energy plans to develop cost effective pathways to achieve
carbon targets;
8. An expectation that new development will:
a. Be net zero(31) carbon from 2028 by following the energy hierarchy (with any residual
carbon emissions offset), which in order of importance seeks to:
i. Minimise energy demand;
ii. Maximise energy efficiency;
iii. Utilise renewable energy;
iv. Utilise low carbon energy; and
v. Utilise other energy sources.
With an interim requirement that all new dwellings should seek a minimum 19% carbon
reduction against Part L of the 2013 Building Regulations.(32)
b. Incorporate adequate electric vehicle charging points to future proof for the likely
long-term demand, taking account of the potential maximum energy demand for the
site;
30 Such assets could be heating / cooling networks, electricity generation or storage infrastructure or a mixed hybrid approach subject to local
demand and connectivity
31 Applied to operational net zero carbon up to 2028 and considered for net zero ‘in construction’  from 2028 onwards in line with the UK GBC
Framework (https://www .ukgbc.org/ukgbc-w ork/net-z ero-carbon-b uildings-a-fr amework-definition/ ) Minimum carbon reduction target expected
to be in line with 2025 Future Homes Standard of 80%.
32 Or until such time that this level is superseded by changes to national building regulations
86 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonec.Where practicable, prioritise connection to a renewable energy/heating/cooling network
in the first instance or a low carbon energy/heating/cooling network that is adaptable
to non-fossil fuels at a later date;
d.Achieve energy demand reductions for residential development in terms of space heat
demand; hot water energy demand and the delivery of on-site renewable energy
generation.
For renewable energy generation priority should be given to PV installation where technically
feasible, alternative technologies will be appropriate where the equivalent generation is
evidenced.
e. For non-residential developments, achieve at least BREEAM excellent standard (or
equivalent) for the ‘Ene 01 – reduction of energy use and carbon emissions’  category
rising to  ‘BREEAM outstanding’  equivalent for ENE 01 from 2028.
f.Include a detailed energy statement to demonstrate via site relevant evidence how the
development has sought to maximize reductions in carbon emissions in line with relevant
policy targets, including the minimisation of overheating risks and appropriate measures
for post occupancy evaluation.Whole life cycle emissions should be considered where
possible.
District Local Plans may set out specific carbon emission reduction targets, particularly if carbon
neutral targets have been set sooner than 2038, or promote other measures through which
energy efficiency of buildings and renewable energy generation can be achieved.
Heat and Energy Networks
5.20 Around two-thirds of Greater Manchester’ s carbon emissions come from domestic and
commercial buildings. Government analysis(33) identifies heat/energy networks as a
cost-effective solution to this issue within areas of high heat density, with modelling suggesting
that heat networks could be an important part of the least-cost mix of technologies needed
to achieve UK-wide decarbonisation targets by 2050.
5.21 Heat and energy networks have the potential to achieve significant emissions reductions
and have significant potential for promoting regional growth in the Low Carbon sector.(34)The
shift to a low carbon economy creates the emergence of new sectors and technologies,
which in turn requires new occupations, skills and expertise to be developed in the labour
market.This Plan seeks to ensure that its residents will be ready for these new opportunities.
33 See https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/the-future-of-heating-a-str ategic-fr amework-for-low-carbon-heat and
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/the-future-of-heating-meeting-the-challenge
34 See http://enw orks.com/resources/EST A%20W edges%20Approach%20in%20Greater%20Manchester%20Final.pdf
GMCONSULT.ORG 87Places for Everyone5.22 Further analysis(35) has as identified heat networks as among the technologies/systems
offering the highest technical potential to contribute to carbon emissions reductions. The
dense urban nature of some parts of Greater Manchester and the scale of development
proposed in the Plan allocations means that there are opportunities for significant growth of
heat networks aligned with, and building out from, strategic development sites. Analysis by
Government(36)suggests a threshold of around 26 kWh/m2/year above which heat networks
are likely to be viable (noting that this figure is one of several factors that may affect viability,
and is commonly used to inform early stage analysis only). National Heat Map data(37)
suggests many of our urban areas are above this viability threshold.
5.23 The UK Clean Growth Strategy (CGS)(38) sets out possible pathways to decarbonise the
UK’s economy by 2050  if the requirement of at least an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions(39) is to be achieved.
Policy JP-S 3
Heat and Energy Networks
The provision of decentralised energy infrastructure is critical to the delivery of our objectives
for low carbon growth, carbon reductions and an increase in local energy generation. The
following measures will help to achieve this:
1. Delivery of renewable and low carbon energy schemes will be supported with particular
emphasis on the use of decentralised energy networks in areas identified as “Heat and
Energy Network Opportunity Areas”. These will be identified where:
a. Existing heat/energy networks are operational or have been commissioned;
b. Proposals for new heat networks/energy networks are being progressed, or future
opportunities have been identified in city-region master planning;
c. Sufficient density of existing heat demand occurs(40); and
d. Significant future development is proposed at the strategic development locations.
2. Within the identified “Heat and Energy Network Opportunity Areas”, there will be:
a. A requirement that new residential developments that are '10 dwellings or more' or
other developments over 1,000 m2 floorspace should evaluate the viability of:
35 See https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1363/spatial_energy_plan_e xec_summar y.pdf
36 See https://assets .publishing.ser vice.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/699306/Carbon_T rust._Estimating_the_cost-reduction_impact_of_the_Heat_Netw ork_Investment_Proj...pdf
and https://assets .publishing.ser vice.gov.uk/go vernment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/424254/heat_netw orks.pdf
37 See https://www .cse.org.uk/projects/vie w/1183
38 See https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/clean-g rowth-str ategy
39 Set out in the Climate Change Act (2008) - see https://www .legislation.go v.uk/ukpga/2008/27/contents
40 https://www .cse.org.uk/projects/vie w/1183
88 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneConnecting to an existing or planned heat/energy network (where such a network
has been identified within the Heat Network Opportunity Areas); and/ori.
ii. Installing a site-wide or communal heat/energy network solution.
b. A requirement, where unviable to connect to an existing network or install a site-wide
or communal heat/energy network, for new development to incorporate appropriate
capability to enable future connection (e.g. adequate space in plant-room for plate heat
exchangers, capped-off flow/return connections);
c.A ‘presumption in favour(41) of network connection’  where new residential developments
over 10 dwellings and other developments over 1,000 sq m floorspace are within 500m
of an existing heat network, or where a network is being delivered;
d.An expectation that new industrial development will demonstrate that opportunities for
using waste heat locally have been fully examined, and included in proposals unless
proven to not be viable;
e. An expectation that where publicly-owned buildings and assets adjoin new major
development sites, opportunities for these buildings and assets to connect to site-wide
proposals will be considered; and
f. An expectation that any site-wide networks will be designed so as to enable future
expansion to adjoining buildings or assets as appropriate.
3. In support of the above, all decentralised heat/energy network viability assessments are
required to demonstrate consideration and analysis of:
a. Identification of existing and proposed heat/energy loads;
b. Identification of heat/energy supply sources;
c. Identification of opportunities to utilise renewable and low carbon energy sources;
d. Identification of opportunities to utilise waste and secondary heat sources;
e. Impact of proposals and technology choices on local air quality;
f. Design according to national best practice in relation to efficient heat network design
(e.g. CIBSE CP1 Heat Networks: Code of Practice for the UK(42), or equivalent); and
g.Adopting appropriate consumer protection standards (e.g. HeatTrust(43), or equivalent).
41 Department for Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework , DCLG (2012), Paragraph 11
42 https://www .theade .co.uk/assets/docs/resources/Code_of_Pr actice_f or_Heat_Netw orks_-_A_guide_f or_owners_and_de velopers .pdf
43 http://www .heattr ust.org/inde x.php
GMCONSULT.ORG 89Places for EveryoneFigure 5.1 Heat and energy network opportunities
Resilience
5.24 Greater Manchester aims to be one of the most resilient places in the world.
5.25 A key part of achieving sustainable development is ensuring resilience, making sure that
our places maintain capacity to function, so that the people living and working here survive
and thrive no matter what stresses or shocks they encounter. A significant challenge within
this is the ability to respond to future impacts from climate change.
5.26 Greater Manchester is part of the Rockefeller Foundation’ s 100 Resilient Cities programme
(100RC)(44), which aims to help cities become more resilient to potential challenges. Greater
Manchester has produced a Resilience Strategy as part of this programme.The ten districts
have also signed up to the United Nations’  Making Cities Resilient Campaign, which aims
to reduce disaster risk.
44 See https://www .rockefellerf oundation.org/100-resilient-cities/
90 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5.27 The need to plan to reduce chronic stresses as well as minimise the impact of acute shocks
means that planning for resilience has to be all-embracing, and so many elements of this
plan have a role to play.
5.28 The Greater Manchester Community Risk Register(45)and work under the 100RC programme
identify that river and surface water flooding, hazardous materials accidents, terrorism, and
disease outbreaks are some of the most significant resilience challenges faced. The way in
which Greater Manchester develops will have a significant impact on future levels of risk
and vulnerability, and the ability of people and places to recover from acute shocks.
Policy JP-S 4
Resilience
Development will be managed so as to increase considerably the capacity of its citizens,
communities, businesses and infrastructure to survive, adapt and grow in the face of physical,
social, economic and environmental challenges, including climate change. Key measures will
include:
1. Ensuring that developments make appropriate provision for response and evacuation in
the case of an emergency or disaster;
2. Supporting the retrofitting of existing buildings, infrastructure and places to enhance their
resilience;
3. Locating critical infrastructure and vulnerable uses away from locations at a high risk of
acute shocks;
4.Providing adaptable buildings and places that can easily respond to changing needs, future
climate impacts and new technologies;
5.Designing out opportunities for crime, anti-social behaviour and terrorism;
6. Designing indoor and outdoor environments to provide a reduction and respite from more
extreme temperatures and winds associated with climate change and greater urbanisation;
7. Increasing the size, spread, quality and interconnectedness of the green infrastructure
network, enabling the city region, its citizens and wildlife to adapt to changing conditions;
8. Taking an integrated catchment-based approach to managing flood risk;
9. Maintaining a very high level of economic diversity across Greater Manchester;
10. Contributing to the delivery of at least 50,000 additional affordable homes up to 2037;
45 See https://www .gmemergencyplanning.org.uk/r isks/ho w-we-assess-r isk/comm unity-r isk-register/
GMCONSULT.ORG 91Places for Everyone11. Promoting significant enhancements in education, skills and knowledge;
12.Supporting healthier lifestyles and minimising potential negative impacts on health including
air pollution; and
13.Carefully controlling the location of hazardous installations and new development that could
be adversely affected by them.
Flood Risk and the Water Environment
5.29 Water is a precious resource that is essential for life. As well as meeting human needs for
drinking, washing and cooking, it is also vital for the health of the natural environment,
supports agriculture and fisheries, provides a resource for many businesses, and offers
opportunities for transport and recreation. However, there are many pressures on the water
environment that adversely impact on its ability to fulfil these functions.
5.30 Greater Manchester is located within a complex hydrological network that extends into
surrounding districts and beyond. This means that individual areas cannot be viewed in
isolation, as rainfall and activities in one place can have significant impacts on the water
environment in other locations. The Irwell and Mersey catchments dominate Greater
Manchester, covering around 78% of its total area, with the River Douglas and Glaze Brook
being the other fluvial catchments. All catchments except the River Douglas drain into the
Manchester Ship canal, which therefore has a very important drainage and flood management
function.
5.31 Approximately 60,500 properties in the Plan area have a 0.1% chance of flooding from rivers
in any one year.(46) 36% of these properties are located in Salford, 22% in Manchester and
12% in Wigan, with the remainder distributed fairly evenly across the other districts. These
high risk areas include some of the most deprived communities as well as some of the most
economically important locations and can be subject to a combination of risk sources (e.g.
river, surface water and sewer flooding) which can impact separately and together.
5.32 Approximately 146,000 properties have a 0.1% chance of flooding from surface water in any
one year in the Plan area.(47)There are also areas in which groundwater flooding can pose
risks and where extensive canal and reservoir infrastructure generates flood risks, associated
with potential overtopping and embankment breaches.
5.33 Climate change is expected to significantly increase peak river flows and surface water
run-off as a result of more intense rain events, potentially placing many more properties at
risk in the future unless flood defences, drainage and run-off management are improved. A
46 Figures based on NAFRA Risk of Flooding from Rivers and Sea (March 2018) and National Receptor Database 2014.
47 Figures based on National Receptor Database 2014 and NWSW Property Count Database (based on NRD 2011)
92 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonecoordinated catchment-wide approach to all types of flood risk will be required to address
these challenges and minimise potential harm to people and property, including actions
upstream of Greater Manchester.
5.34 The location of new development in this Plan has been informed by the application of
Sequential Test and Exception Test, as required by national planning policy. The aim of the
tests are to steer new development towards areas with the lowest risk of flooding first before
considering higher risk locations. If it is not possible for development to be located in zones
with a lower risk of flooding, new development must provide wider benefits to the community
and can be made safe from flooding for its lifetime.
5.35 The North West River Basin Management Plan provides a framework for protecting and
enhancing the benefits provided by the water environment across Greater Manchester and
beyond. It sets out legally binding objectives for the quality of water bodies, with the default
being that they should be classified as ‘good’  overall based on their ecological status or
potential and their chemical status. Very few water bodies in Greater Management currently
reach the required standard.(48)
5.36 Addressing this will require a wide range of measures, including naturalisation of
watercourses, reductions in storm overflow sewage discharges, better land management,
and improved management of surface water. Some of these actions will also assist in
managing flood risk. For example, the use of natural flood management measures that work
with natural processes can provide multiple benefits for people and wildlife, helping to restore
habitats, improve water quality and reduce soil erosion, as well as lowering peak flows and
flash flooding. Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) schemes can provide appropriate
solutions to addressing both flood risk and water quality issues and are mandatory for major
development unless clear evidence indicates that they would be inappropriate.
5.37 In addition to the general need to improve water quality, the Environment Agency has defined
source protection zones for groundwater sources such as wells, boreholes and springs used
for public drinking water supply.(49)The control of potentially contaminating activities is
particularly important in these locations.
5.38 Climate change and population and economic growth can put increasing pressure on the
available potable water supply for homes and businesses. It is important that water is
conserved and efficiently used as much as possible to help build resilience to periods of
drought; avoid over abstraction; reduce carbon emissions from water treatment and disposal;
and protect river and wetland habitats from degradation.
48 See www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/nor th-west-river-basin-distr ict-river-basin-management-plan
49 See https://mappinggm.org.uk/gmodin/?lyrs=ea_source_protection_z ones#open_street_map/11/53.5069/-2.3201
GMCONSULT.ORG 93Places for EveryonePolicy JP-S 5
Flood Risk and the Water Environment
An integrated catchment based approach will be taken to protect the quantity and quality of
water bodies and managing flood risk, by:
1.Returning rivers to a more natural state, where practicable, in line with the North West River
Basin Management Plan;
2.Working with natural processes and adopting a natural flood management approach to slow
the speed of water drainage and intercept water pollutants;
3. Locating and designing development so as to minimise the impacts of current and future
flood risk, including retrofitting or relocating existing developments, infrastructure and places
to increase resilience to flooding;
4. Expecting developments to manage surface water runoff through sustainable drainage
systems and as close to source as possible (unless demonstrably inappropriate) so as to
not exceed greenfield run-off rates or alternative rates specified in district local plans, such
as those identified for areas with critical drainage issues.
5. Ensuring that sustainable drainage systems:
i.Are designed to provide multifunctional benefits wherever possible, including for water
quality, nature conservation and recreation;
ii. Avoid adverse impacts on water quality and any possibility of discharging hazardous
substances to ground;
iii. Are delivered in a holistic and integrated manner, including on larger sites split into
different phases; and
iv.Are managed and maintained appropriately to ensure their proper functioning over the
lifetime of the development.
6. Securing the remediation of contaminated land and the careful design of developments to
minimise the potential for urban diffuse pollution to affect the water environment;
7.Securing further investment in wastewater treatment to reduce the frequency of intermittent
discharges of storm sewage; and
8. Conserving water and maximising water efficiency in new development.
Clean Air
5.39 Air pollution has a significant effect on public health, and poor air quality is the largest
environment risk to human health in the UK. Epidemiological studies have shown that
long-term exposure to air pollution (over years or lifetimes) reduces life expectancy, mainly
due to cardiovascular and respiratory diseases and lung cancer. Short-term exposure (over
hours or days) to elevated levels of air pollution can also cause a range of health impacts,
including effects on lung function, exacerbation of asthma, increases in respiratory and
94 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonecardiovascular hospital admissions and mortality.(50)The youngest, older people and those
with existing health conditions are most likely to be affected by exposure to air pollution.The
exacerbation of respiratory conditions is particularly relevant in consideration of the COVID-19
pandemic.
5.40 Without action, it has been estimated that the health and social care costs of air pollution in
England could reach £5.3 billion by 2035, primarily due to fine particulates(51) (PM2.5).(52) In
Greater Manchester alone, exposure to fine particulates at current levels is estimated to
contribute to around 1,200 deaths per annum.(53) In addition to the direct human impacts,
air pollution also harms the natural environment, adversely impacting on biodiversity, crop
yields and the quality of water bodies. As cities compete to attract skilled workers, clean air
may become an increasingly important differentiating factor.
5.41 Air pollution can also have significant impact on ecology.Therefore there are not only benefits
to the population of improving air quality but there will also be positive ecological effects of
this action.
5.42 A range of different types of pollutant negatively impact on air quality, including nitrogen
oxides (NOx), small and fine particulate matter (PM10and PM2.5), sulphur dioxide (SO2), volatile
organic compounds (NMVOCs) and ammonia (NH3). Figure 5.2 'Change in emissions of air
pollutants since 1970 (since 1980 for ammonia)'  shows how emissions of most of these air
pollutants have declined considerably at the national level over the last few decades.
50 Public Health England (2018). Health Matters: Air Pollution.  Available:
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/health-matters-air-pollution/health-matters-air-pollution
51 particles small enough to be inhaled into the deepest parts of the lung
52 www .gov.uk/go vernment/ne ws/ne w-tool-calculates-nhs-and-social-care-costs-of-air-pollution
53 Derived from Public Health Outcome Framework indicator 3.01 (2016 data) (on Fingertips) (2018),
https://finger tips.phe.org.uk/profile/pub lic-health-outcomes-fr amework
GMCONSULT.ORG 95Places for EveryoneFigure 5.2 Change in emissions of air pollutants since 1970 (since 1980 for ammonia)
5.43 Nevertheless, air quality targets are not consistently being met in some locations. Parts of
the Plan area have been designated as an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA), based
on modelled levels of nitrogen dioxide (NO2). The largest concentration of poor air quality is
around the City Centre, which is also a nationally important economic centre and the proposed
location for a considerable proportion of the new housing and office floorspace proposed in
this Plan.
5.44 Greater Manchester has also signed up to achieve WHO ‘BreatheLife City’  status by 2030,
which means achieving WHO targets for PM ( PM2.5 must not exceed 10 μg/m3 annual
mean) and other air pollutants by this date. Regardless of targets, there is no clear evidence
of a safe level of exposure below which there is no risk of adverse health effects. As such,
policy ambitions should always be to reduce air pollution to as low as possible as further
reduction of PM or NO2 concentrations below air quality targets/standards  are likely to bring
additional health benefits.
5.45 Within Greater Manchester, transport is the major source of air pollution, with roads accounting
for 65% of nitrogen oxides (NOx) , 79% of larger particulates (PM10) and 31% of carbon
dioxide emissions across the city region .(54)Wood burning stoves and coal fires accounts
for 43% of fine particulates (PM2.5) and was the single largest contributor in in the UK for
54 GMCA and TfGM (December 2016) Greater Manchester Low-Emission Strategy, p.9.
96 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2019. New legislation has been introduced on the 1st May 2021 to phase out the sales of
coal and wet wood, also to regulate the quality of the stoves sold. Processes involving
combustion, such as power stations, biomass and incineration, also contribute to air pollution,
as do some industrial activities and agriculture practices.
5.46 The AQMA and associated Greater Manchester Air Quality Action Plan (AQAP) 2016-2021
(approved by the GMCA in 2016) set out measures to help reduce air pollution caused by
NOx while supporting the sustainable economic growth of the region. Since the AQAP was
introduced Government has directed GM authorities to take urgent action to address a
specific air pollution problem: roadside concentrations of NO2 that exceed legal Limit Values.
Picture 5.2 Air Quality Management Area based on 35μg/m3 (2021)
5.47 Government estimates road transport contributes approximately 80% of NOx concentrations
at roadside, with diesel vehicles the largest source in these local areas of greatest
concern.(55)Government has directed Greater Manchester authorities to produce a Clean
Air Plan to tackle roadside nitrogen dioxide (NO2)concentrations and bring them within Limit
Values in the shortest possible time.
55 (Defra and DfT (2017) ‘UK Plan for tackling roadside nitrogen dioxide concentrations. Detailed Plan, July 2017’, London: Defra, pp: 5)  
GMCONSULT.ORG 97Places for Everyone5.48 Greater Manchester Authorities have been working collaboratively to produce a Clean Air
Plan, that will bring about compliance with the legal limit for NO2 in the shortest possible
time and in any case by 2024. The proposal to introduce a Clean Air Zone class C that will
cover the whole of GM (500sq miles), where the most polluting commercial vehicles will be
charged to move within and through the zone, was subject to public consultation in the
autumn of 2020. The final plan is to be put before JAQU (Joint Air Quality Unit – Defra &
DfT) for approval in the early summer 2021, with a view for implementation in spring 2022.
5.49 It is clear that a wide range of actions will be required to improve air quality to appropriate
levels, in addition to the CAZ, and support objectives relating to climate change, Greater
Manchester's 2038 carbon neutrality target, population health and quality pla ces. Many of
these actions are beyond the scope of this plan, but the primary focus will need to be on
transport given its primary contribution to air pollution. Hence, regard should also be had to
transport-related policies elsewhere in this plan and in the Greater Manchester Transport
Strategy 2040 refresh and Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan. The most significant role
which this Plan will play in this respect is to locate development in the most sustainable
locations which reduce the need for car travel, for example by maximising residential densities
around transport hubs.
5.50 Ideally, a higher proportion of general employment sites would be capable of being served
by rail and/or water, but only a few such sites are available and hence within Greater
Manchester there will need to be a stronger emphasis on the use of low-emission goods
vehicles. Short-term high-pollution episodes can affect health as well as long-term exposure
to lower levels(56), so it will be important to tackle both peaks and average levels of air
pollution under relevant actions.
5.51 The cumulative air quality impacts of the proposed scale and distribution of development in
this plan on nationally designated nature conservation sites have been considered through
a separate Habitats Regulations Assessment.
Policy JP-S 6
Clean Air
A comprehensive range of measures will be taken to support improvements in air quality, focusing
particularly on locations where people live, where children learn and play, where there are
impacts on the green infrastructure network and where air quality targets are not being met,
including:
1. Locating and designing development, and focusing transport investment, so as to reduce
reliance on forms of transport that generate air pollution;
56 Defra (2018) Clean Air Strategy 2018, p.4. See https://consult.defr a.gov.uk/en vironmental-quality/clean-air-str ategy-consultation/
98 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Determining planning applications in accordance with the most recent development and
planning control guidance published jointly by the Institute of Air Quality Management (IAQM)
and Environmental Protection UK (EPUK), and the most recent IAQM Guidance on the
Assessment of Dust from Demolition and Construction, or relevant successor guidance,
including the requirement for developers to submit construction management plans as
appropriate;
3. Requiring applications for developments that could have an adverse impact on air quality
to submit relevant air pollution data and, if approved, to make appropriate provision for
future monitoring of air pollution;
4. Restricting and carefully regulating developments that would generate significant point
source pollution such as some types of industrial activity and energy generation;
5. Significantly expanding the network of electric vehicle charging points, both for public and
private use, including as part of new developments;
6.Implementing the charging Clean Air Zone within the Plan area, as directed by Government
and associated measures;
7. Facilitating the more sustainable distribution of goods within the urban area, including
through accommodating urban consolidation centres and urban distribution centres that
use ultra-low-emission vehicles, and local delivery facilities to reduce repeat delivery
attempts;
8. Designing streets to avoid trapping air pollution at ground level, including through the
appropriate location and scale of buildings and trees;
9. Controlling traffic and parking within and around schools and early years sites;
10. Promoting actions that help remove pollutants from the air, such as enhancing the green
infrastructure network and using innovative building materials that capture air pollutants; and
11.Development should be located in areas that maximise the use of sustainable travel modes
and be designed to minimise exposure to high levels of air pollution, particularly for vulnerable
users.
Resource Efficiency
Minerals
5.52 The Greater Manchester Joint Minerals Plan was adopted in April 2013(57)and includes a
set of policies which assist in the consideration of minerals planning applications, safeguards
minerals resources which are likely to be required in the future and identifies areas within
which new or expanded minerals extraction is likely to be suitable. Annual monitoring of
minerals extraction and changes in likely future needs will inform whether and when an
update of the joint minerals plan is required, including as a result of the growth in development
set out in this plan.
57 See https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1995/the_miner als_plan_apr il_2013_final.pdf
GMCONSULT.ORG 99Places for EveryoneWaste
5.53 The Government's new strategy on waste and resources in England(58) focuses on the
creation of a circular economy in which waste is treated as a resource to be kept in use for
as long as possible, extracting maximum value from it before being recovered and regenerated
to form new products and materials. The aim of a circular economy is not only to reduce
waste but to create a society in which waste is seen as a resource to be used again and
again in order to reduce the environmental impacts of production and consumption.
5.54 As part of its ambition to be one of the leading green city regions in Europe, Greater
Manchester will produce a Zero Waste Strategy. The objectives of the strategy will be cross
cutting covering a number of key policy areas including planning.  It will set out how we will
move towards a circular and zero-waste economy in which we no longer see waste as
something to dispose of but as a resource to be used in a different way. The move towards
a circular economy will significantly reduce the amount of waste produced in Greater
Manchester which in turn will enable delivery of higher recycling across all waste sectors,
put more resources back into the economy and reduce our carbon footprint . Utilising
sustainable design and construction techniques at all stages of a development's life cycle
can help deliver this ambition.
5.55 A resource efficient society is key to people and businesses recognising that how we behave
and how we live has a direct impact on the environment around us.The “Plastic-Free Greater
Manchester”  campaign is a bid to eliminate single use plastics across the region and to move
towards renewable alternatives. So far 558 leading businesses and organisations in Greater
Manchester have signed up to the campaign to be plastic free. This is the first key step in
moving towards a resource efficient region and will be the spearhead for future initiatives
including tackling food waste.
5.56 The Greater Manchester Joint Waste Development Plan was adopted in April 2012.(59)This
includes a set of policies which assist in the consideration of waste planning applications
and identifies suitable locations for potential new waste management facilities. Annual
monitoring of waste facility capacity and changes in likely future needs will inform whether
and when an update of the joint waste plan is required, including as a result of the growth
in development set out in this plan.
Policy JP-S 7
Resource Efficiency
The achievement of a circular economy and a zero-waste economy will play a key role in meeting
Greater Manchester’ s ambition of becoming a leading green city region by 2038. The following
measures will help achieve this:
58 See https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/resources-and-w aste-str ategy-f or-england
59 See www .gmw astedpd.co .uk/doclib .html#Adopted_W aste_Plan_Documents
100 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.Development and implementation of the Resource Strategy for Greater Manchester which
promotes overall reduction in the level of waste produced and supports resource efficiency
within the Plan area in order to gain the maximum value from the things we produce;
2.Ensuring the design of all new development incorporates storage space to facilitate efficient
recycling and where appropriate, processing of waste on site;
3.Recognition of the role of existing infrastructure in managing our waste and protecting such
facilities to ensure adequate waste management capacity is maintained; and
4. Using sustainable design and construction techniques to reduce carbon emissions, adapt
and future proof to the impact of climate change, reduce and recycle waste and minimise
water use.
GMCONSULT.ORG 101Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 102Places for EveryoneSupporting Long-Term Economic Growth
6.1 Economic growth is central to the overall strategy for Greater Manchester. It will be essential
to raising incomes, improving health and quality of life, and providing the finances to deliver
better infrastructure, services and facilities.
6.2 Greater Manchester has developed a Local Industrial Strategy (60) which sets out how the
city region will build on its unique strengths and opportunities and capitalise on the creativity
of its people to create a digital-enabled, green city region.
6.3 The Local Industrial Strategy has two key objectives:
Supporting our globally  competitive strengths. Building on our globally competitive
research strengths and industrial opportunities in health innovation and advanced
materials(61) and capitalising on the creativity and collaborative culture of our people,
our digital and technology asset base and our emerging capabilities in green industries
- will be essential if the city region is to continue to attract investment and create new
businesses and jobs for the future.Through this we will be pioneering emerging sectors,
creating significant global competence and additional value for our local economy as
these new sectors grow and flourish.
Strengthening the foundations of our economy. Despite having concentrations of
globally competitive, highly productive businesses, Greater Manchester's overall
productivity is around 10% lower than the national average.(62)Tackling this is important
because it holds back people’ s earning potential and makes our economy more
vulnerable to economic shocks. Strengthening our people, infrastructure, business
environment, innovation ecosystems and places will be important to enable all sectors
and all places in Greater Manchester to be productive and prosperous. We need to
grasp global opportunities emerging from changes to world markets and develop
industries of the future, while also ensuring competitiveness and job quality in our high
employment, low productivity sectors.
6.4 Two of Greater Manchester’ s key economic strengths are its size and diversity. Greater
Manchester accounts for one-fifth of the population(63), jobs(64) and economic output in the
North of England, and its economy is bigger than that of Wales and Northern Ireland. It is
one of the most diverse economic areas in the UK(65) and is second only to London for
attracting Foreign Direct Investment.(66)This helps to provide a broad range of opportunities
for businesses and varied jobs for residents. It also means that it is well-placed to take
advantage of new economic possibilities and should be more resilient to change. The
inter-dependencies between our economic sectors mean that growth in one can support job
creation in others.
60 Greater Manchester Local Industrial Strategy June 2019 https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/2132/gm-local-industr ial-str ategy-w eb.pdf
61 Greater Manchester and Cheshire East Science and Innovation Audit, November 2016
62 GMCA: Deep Dives Phase 2: Productivity in Greater Manchester, February 2017
63 ONS: Population Estimates 2017, accessed via nomis November 2018
64 ONS: Business Register and Employment Survey, accessed via nomis November 2018
65 ONS Krugman Index see www .ons.gov.uk/emplo ymentandlabour market/peopleinw ork/emplo ymentandemplo yeetypes
/adhocs/006229industr ialspecialisationinmajor townsandcitieskr ugmaninde xdataandtool
66 https://www .ey.com/en_gl/attr activeness
104 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone6.5 Greater Manchester has a growing share of graduate level qualified residents, which, along
with people skilled in technical occupations, skilled trades and service industries, forms part
of a large and varied skills base.
6.6 Greater Manchester's transport network provides good connections to other major city
regions, with further major improvements planned such as HS2 and Northern Powerhouse
Rail, making it an attractive place to invest and providing close functional links to other
areas.(67) Manchester Airport is the country’ s largest and best-connected airport outside
London and the South East and the Manchester Ship Canal provides direct shipping
connections to the post-panamax facilities at the Port of Liverpool. Piccadilly rail station is
both a gateway and commercial centre but also has the potential to be the ‘Hub of the North’
serving the whole of the northern economy. Together, these assets enable Greater
Manchester to act as an international gateway for the North and the UK, providing access
to global markets and supply chains.
6.7 Despite these strengths, for two decades, Greater Manchester’ s productivity has consistently
remained at 90% of the UK level and in recent years the balance of employment has shifted
towards lower productivity sectors and activities, as has been the case for the UK as a whole.
The share of low productivity sectors in GM – those with lower than £30,000 GVA per worker,
at 2013 prices – increased from 37.7% in 2005 to 41.8% in 2015. Wages have fallen by
6.6% in real terms between 2006 and 2016: the average worker in Greater Manchester still
earns 81p an hour less in real terms than in 2006. The gross median annual wage for full
time workers living in Greater Manchester was £26,800 in 2018, compared to £29,570 in
the UK as a whole; and the gap in wages between GM and the national average has widened
over the decade.This reflects the uneven economic geography of the UK and the dominance
of London and the South East.
6.8 There are also significant economic disparities within our plan area, and baseline forecasts
suggest that these could increase without intervention. For example, Manchester is forecast
74,600 additional jobs between 2018-38 with the central and southern districts forecast to
add a further 60,000 jobs of which almost 47,000 are forecast to be in Salford and
Trafford. Collectively they have the highest concentration of key assets and major growth
areas in the sub-region. In contrast, the rest of Greater Manchester is only forecast to
collectively add 10,800 net jobs with some districts (Oldham and Tameside) seeing a small
decrease in total employment. Full-time jobs in the central and southern areas on average
pay significantly more than full-time roles in the other districts(68) which in turn also impacts
commuting patterns and transport infrastructure congestion.
6.9 These problems have also been exacerbated by the adverse impacts of austerity and
economic shocks, such as Brexit and Covid-19, on growth and reform. Furthermore, like in
other places, employment and output growth since the recession have been characterised
by low productivity growth and increasing share of jobs in lower value sectors with
67 See Greater Manchester's HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail Growth Strategy: "The Stops Are Just The Start" at
https://www .tfgm.com/press-release/hs2-npr-g rowth-str ategy
68 ONS: Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings 2018, accessed via nomis November 2018
GMCONSULT.ORG 105Places for Everyonecomparatively low paid, less secure employment.(69)We are also not fully realising the
possibilities of its key assets, for example the outstanding research base has much greater
potential to support business activity and growth. Further improvements in transport
connections and skills development are required to ensure that everyone can contribute to
and share in the benefits of economic activity, helping to deliver genuinely inclusive growth.
6.10 The Northern Powerhouse Independent Economic Review(70) identified that through
improvements in skills, innovation, and connectivity the North has the potential to create by
2050 an additional £97 billion of GVA (a measure of total economic output and income) and
850,000 extra jobs under a transformational scenario, compared to the ‘business as usual’
scenario. As part of Greater Manchester we are well-placed to play a leading role in delivering
this additional growth, given its central location within the North of England and concentration
of key growth assets.
6.11 We have the opportunity to increase the future prosperity of local residents through making
a full contribution to rebalancing the national economy, helping to deliver a more successful
North of England and UK. Hence, this plan supports high levels of economic growth and
seeks to put in place the measures that will enable such growth to continue in the even
longer-term. Economic growth provides a good opportunity for local residents to gain
increased access to new jobs and training, which will help to reduce unemployment rates
and economic inequalities and boost skill levels and personal fulfilment. Local job growth is
therefore supported through seeking agreement with employers and developers to enter
into local labour and training agreements, where appropriate. The key challenge will be to
ensure that such growth benefits everyone and all of our places, and happens in a sustainable
way that respects the environment and local communities. Growth today must not come at
the expense of the ability to deliver sustained prosperity and quality of life.
6.12 However, delivering these high levels of growth, in terms of jobs and GVA, will become
increasingly challenging. Beyond the slowdown in productivity growth seen across the UK
economy, and increasing international competition for trade and capital, our economy also
faces the challenges of accommodating rapid technological change, political risks and
economic shocks – such as Brexit and Covid-19. The emergence of a global pandemic in
March 2020 rightly resulted in the need to understand what, if any, actions should be taken
in relation to the level of economic growth being proposed. Following an initial assessment
of the potential impacts of Covid-19 on the economy in 2020, a further assessment was
carried out to inform this plan. Both studies suggest that there is insufficient evidence (either
at a national or local level) to change the assumptions behind our growth targets.
6.13 Whilst it is recognised that the country is in a state of flux, it is very clear that to delay the
production of the plan further could have a negative effect on the proper planning of the
boroughs and therefore its recovery. Instead it is considered appropriate to proceed, but to
use the process of plan review to monitor the situation and if necessary to undertake a formal
review outside of statutory review timetable.
69 GMCA - GM Labour Market and Skills Review 2017/18
70 SQW and CE (24 June 2016) The Northern Powerhouse Independent Economic Review: Final Executive Summary Report, p.16
106 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone6.14 We will need to continue to invest in the sites and critical infrastructure that will make our
boroughs even more attractive places for businesses to invest, bringing high-value, well paid
jobs, to our area, and supporting the continued progress towards a low-carbon economy.
6.15 This Plan promotes prosperity for all residents and places in a sustainable way in a wide
variety of ways, some of which are set out in this chapter but many of which will be delivered
through other parts of the plan. Such measures include:
Delivering sustainable places that can meet the needs of all sections of communities,
both now and in the future
Achieving the high quality, inclusive design of places and developments
Providing excellent transport networks that help all people to access employment
opportunities across our boroughs, particularly by walking, cycling and public transport
Encouraging the efficient reuse of previously-developed land and buildings as part of
the coordinated regeneration of urban areas, particularly those with high levels of
deprivation
An expectation that all development will be net zero carbon by 2028
Significantly increasing the supply of new housing that helps to meet the wide variety
of needs across our boroughs at a price people can afford
Enhancing the supply of employment opportunities at a variety of skill levels throughout
our boroughs to achieve more inclusive growth
Supporting improvements in education and research facilities
Enabling all residents to lead healthier lives in safer places with good access to facilities
that support health and well being including good quality open space and green
infrastructure
Seeking a net enhancement to biodiversity across our boroughs
Policy JP-J 1
Supporting Long-Term Economic Growth
A thriving, inclusive and productive economy will be sought in all our boroughs. There will be
an emphasis on:
A. Maintaining a very high level of economic diversity across our boroughs
B. Facilitating the development of high value clusters in prime sectors such as:
i. Advanced manufacturing;
ii. Digital and cyber;
iii. Health innovation, including life sciences;
iv. Low carbon goods and services;
GMCONSULT.ORG 107Places for Everyonev. Business, financial and professional services;
vi. Logistics.
C. Making the most of major assets of the sub-region, such as:
i. The high concentration and range of research assets
ii. The large pool of graduates
iii. Highly productive businesses in every sector of our economy
iv.Existing transport infrastructure such as Manchester Airport, Manchester Ship Canal,
public transport networks and the motorway network
v.Major proposed transport improvements such as HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail
D. Grasping the economic opportunities from the global transition to a low carbon economy
E.Providing the high-quality, sustainable living environments that will help to attract and retain
skilled workers 
F .Supporting local job growth, by seeking agreement with employers and developers, including
housebuilders, to enter into local labour and training agreements through planning obligations
and other mechanisms where appropriate.
G. Maximising the potential of the key growth locations whilst also securing investment that
raises the competitiveness of our northern boroughs to deliver inclusive growth across the
sub-region by ensuring that employment growth opportunities are well connected and
accessible to all residents. Key locations that will help to maximise economic growth in an
inclusive way include:
i. The expanding City Centre, which will be further strengthened as the most significant
economic location in the UK outside London, providing a high concentration of jobs
that are highly accessible from across Greater Manchester and beyond.The city centre
includes the Oxford Road corridor which will continue to develop as a world-class
innovation hub with a very high concentration of research activity and enhanced
business connections
ii. The Quays, delivering sustained growth as a major business location including an
internationally important digital and creative cluster
iii.The wider area of economic activity at the heart of Greater Manchester, stretching from
the Etihad Campus in the east, through the City Centre and The Quays, to Trafford
Park and the Trafford Centre, providing an enormous and extremely diverse range of
108 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonebusinesses and jobs (currently accounting for around one-quarter of employment in
Greater Manchester, with this proportion expected to grow), and with key clusters of
growth sectors
iv. Manchester Airport Enterprise Zone, with the expansion of the airport as the UK’ s
primary international gateway outside London and the South East providing easy
business connectivity across the world, and increased employment activity around the
airport, Wythenshawe Hospital/Medipark, and the proposed HS2 station
v.The seven main town centres (Altrincham, Ashton-under-Lyne, Bolton, Bury, Oldham,
Rochdale and Wigan), providing a stronger focus for local economic activity, and
exploiting important advantages such as the direct mainline rail links to London from
Stockport and Wigan, HS2 and the university in Bolton
vi.Port Salford, providing sustainable freight connections by water and rail and acting as
an international gateway via facilities at the Port of Liverpool that are capable of
accommodating ships larger than those which can be accommodated by the Panama
Canal - "Post-Panamax"
vii.Northern Gateway, with a massive expansion of the existing employment areas forming
a major facility similar in size to Trafford Park, helping to deliver a better distribution of
growth across Greater Manchester and boosting the economy of the northern part of
the city-region
viii.M6 logistics hub in Wigan, extending into Warrington, St Helens and West Lancashire,
providing a major cluster of warehousing and distribution activity along the M6 corridor
with easy access to the Port of Liverpool via the M58
GMCONSULT.ORG 109Places for EveryoneWIGAN & BOLTON
GROWTH CORRIDOR
STRATEGIC LOCATIONS
STRATEGIC LOCATIONS - TOWN CENTRESCORE GROWTH AREASTRATEGIC LOCATIONS
PORT 
SALFORD
THE QUAYS
MANCHESTER
AIRPORT 
NORTH EAST
GROWTH CORRIDOR
CITY
CENTREWigan
town centreBolton
town centreBury
town centreRochdale
town centre
Oldhamtown centre
Ashton-under-Lyne
town centre
Altrincham
town centreFigure 6.1 Strategic Locations
Employment Sites and Premises
6.16 It will be important to ensure that there is an excellent supply of employment sites and
premises across the Plan area, with sufficient variety in terms of quality, cost and location
to maximise the ability to attract and retain jobs and investment.This will help to deliver high
levels of economic growth and tackle inequalities by improving access to employment
opportunities for existing and new residents.
6.17 If economic growth is to be sustainable in the long-term then it will be necessary for the
supply of employment sites and premises to adapt to changing circumstances, technological
advancements, and new working practices. The need to be able to compete for investment
is constantly increasing and will become even more imperative after Brexit. A lot of businesses
are currently doing fantastic things from poor premises, and there is the potential to improve
productivity and support growth with modern buildings in better locations. However, there
110 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonewill continue to be demand for cheaper accommodation from start-ups and businesses
working on tight margins. A good combination of existing and new sites and premises will
therefore be required.
Policy JP-J 2
Employment Sites and Premises
A diverse range of employment sites and accessible premises, both new and second-hand, will
be made available across the Plan area in terms of location, scale, type and cost. This will offer
opportunities for all kinds and sizes of businesses, including start-ups, firms seeking to expand,
and large-scale inward investment, which will help to tackle inequalities.
A strong portfolio of prime investment opportunities for new floorspace will be brought forward
in the key locations identified in Policy JP-J 1 'Supporting Long-Term Economic Growth'  and in
complementary locations, with many being particularly suitable for prime growth sectors and
specialisms. This includes the selective removal of land from the Green Belt and other land
previously safeguarded for development to provide the quality of well-connected employment
land supply necessary to deliver the required scale of long-term economic growth, as set out
in Policy JP-J 3 'Office Development'  and Policy JP-J 4 'Industry and Warehousing
Development' . We will work with Government and other stakeholders to increase the delivery
of previously-developed sites for employment use, and hence minimise the need for any further
Green Belt release.
Existing employment areas that are important to maintaining a strong and diverse supply of sites
and premises in our boroughs will be protected from redevelopment to other uses, nurtured to
ensure they remain competitive and their accessibility improved where necessary. This will
include local employment areas as well as strategic locations such as the Tame Valley and the
core of Trafford Park, and associated transport infrastructure such as the Trafford Park Freight
Terminal.
Office Development
6.18 Greater Manchester is generally acknowledged as having one of the strongest office markets
in the country. The scale and quality of the offer is vital to supporting strong and productive
sectors such as digital/creative, and business, financial and professional services.
6.19 The City Centre is the pre-eminent office location outside London. It will be important to
maintain this position, and improve accessibility to the associated job opportunities, for the
wider benefit of Greater Manchester, thereby helping to reduce inequalities, deprivation and
poverty. The large number of sites available for office development within the City Centre,
many of which are close to major public transport facilities and with the prospect of further
GMCONSULT.ORG 111Places for Everyoneimprovements through HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), provides an unrivalled
combination of location, scale, quality of development opportunity and access to a large pool
of skilled labour.
6.20 The other two primary office markets within Greater Manchester are The Quays and South
Manchester, with the latter including the area around Manchester Airport as well as town
and district centres in Trafford.These provide a complementary offer to the City Centre, with
their own distinctive characteristics that are attractive to occupiers, and have significant
potential for further growth. Securing office growth in other parts of the Plan area, particularly
the northern areas, will also be an important component of delivering inclusive growth and
reducing deprivation and poverty in these areas. This will be focused primarily in the town
centres, as these are the most accessible locations to surrounding residential areas, and
increasing office-based activity is a key component of the overall strategy for delivering more
vibrant and economically prosperous town centres.
6.21 Modelling based on past economic trends suggests that the supply of new office floorspace
needs at least to match average development rates over recent years. To ensure the
continued growth of our key sectors is not constrained by a shortage of supply of new
floorspace it is important to maintain a strong supply in key locations such as the City Centre
and The Quays.
6.22 Existing office floorspace will continue to have an essential role in meeting the needs of our
businesses, often providing a lower cost alternative to new premises, especially for start-ups
and smaller businesses. The conversion of offices to housing can be an important source
of supply of new homes, but this must not be allowed to compromise our economic growth
and diversity, and consequently there may need to be restrictions on the loss of office
floorspace particularly in key locations.
Policy JP-J 3
Office Development
At least 1,900,000 sqm of accessible new office floorspace will be provided in the Plan area
over the period 2021-2037, with a focus on:
1.The City Centre, accounting for more than half of all new office floorspace in the sub-region
and taking advantage of existing and proposed public transport connectivity, including the
proposed new HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail links which will further enhance its
position as the premier office location outside London
2.The Quays, significantly expanding this distinctive office location and the continued growth
of the nationally significant MediaCityUK
112 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone3. Manchester Airport Enterprise Zone and its environs, taking advantage of the extensive
international connections, public transport accessibility, and proposed HS2 and Northern
Powerhouse Rail links
4. Town centres, offering a strong local profile and lower cost options with excellent public
transport connections and access to services, with opportunities being sought to significantly
increase the supply of new office floorspace beyond that currently identified especially in
the northern parts of Greater Manchester.
The refurbishment of existing office accommodation will be encouraged including improving
standards of accessibility.
Individual districts through Local Plans or other mechanism(s) may restrict the changes of use
of existing office space to non-employment uses such as housing where this could compromise
the continued supply of a diverse range of office floorspace.
6.23 A wide range of office development opportunities have been identified by districts through
their strategic employment land availability assessments, capable of accommodating just
over 3,275,000  sqm of floorspace. This will help to ensure that there is a diverse range of
opportunities, providing choice and flexibility in the market. The vast majority of these are
in the key locations identified in Policy JP-J 3 'Office Development'  and are on
previously-developed land.
GMCONSULT.ORG 113Places for EveryoneFigure 6.2 Existing supply of office sites identified in strategic employment land availability assessments 2020-2037
6.24 Although this supply is sufficient in numerical terms to meet the minimum office floorspace
requirement up to 2037, it is considered that the very limited release of some existing Green
Belt land within the Manchester Airport Enterprise Zone key location is required to maximise
the competitive advantages of Greater Manchester.
6.25 Table 6.1 'Office land supply 2020-2037'  summarises the sources of office land supply up
to 2037.
114 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneTotal
2021-37Estimated
Completions
2020-21Total
2020-2037Places for
Everyone
Allocations
2020-2037
(sqm
floorspace)(71)Existing supply 2020-2037 (sqm
floorspace)
DistrictMixed Greenfield Brownfield
90,579 -3,364 93,943 0 10,512 3,447 79,984 Bolton
39,686 -519 40,206 0 0 28,485 11,721 Bury
2,233,914 -116,061 2,349,975 21,500  0 102,514 2,225,961 Manchester
61,619 -9,207 70,826 0 11,554 0 59,272 Oldham
95,036 -4,676 99,711 0 0 81,249 18,462 Rochdale
337,576 -11,035 348,6110 0 0 348,611 Salford
25,902 -530 26,432 0 0 0 26,432 Tameside
257,101 -1,327 258,4280 0 15,000 243,428 Trafford
9,349 0 9,349 0 7,294 2,055 0 Wigan
3,150,763 -146,718 3,297,481 21,500 29,360 232,750 3,013,871Places for
Everyone
Table 6.1 Office land supply 2020-2037
Industry and Warehousing
6.26 Industrial and warehousing accommodation is essential to a wide range of businesses across
many economic sectors. It is particularly important to the key sectors of advanced 
manufacturing and logistics, but is also crucial to supporting other parts of the economy and
its continued provision will help to reduce inequalities.
6.27 Although there have been continued reductions in the numbers employed in manufacturing
over many decades, it continues to be a very important sector for Greater Manchester,
delivering high levels of productivity and income. Advanced manufacturing is a particular
strength, supported by the city-region’ s high concentration of research assets. Greater
Manchester is recognised as an internationally important test-bed for new products and
services, renowned for its ability to drive adoption of approved innovations at pace and scale.
Enabling the success of this sector will be important for the wider prosperity of the North of
England.
6.28 Logistics is a sector that is becoming increasingly central to the economy, enabling the
efficient functioning of other sectors such as manufacturing and retail, and supporting changes
in consumer behaviour. Greater Manchester’ s central position in the North of England, its
large business and customer market and its excellent international freight connections via
Manchester Airport, the Manchester Ship Canal and the nearby Port of Liverpool, as well
as its motorway network, notably the M6, together provide opportunities to significantly
71 Excluding floorspace identified in baseline supply
GMCONSULT.ORG 115Places for Everyoneincrease logistics activity within the sub-region. This not only has the potential to promote
higher levels of economic growth, but also to support environmental objectives by reducing
the number of HGV journeys from the ports and distribution parks across England.
6.29 There is already a varied range of industrial and warehousing locations, ranging from major
areas with strong brand recognition such as Trafford Park to numerous smaller employment
areas that are an important source of local employment and business opportunities. However,
our long-term economic success will partly depend on the ability to continually renew and
enhance the supply of accessible industrial and warehousing premises, responding to
changing business practices and demands. Rising levels of automation and digitisation,
increased customisation, greater integration of product services, and demands for more
functionally and energy efficient premises are all leading to the need to increase the supply
of new high quality floorspace, often with larger floorplates. At the same time, there will
continue to be a demand for smaller and/or cheaper accommodation to support local
businesses and start-ups that may often be working on narrow margins but make an important
contribution to our economy. All of this points to the need for a diverse portfolio of sites and
premises, both retaining existing premises and providing new ones of varying size and
location. Promoting and supporting access to the sites and premises by sustainable modes
of transport will help to ensure that they will be accessible from both our existing and new
communities.
6.30 There is evidence that past industrial and warehousing completions have been constrained
by a lack of suitable sites within Greater Manchester, resulting in the city-region being unable
to compete for some major occupiers. When combined with the need to secure a significant
increase in the quality of accommodation available to respond to evolving business
requirements and increasing global competition, this means that a considerable uplift on
past development rates is needed.
Policy JP-J 4
Industry and Warehousing Development
At least 3,330,000 sqm of new, accessible, industrial and warehousing floorspace will be provided
in the Plan area over the period 2021-2037.
To achieve this, a high level of choice and flexibility will be provided in the supply of sites for
new industrial and warehousing floorspace, with a focus on:
1. Offering a range of opportunities
116 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Making the most of the key locations identified in Policy JP-J 1 'Supporting Long-Term
Economic Growth'
3.Significantly increasing the supply of high quality sites across the northern parts of Greater
Manchester to help increase the competitiveness of that area, including a major strategic
opportunity at Northern Gateway
Individual sites providing more than 100,000 sqm of industrial and warehousing floorspace
should, where there is likely to be demand and it is appropriate to the location, incorporate:
A. Opportunities for manufacturing businesses, particularly advanced manufacturing;
B. Units capable of accommodating small and medium sized enterprises;
C. Overnight parking for heavy goods vehicles; and
D. Promote and support access by sustainable modes of transport
6.31 The need to provide the level of industrial and warehousing land within the Plan reflects the
need for Greater Manchester to compete internationally for investment and provide sufficient
choice and flexibility to respond to the varied needs of different businesses. This will help
Greater Manchester to maximise its ability to attract and retain businesses and hence support
its long-term economic growth prospects and the availability of local jobs. The new sites will
be important in enabling the relocation and expansion of existing businesses, which will free
up some poorer quality current employment sites for redevelopment for uses such as housing,
as well as attracting new investment into the sub-region. The large amount of flexibility in
the supply is also necessary because some existing employment areas may be utilised for
employment-generating uses other than industrial and warehousing floorspace, which, whilst
making an important contribution to economic growth, may mean they are no longer available
for industry and/or warehousing purposes.
6.32 A range of industry and warehousing development opportunities have been identified by
districts through their strategic employment land availability assessments, capable of
accommodating just over 1,900,000 sqm of floorspace.
GMCONSULT.ORG 117Places for EveryoneFigure 6.3 Existing supply of industry and warehousing sites identified in strategic employment land availability
assessments 2020-2037
6.33 The existing supply of potential industrial and warehousing sites identified in the districts'
strategic employment land availability assessments are insufficient to meet the overall
identified need. Many of the sites they contain are also likely to be attractive primarily to a
relatively local market and/or smaller businesses, due to their location, size and surroundings.
Consequently, if Greater Manchester is to meet its future development requirements and
increase the supply of high quality sites that can compete regionally, nationally and even
internationally for investment, including from businesses requiring large modern premises,
then there is a need to identify additional sites across the city-region.The only realistic option
for doing so is to remove some land from the Green Belt.
6.34 Table 6.2 'Industry and warehousing land supply 2020-2037'  summarises the sources of
industry and warehousing land supply up to 2037. Although all of the sites could potentially
be developed in full during the plan period. In practice, the high level of land supply, the size
of some individual sites and infrastructure requirements mean that some of the Green Belt
sites may come forward in part after 2037. This will help to ensure that there is a diverse
118 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonerange of opportunities, providing choice and flexibility in the market. A dditionally given the
scale of some of the opportunities, almost a further 480,000 sqm has been identified which
is likely to be delivered after 2037.
GMCONSULT.ORG 119Places for EveryoneTotal
2021-37Estimated
Completions
2021-21Total
2020-2037Places for
Everyone
Allocations
2020-2037
(sqm
floorspace)(72)Existing supply 2020-2037 (sqm
floorspace)
District Mixed
Greenfield Brownfield
754,208 -8,274 762,482 486,000 8,653 15,673 252,156 Bolton
500,481 -750 501,231 491,000 0 6,500 3,731 Bury
92,641 -10,107 102,749 25,000 0 64,004 13,745 Manchester
251,143 -17,098 268,241 136,720 65,2520 66,269 Oldham
574,916 -21,085 596,001 244,000 0 203,311 148,690 Rochdale
517,513 -6,414 523,927 320,000 0 32,396 171,531 Salford
271,812 -4,659 276,471 160,000 1,716 62,415 52,340 Tameside
506,989 -29,220 536,209 92,160 46,4500 397,599 Trafford
490,685 -4,563 495,247 200,000 22,512 207,143 65,592 Wigan
3,960,389 -102,1694,062,558 2,154,880 144,583 591,442 1,171,653 Places for
EveryoneTotal
1. The floorspace arising at Policy JP Allocation 1.1 'Heywood / Pilsworth (Northern Gateway)', has been
split between Bury and Rochdale based on illustrative plans and may be subject to change followingcomprehensive masterplanning.
72 Excluding floorspace identified in baseline supply
120 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneTotal
2021-37Estimated
Completions
2021-21Total
2020-2037Places for
Everyone
Allocations
2020-2037
(sqm
floorspace)(72)Existing supply 2020-2037 (sqm
floorspace)
District Mixed
Greenfield Brownfield
2. The floorspace arising at Policy JP Allocation 2 'Stakehill', has been split between Oldham and Rochdale
based on illustrative plans and may be subject to change following comprehensive masterplanning.
Table 6.2 Industry and warehousing land supply 2020-2037
72 Excluding floorspace identified in baseline supply
GMCONSULT.ORG 121Places for Everyone6.35 New industrial and warehousing development has an important role to play in addressing
the economic disparities across Greater Manchester, and in particular to boost the
competitiveness of northern areas. It can help to deliver more balanced growth across the
sub-region and tackle deprivation. Consequently, the release of Green Belt for employment
use is focused primarily in the northern parts of Greater Manchester, with a string of high
quality opportunities of varying sizes focused particularly around the key motorway corridors.
Overall, this will result in around two-thirds of the supply being in the districts of Wigan,
Bolton, Bury, Rochdale, Oldham and Tameside, whereas just over one-half of the supply in
land availability assessments is in those six districts. The strategic location of Northern
Gateway will alone account for about one-fifth of the Greater Manchester supply.
6.36 It will still be important to ensure that there is a good supply of industrial and warehousing
in other parts of Greater Manchester, and so there is also some Green Belt release in the
central and southern areas. The Green Belt sites have been selected in order to make the
most of key assets and locations, with a focus on realising the potential of transport
infrastructure such as the motorway network, the Manchester Ship Canal and Manchester
Airport.The lowest level of new supply is in Tameside, where there will be a greater reliance
on existing sites and premises, such as in the Tame Valley, which will need to be protected
accordingly.
122 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 123Places for Everyone7.1 We have a diverse range of housing and residential neighbourhoods, capable of
accommodating a wide variety of needs. We have seen high levels of new housing
constructed in recent years, particularly with the growth in high-density apartments in the
City Centre and The Quays, drawing in people and investment from across the world. At the
same time, our suburban locations have remained popular with residents and developers
alike, providing homes for people of all ages.
7.2 Despite these positive characteristics, we are facing a housing crisis. It is adversely affected
by the broken housing market that afflicts the country as a whole. The increase in rough
sleeping over recent years has been the most visible manifestation of this, but lying behind
it is a much more extensive problem of many people being unable to access suitable housing
at an affordable price and with certainty of tenure. Over 70,000(73)people are on our local
authority housing waiting lists with almost 27,000 "reasonable preference" . A lack of
appropriate housing options prevents some people from forming their own households,
particularly younger adults, whilst those who can may have to cope with substandard or
expensive accommodation. These problems are not universal, with the majority of people
having access to good housing, but they are far too widespread in a modern city such as
Greater Manchester and must be addressed. This Plan is one of the tools that we have to
address these issues.
7.3 We consider a decent home as a fundamental human right, but too often the housing market
is not delivering this. Its ability to do so has been further compromised over the last few
years by an increasing tendency for new dwellings to be seen as investments rather than
homes, further raising the financial pressures on households. Private sector housing
undoubtedly has a vital role to play in meeting housing needs, but the challenges can only
be truly met through a more diverse range of new provision including a major boost in the
supply of affordable housing.
Housing Need
7.4 As expected by NPPF , the housing need set out in this plan has been derived using the
standard methodology provided in the NPPG for calculating the Local Housing Need (LHN).
The calculation of housing need makes an adjustment to take account of affordability. If
insufficient new homes are provided to meet this need, then there is a risk that affordability
levels will worsen and people will not have access to suitable accommodation that meets
their needs. The construction of new housing is also an important part of the economy,
providing large numbers of jobs and often securing the redevelopment of derelict and
underused sites.
7.5 The economic opportunities and quality of life that Greater Manchester can offer make it an
attractive place for people to move to. This not only includes younger adults drawn by the
universities, graduate jobs and lifestyle offer but also families attracted by the long-term
prospects for their children, and older people wanting to take advantage of the wide range
of cultural and leisure facilities.
73 Source: Local Authority Housing Statistics Data Return 2019/20
GMCONSULT.ORG 125Places for Everyone7.6 The emergence of a global pandemic in March 2020 caused by the Covid-19 virus rightly
resulted in the need to understand what, if any, action should be taken in relation to the level
of housing growth being proposed. Following an initial assessment of the potential impacts
of Covid-19 on the housing market, in 2020, a further assessment was carried out to inform
this plan. Both studies suggest that it became clear that there is insufficient evidence (either
at a national or local level) to suggest that we should not be seeking to meet our overall
housing need (as calculated by the standard LHN methodology) as a result of Covid-19.
That said it is considered that a cautious approach to predicting delivery rates should be
followed in the early years of the plan.
7.7 Therefore, whilst it is recognised that the country was in a state of flux, it is very clear that
to delay the production of the plan further could have a negative effect on the proper planning
of the conurbation and therefore its recovery. Instead it is considered appropriate to proceed
on the basis that we should seek to meet our LHN up to 2037 but to use the process of local
plan review to monitor the situation and if necessary to undertake a formal review outside
of the statutory timetable.
Housing Land Supply
7.8 There is a strong focus in this Plan on directing new housing towards previously-developed
sites within the existing urban area. This will help to address existing dereliction and poorly
used sites, as well as reducing the need to release greenfield and Green Belt land for
development. Previously-developed sites are often in relatively sustainable locations, close
to facilities and served by existing infrastructure, and hence their reuse for housing can
support wider objectives. Policy JP-H 4 'Density of New Housing'  will ensure that the most
is made of such sites, particularly in more accessible locations, further reducing the need
for additional land release.
7.9 A large number of previously-developed sites suitable for housing have been identified by
districts in their Brownfield Registers, Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessments and
Local Plans. Not all previously-developed sites will be appropriate for housing development,
as there will be a continued need to accommodate other uses such as employment. The
large amount of land identified in the Plan for new industrial and warehousing development
may free up some existing employment sites and areas including where there are issues of
viability and/or market demand for residential redevelopment in addition to those already
identified, but this potential supply is too uncertain to be assumed to make a significant
contribution to new housing during the plan period.
126 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneFigure 7.1 Existing supply of sites identified in strategic housing land availability assessments 2020-2037
7.10 A further source of housing land supply will be small sites, which are typically not identified
comprehensively in brownfield registers and strategic housing land availability assessments.
It has been assumed that the supply of new dwellings on small sites will continue at the
same rate in each district as has been seen over the last five years.
7.11 It will be important to make the most of the existing housing stock.The proportion of dwellings
that are vacant has halved since 2008 and is now slightly below the England
average.(74)Efforts will be made to further reduce long-term vacancies, including by seeking
Government funding and working with property owners, but any significant further reduction
in vacancies could begin to make it more difficult for people to move home. Consequently,
it has not been assumed that a reduction in vacancies will help to meet the overall housing
requirement. In any event, Government guidance is clear that empty properties brought back
into use can only be counted as contributing to housing supply and completions if they have
not already been counted as part of the existing stock.
74 Source based on ONS live tables 125 and 615
GMCONSULT.ORG 127Places for Everyone7.12 Table 7.1 illustrates that, in numerical terms, the existing supply of potential housing sites
identified in the districts' strategic housing land availability assessments and small sites is
adequate to meet the overall identified need. However, meeting the numerical needs alone,
is not enough. We must be able to demonstrate that its land supply has sufficient flexibility
within it to demonstrate that it represents a deliverable, viable and robust land supply and
will deliver a balanced and inclusive growth, thereby achieving the overall spatial strategy.
In light of this and the need to ensure the Green Belt boundary can endure beyond the plan
period it has been necessary to identify additional new sites across the city-region, over and
above those in the existing land supply. Having considered a number of spatial options, it
has been concluded that it in order to achieve this, it has been necessary to remove some
land from the Green Belt and to allocate this land within this Plan for residential development.
128 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone7.13 The table below summarises the sources of housing land supply up to 2037.
Estimated
LandSupply2021-2037EstimatedCompletions2020-21(77)Total2020-37Places forEveryoneAllocations(76)Allowances(75)Strategic Housing Land AvailabilityAssessmentDistrict
Mixbrownfieldland andgreenfieldlandGreenfieldlandBrownfieldland
14,672 -504 15,1760 2,021 0 2,469 10,686 Bolton
8,616 -187 8,803 4,700 261 362 424 3,056 Bury
59,576 -2,951 62,5510 805 9,676 2,591 49,455 Manchester
12,801 -330 13,131 2,176 557 1,410 1,276 7,712 Oldham
11,434 -569 12,003 4,006 -783 426 2,836 5,518 Rochdale
36,023 -1,680 37,703 1,500 1,959 1,473 2,137 30,634 Salford
8,200 -281 8,481 1,558 576 575 755 5,017 Tameside
20,698 -591 21,289 4,827 777 824 2,568 12,293 Trafford
18,732 -864 19,596 1,600 756 68 6,403 10,769 Wigan
190,752 -7,957 198,733 20,367 6,929 14,814 21,459 135,140 Places forEveryone
Table 7.1 Sources of housing land supply 2020-2037
77 Estimated completions 2020-2021 have been deducted from the total supply based on the target for 2020-2021 as presented in the GMSF October 2020
76 Excluding homes identified in existing land supply75 Allowances are a combination of small sites windfall allowances and demolitions/clearances for four of the districts (Bolton, Manchester, Oldham and Rochdale).  Rochdale has a
negative allowance figure because the number of dwellings expected to be lost to demolition/clearances is expected to outnumber the number of new dwellings expected to be builton small sites.
GMCONSULT.ORG 129Places for EveryoneDistribution of New Housing
7.14 The population of the PfE plan area is projected to increase in population by 158,194 (6.2%)
from 2021 to 2037. The highest levels of population growth across Greater Manchester are
projected to be in the two cities Manchester (32,700 increase in residents) and Salford
(31,000). The next largest increases are projected to be in Rochdale (19,100) and Oldham
(16,700). In contrast the projected population growth in the other northern districts across
the conurbation is lower. Overall though, projected demographic changes across Greater
Manchester still broadly mirror recent economic forecast changes. If these trends continue
unchecked then inequalities across Greater Manchester could widen further, with prosperity
increasingly focused in the centre and the south of the conurbation. Northern areas lacking
the scale and quality of housing investment to support their regeneration fully enough for
them to make a greater contribution to the economic success of Greater Manchester.
7.15 In order to help address these issues, higher levels of housing growth will be focused in the
central and northern districts of Greater Manchester. Manchester and Salford will continue
to be an appropriate location for the highest levels of new housing due to their central location,
good public transport connections, proximity to the main concentrations of employment and
leisure opportunities, and ability to deliver very high density developments. Supporting higher
levels of new housing in the northern districts will assist in achieving a more balanced pattern
of growth across Greater Manchester and a better distribution of skilled workers to support
local economies, helping to reduce disparities. The proposed distribution of housing
development also reflects the availability of suitable sites in each of the districts.
Phasing of New Housing
7.16 The average annual housing requirement of 10,305 net additional dwellings per annum was
achieved in 2018/19 for the first time since the peak of the housing market in 2006/07,
2007/08, and this achievement also continued in 2019/20 with 12,443 net completions. It
has therefore been demonstrated that this level of residential development can be achieved.
However, it is also true to say that following shocks like the financial crisis of 2008,
completions can see significant drops. Therefore we need to identify a phasing trajectory
which it considers is realistic and which will result in housing being delivered as planned
over the life of the plan. Until March 2020 there would have been little reason to suspect
that recent delivery trends would not continue, however in March 2020 there was a major
health induced economic event, caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. Although this pandemic
caused an initial shock to the construction industry, which might have an impact on delivery
rates in the early years of the plan, there is no robust evidence to suggest that it could have
such long term impacts to warrant reducing the overall housing land target from that derived
from the standard methodology. Instead, this plan recognises the uncertainty that the
pandemic may have on the housing sector in the short-term by ensuring that there is a
significant buffer on the housing land supply to meet the proposed phasing. This will enable
sufficient flexibility, which in turn gives confidence in the delivery rates in the early years of
the plan period.
130 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone7.17 Ensuring sufficient flexibility in the supply in the first years of the plan will not be sufficient
on its own to ensure housing delivery happens as planned. A significant proportion of the
land supply in the early years of the plan is made up from sites within the urban area, the
majority of which are on previously developed land. Many of these sites therefore face
challenges which will need assistance to kick-start their delivery. As part of Greater
Manchester we have been lobbying central Government for many years to secure funding
to enable it to achieve the common goal of delivering as many homes on brownfield land as
possible and keeping to a minimum the need to release Green Belt land. A number of key
schemes within Greater Manchester have successfully been awarded funding through the
Housing Infrastructure Fund and Greater Manchester has also recently been awarded funding
through the Brownfield Housing Fund. This type of funding, together with proactive work in
relation to housing delivery by each of the local planning authorities will help to ensure that
delivery will keep apace as anticipated in this Plan.
7.18 It is not the impact of Covid-19 alone that means that we need to be realistic in terms of
delivery rates over the early years of the plan period.The masterplanning and infrastructure
investments required to support the development of some sites, including many of the
allocations in the Plan, means that they may only produce large numbers of new dwellings
in the latter phases of the plan period. In some parts of the conurbation it will be necessary
to develop new markets for housing, which is vital to delivering the overall strategy for Greater
Manchester but may take some time to achieve.
7.19 Taking all of these factors into account, it is anticipated that there will be around 8,732 housing
completions on average up until March 2025, increasing to an average of around 10,305
net additional dwellings per annum up to March 2030 and accelerating to around 11,200 per
annum up to March 2037. This trajectory is shown below. Whilst the trajectory in this plan
is considered to be realistic, given the relatively unknown impacts of Covid-19 at this point
in time, it is possible that delivery could in fact be different to that currently anticipated.
Therefore, in such an eventuality the surplus or shortfall will be distributed over the remaining
years of the plan. In this way, any over delivery within a local planning authority area will not
result in that authority being adversely affected when it comes to calculating their five-year
housing land supply.
7.20 The work of each of the local planning authorities in terms of housing delivery will be key to
ensuring that these step changes in delivery rates are achieved and these will be reviewed
regularly as part of the housing delivery test process.
Policy JP-H 1
Scale, Distribution and Phasing of New Housing Development
A minimum of 164,880 net additional dwellings will be delivered over the period 2021-37, or an
annual average of around 10,305.
GMCONSULT.ORG 131Places for EveryoneTable 7.1, defines the land supply, demonstrating that brownfield land will be the predominant
source of land over the plan period.
The new homes will be of good quality and design, adaptable, supported by the necessary
infrastructure and amenities and their distribution (as set out in Table 7.2) will support the Plan's
overall strategy which enables people to reduce the need to travel when taking advantage of
our key assets.
The phasing of development is set out in Table 7.2. Each local authority will monitor delivery
rates within their area and will take action as necessary to ensure that delivery rates are
maintained as anticipated in this plan. If this regular monitoring reveals significant deviation from
the phasing in this plan, the factors resulting in these changes will be determined and
consideration will be given to what action would be appropriate, including development
management action and review of the policies in this plan. Any shortfall or surplus will be
distributed over the remainder of the full plan period when calculating five-year supply.This work
would feed into the regular reviews of this plan, although individual authorities may wish to take
specific local action outside the formal review process to ensure that they can maintain delivery
rates.
Total
2021-20372030-2037
(annual)2025-2030
(annual)2021-2025
(annual)Annual
average
2021-2037District
12,589 930 787 536 787 Bolton
7,228 596 452 199 452 Bury
56,528 3,533 3,533 3,533 3,533 Manchester
10,884 868 680 352 680 Oldham
9,858 622 616 606 616 Rochdale
26,528 1,658 1,658 1,658 1,658 Salford
7,758 591 485 299 485 Tameside
17,954 1,404 1,122 629 1,112 Trafford
15,554 1,002 972 920 972 Wigan
164,881 11,204 10,305 8,732 10,305 Places for
Everyone
Table 7.2 Distribution and Phasing of new dwellings 2021-2037
132 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAffordability of New Housing
7.21 A key challenge and priority for Greater Manchester is to ensure that new housing comes
forward at a price that potential occupiers can afford. Overall, Greater Manchester is a
relatively affordable place to live on average compared to some other parts of the UK,
particularly London and the South. This is an important aspect of the competitiveness of
Greater Manchester that will need to be maintained if high levels of economic growth are to
be delivered, and all residents are to share in its benefits.
7.22 However, affordability has been worsening in recent years, and there are a significant number
of households who are unable to find suitable homes at an affordable cost. The cost of
housing is a challenge to different cohorts within the housing system - including those needing
access to social rent or trying to maintain a tenancy as welfare rules are squeezed; private
renters sharing; those saving as prospective First Time Buyers looking for routes into home
ownership; people in unstable employment in any tenure; older owner-occupiers without the
resources to maintain a decaying property, or people living in overcrowded properties because
they cannot afford or access a home large enough to meet their needs. As a result, some
people are living in inadequate accommodation and/or spending an unacceptably large
proportion of their income on housing, which in turn increases levels of poverty. The official
definition of affordable housing does not adequately address the diverse range of need within
our boroughs, nor does it reflect the impact of welfare reform and other factors on households’
ability to meet their housing costs.Through its housing strategy, Greater Manchester(78)sets
out its approach to tackle the housing crisis, to ensure our housing solutions address the
needs and aspirations of current and future citizens. Importantly our housing crisis will not
be fixed by the planning system alone, although it will play a key role in this work.
7.23 There are around 72,000 households on the local authority registers, with over 26,000 of
these identified as being in reasonable preference for housing.(79) It is estimated that around
38% of newly forming households are unable to afford to buy or rent a home at lower quartile
prices.(80) New build is just one of the ways to meet this need.
7.24 Consequently, increasing the delivery of affordable housing across the Plan area is a very
high priority, and it will be essential that new residential developments play a full role in
supporting this.There are a variety of ways of delivering affordable housing and the emphasis
in some parts of our area may be on increasing the supply of social rented and affordable
rented properties, reflecting the low incomes of many households in need. In other parts,
alternative types of affordable housing may also be suitable, such as shared ownership,
affordable market rent, and discount market sales.
7.25 In doing this it will be important to ensure that a diverse mix of values and tenures of new
housing comes forward so that all households can meet their needs and aspirations, helping
to ensure that Greater Manchester can attract and retain skilled workers, bring more money
into local economies and deliver more mixed and inclusive communities.
78 https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/2257/gm-housing-str ategy-2019-2024.pdf
79 ‘reasonable preference’  is defined in the 1996 Housing Act (Part 6)
80 The lower quartile is the point at which one-quarter of properties are cheaper to buy/rent, and three-quarters are more expensive, representing
a typical entry point property for new households prices.
GMCONSULT.ORG 133Places for EveryonePolicy JP-H 2
Affordability of New Housing
Substantial improvements will be sought in the ability of people to access housing at a price
they can afford, including through:
1.Significantly increasing the supply of new housing, in accordance with Policy JP-H 1 'Scale,
Distribution and Phasing of New Housing Development', thereby reducing the potential for
a shortfall to lead to large house price and rent increases
2. Aiming to deliver our share of at least 50,000 additional affordable homes across Greater
Manchester up to 2037, with at least 60% being for social rent or affordable rent(81)
3.Support provision of affordable housing, either on- or off-site, as part of new developments
(avoiding where possible clusters of tenure to deliver mixed communities), with locally
appropriate requirements being set by each local authority
4.Working with Government to maximise the amount of public funding being directed towards
the provision of new affordable housing
5.Increasing the supply of low-cost market housing, to complement the provision of affordable
homes and diversify options for low income households.
Type, Size and Design of New Housing
7.26 Increasing the supply of affordable homes is an essential component of the overall strategy,
but it will be important to ensure that a diverse mix of values and tenures of new housing
comes forward so that all households can meet their needs and aspirations.
7.27 Greater Manchester is in competition with cities across the world to attract and retain the
skilled workers that will be critical to delivering high and sustained levels of economic growth.
It already has some particularly attractive residential neighbourhoods, several of which can
command very high house prices, both within the high-density areas of the City Centre and
The Quays, and in some of the lower density suburbs. Many of the higher value suburban
neighbourhoods are located in the south of the conurbation, forming part of a much larger
high-value area extending into north Cheshire, although there are smaller and more dispersed
prosperous housing areas elsewhere in the sub-region.
7.28 A key aim of this Plan is to boost the supply of well designed, adaptable new homes with
appropriate access to private space. In some areas this will help to diversify local housing
markets that are often dominated by low-cost housing, bring more money into local
economies, and deliver more mixed and inclusive communities. It will also help to increase
the options for skilled workers looking to move into or within our area. Focusing a significant
81 A definition of the different forms of affordable housing is given in Annex 2: Glossary (page 64) of the NPPF - see
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/national-planning-policy-fr amework--2
134 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneproportion of housing growth in the northern areas will assist in this, supported by selectively
releasing Green Belt sites to deliver a diverse mix of values and tenures that includes
affordable homes as well as some higher value housing, (relative to prevailing values in the
local area), within a high quality environment. This will help to achieve a better spread of
higher value housing and prosperity across the plan area, whilst also delivering greater
diversity within individual areas.
7.29 A diverse range of housing will be required to meet our population and household growth. Just
over 70% of the population increase 2021-2037 is projected to be in those aged 65 and over.
In contrast the population of those aged under 18 is projected to decrease by more than
12,000.(82) Indeed, those aged 65 and over are projected to account for large proportions
of the growth in each district and ranging from 34% of the growth in Salford to 145% in Wigan
and 166% in Bolton (and those under 65 in Bolton decreasing by 5,000 and those under 65
in Wigan decreasing by 6,100).
7.30 A key part of the overall strategy is to maximise the amount of development on brownfield
sites in the most accessible locations, and minimise the loss of greenfield and Green Belt
land as far as possible. In order to deliver the necessary densities, an increasing proportion
of new dwellings will be in the form of apartments and town houses, continuing recent trends.
7.31 Smaller households are forecast to account for over half of the growth in households.(83) It
is anticipated that this will further strengthen the demand in apartments, particularly given
cost pressures and the increased reliance on private rented accommodation. However, some
single and couple households will want or need to live in larger dwellings, for example to
facilitate home-working or accommodate visiting relatives. There is scope to increase the
number of families living in apartments, especially if higher density neighbourhoods can be
made more inclusive for all age groups. The land supply that has been identified responds
to these needs as demonstrated by the table below.
 % Apartments 2020 - 2037 % Houses 2020 - 2037 District
40 60 Bolton
22 78 Bury
84 16 Manchester
35 65 Oldham
17 83 Rochdale
81 19 Salford
40 60 Tameside
82 ONS 2018-based subnational population projections
83 ONS Household Projections
GMCONSULT.ORG 135Places for Everyone % Apartments 2020 - 2037 % Houses 2020 - 2037 District
64 36 Trafford
11 89 Wigan
59 41 Places for Everyone
Table 7.3 Residential Land Supply - Split of Houses and Apartments
7.32 The ageing population will necessitate a renewed emphasis on ensuring that a diverse range
of housing is available to meet the needs of older people and households. This will require
new dwellings to be more adaptable, and designed with potential care needs in mind, so
that older people can remain in their homes if they wish as their circumstances change.
There also need to be much better options for those who would like to move, perhaps to a
dwelling of a more appropriate size in a location that enables them to easily access local
services and facilities, and this could help to release some existing houses for families with
dependent children.
7.33 The UK has the smallest average new-build dwellings in Europe(84) and cost considerations
for both developers and households are placing further downward pressure on dwelling size.
This potentially creates a number of problems, resulting in less adaptable dwellings that are
unable to respond to the changing needs of households, poor health resulting from cramped
conditions and overcrowding, and overall a lower quality of life. The lack of space can also
inhibit home-working, which will be increasingly important in helping to minimise the need
to travel and enabling us to take advantage of digital-based business opportunities. It is
therefore essential that new housing achieves minimum standards that will help to ensure
that it is able to meet identified needs and contributes to rather than detracts from the relative
attractiveness of Greater Manchester as a place to live.The provision of appropriate outdoor
private amenity space will also be vital in delivering high quality homes that support good
health.
Policy JP-H 3
Type, Size and Design of New Housing
Development across the plan area should seek to incorporate a range of dwelling types and
sizes including for self-build and community led building projects to meet local needs and deliver
more inclusive neighbourhoods. Where appropriate, this should include incorporating specialist
housing for older households and vulnerable people.
84 Malcolm Morgan and Heather Cruickshank (2014) Quantifying the extent of space shortages: English dwellings, Building Research & Information
Vol. 42, Issue 6, 2014
136 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneThe precise mix of dwelling types and sizes will be determined through district local plans,
masterplans and other guidance, in order to reflect local circumstances and deliver an appropriate
mix of dwellings across the plan area as a whole.
Housing provision to accommodate specific groups, such as students and travelling people, will
be addressed through district local plans.
All new dwellings must:
1. Comply with the nationally described space standards; and
2.Be built to the ‘accessible and adaptable’  standard in Part M4(2) of the Building Regulations,
unless specific site conditions make this impracticable.
Innovation in housing development will be supported where it is consistent with the principles
of good design and contributes to local distinctiveness, including the use of  modern methods
of manufacturing that can help to improve the speed of delivery and increase building standards.
Housing Densities
7.34 Increasing the average density of new housing developments in the most accessible locations
is an important part of our overall strategy, providing a number of benefits. It will reduce the
amount of land that needs to be used for development, thereby assisting the protection of
greenfield and Green Belt land. It will help to minimise the need to travel, enabling more
people to live close to shops and services, and increasing the local population necessary
to support local facilities and support regeneration. It will also maximise the number of people
living in the most accessible places, helping to increase the proportion of trips made by
walking, cycling and public transport, and reducing the demand for car-based travel. The
approach to housing densities directly supports the objectives of the Mayor's Town Centre
Challenge.
Policy JP-H 4
Density of New Housing
New housing development should be delivered at a density appropriate to the location, reflecting
the relative accessibility of the site by walking, cycling and public transport, in accordance with
the minimum densities set out below.
GMCONSULT.ORG 137Places for EveryoneMinimum net residential density
(dwellings per hectare)Location
(use highest density
that applies when a
site falls within more
than one location)Within 800 metres Within 400 metres Within the location
Designated centres:
70 120 200 City Centre
50 70 120Designated town
centres
35 50 70Other designated
centres
Public transport stops:
120 200 N/AMain rail stations and
Metrolink stops in the
City Centre
70 120 N/AOther rail stations and
Metrolink stops in
large designated
centres
50 70 N/AOther rail stations with
a frequent service and
all other Metrolink
stops
35 50 N/ALeigh Guided Busway
stops
35 35 50Areas within GMAL 6
and above or its
equivalent
All other locations:  minimum net residential density of 35 dwellings per hectare
Lower densities may be acceptable where they can be clearly justified by:
138 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.Local housing market issues, such as a demonstrable need for a particular type of housing
that cannot be delivered at a higher density; or
2. Site-specific issues, such as the design context and any potential impact on the wider
landscape or townscape including heritage assets and green infrastructure
And where it would not compromise the overall delivery of new homes in the district.
In order to achieve an appropriate mix of housing across the plan area, the densities above
should typically be delivered as follows:
A. 35-70 dwellings per hectare: primarily houses
B. 70-120 dwellings per hectare: mix of houses and apartments
C.120+ dwellings per hectare: primarily apartments, incorporating houses and/or ground-floor
duplexes where practicable
Definitions and interpretation
Where more than one density applies to the same part of the site, the highest density should
be used. Different densities may apply to different parts of a site.
Distances should be measured from the boundary of the designated centre or GMAL
area.(85) All distances are measured in a straight line.
The designated centres are as defined in district local plans.
85 GMAL is an abbreviation of Greater Manchester Accessibility Layer, which measures the accessibility of locations across Greater Manchester
by walking and public transport. Areas are scored on a scale of 1-8, with 8 being the most accessible. GMAL scores are published online
at data.gov.uk.
GMCONSULT.ORG 139Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 140Places for Everyone8.1 Our many and varied green spaces and features are used in many different ways and afforded
many different values by the people who live, work in or visit the city-region. The GMCA is
committed to the Government’ s approach as set out in the 25 Y ear Environment Plan
(25YEP)(86)to deliver a better natural environment for people and wildlife and ensuring that
it is accessible for everyone to connect to and benefit from.
8.2 This Plan supports the important role of our natural assets by:
Valuing the special qualities and key sensitivities of our landscapes (recognising
importance of an area’ s appearance to the sense of place held by those who live in or
visit it);
Seeking to protect and enhance green and blue infrastructure (the wider network of
green (and blue) features which make a huge contribution to quality of life, promote
good mental and physical health, create liveable places and support economic growth);
Seeking an overall enhancement of biodiversity and geodiversity (the living organisms
and ground beneath our feet which underpin the value of the natural environment and
its ability to provide a wide range of important benefits, including supporting human
health and quality of life);
Seeking to maintain a Green Belt (which plays an important role in restricting unplanned
development in a conurbation with a complex urban form, ensuring that its cities, towns
and smaller settlements retain their identity).
Valuing Important Landscapes
8.3 A Greater Manchester Landscape Character and Sensitivity Assessment (GMLCSA) has
been prepared for Greater Manchester.(87)This assesses the quality and sensitivity of
different landscapes and considers cross-boundary relationships (including with the Peak
District National Park).
8.4 The GMLCSA identifies 10 different landscape character types which make up Greater
Manchester's predominantly unbuilt areas and sets out evidence of their characteristics and
sensitivities:
Broad Urban Fringe Valleys;
Historic Parks and Wooded Estate Farmland;
Incised Urban Fringe Valleys;
Mosslands and Lowland Farmland;
Pennine Foothills (West-South Pennines);
Pennine Foothills (Dark Peak);
Reclaimed Land / Wetlands;
Unenclosed Uplands and Fringes (West-South Pennines);
Unenclosed Uplands and Fringes (Dark Peak); and
Urban Fringe Farmland
86 www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/25-y ear-en vironment-plan
87 https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/placesf oreveryone
142 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone8.5 The sensitivities of our landscapes vary according to the issues and pressures they face
and can be significantly influenced by the green infrastructure features they contain (see
Our Green Infrastructure Network).
Policy JP-G 1
Valuing Important Landscapes
Development should reflect and respond to the special qualities and sensitivities of the key
landscape characteristics of its location, including having regard to:
Topography, geology and drainage;
Land use and field patterns;
Semi-natural habitats and woodland cover;
Archaeology and cultural heritage;
Settlement, road pattern and rights of way; and
Views and perceptual qualities.
Transitional areas around new development and the interface of new development with the
surrounding countryside/landscape are also of particular importance, requiring well-considered
and sensitive treatment. In particular, opportunities to improve the intactness and condition of
the landscape should be taken, especially in conjunction with seeking a net enhancement of
biodiversity/geodiversity resources under Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and
Geodiversity' .
In implementing this strategic policy regard will be had to the Greater Manchester Landscape
Character and Sensitivity Assessment (GMLCSA), in particular its guidance on future development
and landscape management/enhancement within areas covered by each landscape character
type.
GMCONSULT.ORG 143Places for EveryoneFigure 8.1 Landscape Character Types
Our Green Infrastructure Network
8.6 Green infrastructure(88) is a natural capital asset that provides multiple benefits, at a range
of scales. For communities, these benefits can include enhanced wellbeing, outdoor recreation
and access, enhanced biodiversity and landscapes, food and energy production, urban
cooling, and the management of flood risk. These benefits are also known as ecosystem
services.
8.7 Our green infrastructure network is enormously diverse, both in terms of its character and
functions. Each type of green infrastructure is important in its own right, adding to the
distinctiveness of the local area and Greater Manchester as a whole. However, it is the
combination of and interrelationships between them that is particularly significant.
8.8 Ensuring that there is a high quality network of green infrastructure is therefore vital to our
long-term success, sustainability and resilience. Such a network should be:
88 See: https://www .gov.uk/guidance/natur al-en vironment
144 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneExtensive, maximising the size and spread of green infrastructure in a way that is
compatible with meeting development requirements, with a particular need to increase
the quantity of green infrastructure in the denser urban areas;
Integrated, maximising connections between the different components including into
areas surrounding Greater Manchester and, importantly, into and through new
development;
Multifunctional, providing multiple eco-system services whilst not detracting from
important primary functions;
High quality, ensuring it is able to perform successfully its various functions; and
Accessible, enabling residents from across Greater Manchester and other visitors to
appreciate its benefits in a way that does not lead to its degradation.
8.9 However, green infrastructure assets can come under pressure due to continued growth in
the population, economic activity and number of visitors, as well as from higher temperatures
and more extreme weather events which will result from climate change. Our challenge is
to find a way of accommodating the necessary scale of development to deliver inclusive
growth and prosperity, whilst delivering overall improvements to the green infrastructure
network.
8.10 Our existing valued landscapes and protected sites and areas constitute our best (priority)
areas for green infrastructure and these sites and areas provide many social and economic
benefits. But we also have to look beyond these areas and take action to extend and link
these sites to form a Nature Recovery Network (NRN) for Greater Manchester.
8.11 On 14 August 2020, Greater Manchester was selected by the government to help kick-start
nature recovery on a countrywide scale. The pilots will enable local authorities to set out
their local priorities for restoring and linking up habitats so species can thrive, and agree the
best places to help nature recover, plant trees, restore peatland, mitigate flood and fire risk,
and create green spaces for local people to enjoy. GMCA is piloting and developing a Local
Nature Recovery Strategy (LNRS), these will become mandatory and a statutory document
under the Environment Bill and will identify priority actions for biodiversity and nature recovery
across Greater Manchester, including the development of a NRN.
8.12 The map of biodiversity strategic priorities and opportunities which will underpin the Greater
Manchester LNRS and the NRN will be developed as a first iteration, prior to engaging wider
stakeholders in its further development. This has been provided for inclusion within this
Plan at this stage as part of the national pilot and will inform the process to be undertaken
in developing LNRSs and LNRs across the country and as such is following a stepped
process and timeline designed by Defra.
8.13 The map will provide for each habitat type an overview of priority activities required to support
nature recovery across the whole of Greater Manchester and beyond the administrative
boundary. It will include all areas, including urban areas, to identify key activities for habitat
and green infrastructure creation and restoration needs for wildlife and the benefits they can
provide for people through Natural Capital benefits. As part of the development process for
a LNRS, GMCA, working with Natural England, GMEU and wider Natural Capital Group
GMCONSULT.ORG 145Places for Everyonepartners, will be engaging wider stakeholders, sectors  and interest groups in the development
of the Strategy, the identification of priorities and the mechanisms for delivering these priority
actions.
8.14 The Environment Bill being considered by Parliament goes even further – requiring all areas
in England to establish LNRSs. This will help bring a broad range of groups together – from
farmers to businesses to local communities – to deliver priorities for nature recovery at a
local and national level.The pilots will also help kick-start the creation of over a million acres
of habitats for wildlife.
8.15 As the overall green infrastructure network evolves, it will be identified in the most relevant
information source, including green infrastructure plans, LNRSs and MappingGM.
Policy JP-G 2
Green Infrastructure Network
A strategic approach will be taken to the protection, management and enhancement of our Green
Infrastructure in order to protect and enhance the ecosystem services which the Figure 8.2 'Green
Infrastructure Network'  provides, including flood management, climate change mitigation and
adaptation. Alongside this primary function an enhanced Green Infrastructure network will support
wider public health benefits, including promotion of active travel, food growing and recreational
opportunities.
The protection, management and enhancement of Green Infrastructure will contribute to the
development of a Nature Recovery Network for Greater Manchester.
The following opportunity areas (as broadly illustrated on Figure 8.3 'Green Infrastructure
Opportunity Areas') are identified as having particular potential for delivering improvements to
our Green Infrastructure Network:
a.Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area (Salford and Wigan with connections
to Warrington);
b. Croal-Irwell Valley (Bolton, Bury, Manchester and Salford with connections to
Blackburn-with-Darwen and Rossendale);
c. South Pennine Moors (Oldham, Rochdale and Tameside with connections to Calderdale,
Kirklees and High Peak);
d. West Pennine Moors (Bolton and Bury with connections to Blackburn-with-Darwen and
Chorley);
e. Mersey Valley (Manchester and Trafford with connections to Stockport, High Peak and
Cheshire East);
146 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonef. Red Moss and Middle Brook Valley (Bolton);
g. Hulton Park (Bolton);
h. Cutacre Country Park (Bolton, Salford and Wigan);
i. Lower Medlock Valley (Manchester);
j. Moston Brook Corridor (Manchester and Oldham);
k. Roch Valley (Rochdale);
l. Hollingworth Lake and Surrounds (Rochdale); and 
m. Carrington (Trafford)
Development within and around the Green Infrastructure Network should be consistent with
delivering major green infrastructure improvements within them and should contribute to
improvements. Where Green Infrastructure Opportunity Areas overlap or are in close proximity
to development allocations proposed in this plan appropriate measures to achieve this have
been included. Further opportunities for delivering strategic green infrastructure enhancements
and additional opportunities will be identified in the appropriate source(s) over time as the overall
green infrastructure network evolves.
Wherever practicable, opportunities to integrate new and existing green infrastructure into new
development will be taken to protect, enhance and expand the green infrastructure network in
accordance with the above priorities. Where new or improved green infrastructure is delivered
as part of a development, the developer should make appropriate provision for its long term
management and maintenance.
GMCONSULT.ORG 147Places for EveryoneFigure 8.2 Green Infrastructure Network
148 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneWIGANBOLTONBURYROCHDALE
OLDHAM
ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE SALFORD
MANCHESTER
ALTRINCHAM
Green Infrastructure Opportunity AreasFigure 8.3 Green Infrastructure Opportunity Areas
ABCD
EEF
G
H
IJKL
M
Contains OS data © Crown copyright and database right 2020Figure 8.3 Green Infrastructure Opportunity Areas
Key Elements of the Green Infrastructure Network
8.16 Our Green Infrastructure Network is enormously diverse, both in terms of the type and
character of features and the various functions that they perform. At a broad level, the priority
green infrastructure can be split into different character areas, although these are not
completely discrete and there is some overlap between them:
River valleys and waterways
Lowland wetlands and mosslands
Uplands
Urban green spaces
8.17 Trees and woodland are further vital elements of the green infrastructure network, permeating
through these broad areas and often appearing as key features within them.
GMCONSULT.ORG 149Places for Everyone8.18 Each type of green infrastructure is important in its own right, adding to the distinctiveness
of the local area and Greater Manchester as a whole. However, it is the combination of, and
interrelationships between, them that is particularly significant. Views between the various
elements are a key part of the character of the area, and collectively they enable the
movement of species throughout the sub-region and beyond. Although this categorisation
helps to understand the overall network, it should also be recognised that there are
considerable differences within as well as between them. These broad areas are
complemented by other green infrastructure features especially within urban areas, such as
gardens, ponds, green roofs and verges.
River Valleys and Waterways
8.19 There are over 2400 km(89) of river valleys within Greater Manchester, in addition to over
150 km of canals, which form a central component of the landscape, making a major
contribution to biodiversity, geodiversity, wider green infrastructure, local identity, the sense
of place and heritage.
8.20 In urban centres they have a significant role for generating and sustaining economic growth
as well as providing a unique opportunity to contribute to the quality of the local natural
environment.They also provide critical ecosystem services in reducing the urban heat island
effect and mitigating air pollution, particularly when reinforced by planting.
8.21 River valleys and canals are vital components of the wider network of habitats, transport
routes and recreation/tourism opportunities, and their long term management is essential
to provide benefits to flood risk, water quality, climate change adaptation, wildlife and creating
attractive healthy environments for people to live. They provide important corridors of
semi-natural habitats and natural green space, with open grassland, woodland and wetland,
linking urban centres with open countryside and connecting other strategically important
areas such as the uplands and lowlands. As such, river valleys and canals will form an
important part of our Nature Recovery Network.
8.22 Our river valleys are a complex network and cover a number of catchments including the
Mersey, Irwell, Roch, Tame and Bollin. These flow from the Pennine moors to the East and
North, and the Peak District to the South-East, across the conurbation and into the lower-lying
areas of the South and West.The Douglas also covers the West of Greater Manchester and
flows North into the Ribble Estuary (Lancashire).
8.23 New development must be designed to ensure river corridors and their associated habitats
are integrated within development  and enhanced wherever possible, ensuring they are
managed sustainably in the long term and opportunities to address Water Framework
Directive failures are considered. This in turn will provide high quality and attractive
environments, achieve additional economic benefits (through multifunctional ecosystem
services and land value capture) whilst ensuring there is increased resilience to future climate
change pressures and an overall improvement in biodiversity.
89 Source: Environment Agency
150 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone8.24 The North West River Basin Management Plan(90), required under the Water Framework
Directive(91), and implemented through UK legislation (92), provides the statutory framework
for protecting and enhancing the benefits provided by the water environment. Catchment
Partnerships are also responsible for preparing catchment plans to help achieve a coordinated
approach to Water Framework Directive delivery and embedding the catchment based
approach.
Figure 8.4 Greater Manchester's river and canal networks
8.25 Greater Manchester Combined Authority is also a key partner on the EU Life Integrated
Project known as ‘Natural Course’.(93)This covers the North West River Basin Management
Catchment, and has a primary focus on the Irwell Catchment. Natural Course is seeking to
develop a collaborative approach to integrated water management and the enhancement
of the many benefits that our rivers provide. A key objective of Natural Course is to identify
and innovative and cost effective solutions to a range of water management issues and
90 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/collections/r iver-basin-management-plans-2015
91 http://ec.europa.eu/en vironment/w ater/w ater-fr amework/inde x_en.html
92 https://www .legislation.go v.uk/uksi/2017/407/contents/made
93 http://natur alcourse .co.uk/
GMCONSULT.ORG 151Places for Everyonewhere possible use a natural capital approach to help deliver multiple objectives. A recent
study of the ecosystem benefits from the natural environment alongside the Irwell’ s rivers
has an existing natural capital value of £418 million per year.(94)This Plan has an important
role as part of this to ensure that any future development has a positive impact on the water
environment and these ecosystem services are enhanced where possible.
Policy JP-G 3
River Valleys and Waterways
River valleys and waterways will be protected and improved as central components of our Green
Infrastructure Network and a vital part of a Nature Recovery Network, making a major contribution
to local identity, quality of life and the natural environment.
In making planning decisions and carrying out other associated activities, we will seek to deliver
the following priorities:
1. Retain the remaining open character of the river valleys, avoiding their fragmentation and
prominent development on valley edges;
2. Promote public enjoyment of the river valleys, including as key features connecting urban
areas to the countryside, providing opportunities for active travel, and enhance their high
recreational value as green fingers through densely populated areas;
3. Protect and enhance the mosaic of semi-natural habitats, including: riparian (waterside),
clough, broadleaved and ancient woodland; wet and semi-natural grassland; meadow; and
lakes and ponds;
4. Retain existing pockets of relatively tranquillity and seclusion, especially within the more
tightly enclosed and wooded valleys;
5. Reduce flood risk, through Natural Flood Management (NFM), including careful land
management and a catchment-wide approach;
6. Improve water quality, including through land decontamination and the management of
diffuse pollution from industry and agriculture;
7.Return rivers to a more natural state where practicable, including through deculverting and
the re-naturalisation of river banks and flood plains;
8.Increase the use of canals and watercourses for active travel, with improved and extended
rights of way alongside the water providing walking and cycling routes for both recreation
and commuting, thereby increasing access to natural green space; and
94 TEP/Vivid Economics Irwell Ecosystem Services Opportunity Mapping (2018) - see
https://natur alcourse .co.uk/2018/04/23/irw ell-management-catchment-natur al-capital-account-and-ecosystem-ser vices-oppor tunities-mapping/
152 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone9. Ensure that development relates positively to nearby rivers and other waterways, taking
advantage of opportunities to integrate green infrastructure through:
a. High quality frontages to the water; and
b. Public realm alongside the water for both recreation use and maintenance access.
Lowland Wetlands and Mosslands
8.26 Lowland wetlands and mosslands cover substantial areas within Wigan, west Salford and
south-west Trafford, where they form part of the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature
Improvement Area which extends into Warrington and measures around 40,000 hectares
in total. There are also smaller lowland wetland and mossland areas in other parts of the
sub-region, including Clifton Moss in Salford, Red Moss in Bolton, Unsworth Moss in Bury,
and Ashton Moss in Tameside. All of these areas have significant green infrastructure
functionality, and are significant in terms of their biodiversity and geodiversity resources.
8.27 The area includes a range of internationally, nationally and locally designated nature
conservation sites and is covered by the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement
Area which aims to create an essential network of wildlife corridors, linking biodiversity across
the landscape and allowing wetland habitats to thrive and survive.(95)The area will form an
important part of the Nature Recovery Network for Greater Manchester. Although it has a
rich variety of habitats, existing conservation sites are often poorly connected, and there are
large parts of the area where the landscape is degraded. Habitat enhancement and
reinstatement could deliver considerable ecological benefits, as well as providing a large-scale
recreation resource that could make a significant contribution to the health and quality of life
of residents. Landscape enhancements would also support other objectives such as improving
water quality, mitigating flood risk and reducing soil erosion.
8.28 The mosslands were originally typified by lowland raised bog, which supports a unique range
of wildlife. Peat cutting and agriculture have left only small areas of undamaged peat deposits,
and lowland raised bog is now one of Western Europe’ s rarest and most threatened habitats.
Several restoration projects are underway within the Plan area, which will not only have
major nature conservation benefits, but could also make a considerable contribution to
carbon targets, reducing a significant source of emissions and locking in additional carbon.
Within Wigan in particular, extensive valuable wetland habitats have formed on many former
industrial sites where undermining has resulted in the formation of subsidence flashes and
ponds. A mixture of pasture and arable cultivation is found in farmed areas surrounding the
wetlands and active mossland, taking advantage of the productive peaty soils.
95 https://www .lancs wt.org.uk/g reatmanchesterw etlands
GMCONSULT.ORG 153Places for Everyone8.29 The restored industrial landscapes of the wetlands, such as the flashes in Wigan, provide
an important recreational resource. There is also a network of public footpaths and
long-distance walking and cycling routes, but access to large parts of the landscape is very
limited.The Heritage Lottery funded Carbon Landscape project, which also extends through
Warrington to incorporate the Mersey Wetlands Corridor, is seeking to reconnect people to
the landscapes and raise awareness within local communities of these amazing wild oases
on their doorstep, including through a Carbon Trail that will link them together.(96)
8.30 The importance of the habitats and wider landscape means that there is a strong emphasis
in the Plan on their retention and improvement, and the majority of these areas will see little
or no development. Some sections of undeveloped mossland, however, are considered
appropriate for future development as they are well-located to make a notable contribution
to delivering more balanced and inclusive growth. Such areas will only be developed where
they are shown to be of limited ecological value and the development can be delivered
without compromising the green infrastructure role of the wider area.
Policy JP-G 4
Lowland Wetlands and Mosslands
The distinctive flat, open landscape and network of habitats of ecologically valuable lowland
wetlands and mosslands will be protected, enhanced and restored, with a strong emphasis on
reconnecting local communities to the natural and historic environments.
In making planning decisions and carrying out other associated activities, we will seek to deliver
the following priorities:
1. Maintain and enhance the extensive and varied mosaic of semi-natural habitats including
brooks, ditches, open water bodies, bog, fen, swamp, flashes, ponds, wet and broadleaved
woodland, and grassland;
2.Manage and restore the remnant pockets of lowland raised bog, including through restoration
from farmland, significantly expanding and connecting the areas of active bog to contribute
to important functions such as flood risk management and carbon sequestration;
3.Positively manage land adjacent to lowland raised bog and other sensitive wetland habitats
in a complementary and coordinated manner, ensuring that their hydrology is not adversely
affected and the water table is restored;
4.Increase features that act as stepping stones for wildlife moving through the area, such as
field ponds, hedgerows and trees, and minimise barriers to movement;
5. Removal of derelict structures and the remediation of land where it is beneficial to green
infrastructure provision and there is no historic value in their retention; and
96 https://carbonlandscape .org.uk/
154 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone6. Expand public access across the area considerably, including through the creation of new
circular routes, and enhance recreation and active travel opportunities.
Uplands
8.31 Greater Manchester's uplands extend around the northern and eastern edges of the
conurbation, through Bolton, Bury, Rochdale, Oldham, Tameside and Stockport. The area
includes parts of the West and Southern Pennines and the Dark Peak, and sits within a
much larger moorland landscape stretching eastwards into the Peak District National Park
and northwards into Lancashire. As a result, cross-boundary working with neighbouring local
authorities including Stockport as well as those outside of Greater Manchester is required
to address the issues affecting the uplands.
8.32 The uplands and features within them are widely visible from across Greater Manchester,
providing a strong sense of place and orientation. The intense rural character and sense of
isolation of the uplands, particularly on the unenclosed moorland, contrasts with the extensive
urban area below, of which there are spectacular panoramic views. This is complemented
by the industrial architecture and archaeology throughout the uplands, including mill ponds,
narrow winding lanes, disused quarries and coal-mining relics. Gritstone is a distinctive
unifying feature of the dry stone walls and limited built development.
8.33 The importance of the mosaic of moorland habitats is reflected in a range of international,
national and local designations, including parts of the large South Pennine Moors Special
Area of Conservation and Special Protection Area.These habitats support important breeding
bird populations. The peat soils of the uplands store significant volumes of carbon, but
extensive areas are degraded. Habitat restoration, particularly of blanket bog, but also other
wetland habitats and woodland, will be important for addressing multiple green infrastructure
priorities such as sequestering carbon from the atmosphere, minimising flood risk, reducing
soil erosion, improving water quality, combating the heat island effect of Greater Manchester
and enhancing biodiversity. However, such restoration may have future land use implications,
for example by requiring the re-wetting of moorland and/or the blocking of drainage ditches.
8.34 The uplands provide a sense of inspiration and escapism, offering important opportunities
for outdoor recreation which can make a considerable contribution to health and wellbeing.
There are large areas of Open Access Land, several long-distance trails, and reservoirs that
form popular visitor destinations. Enabling more people to enjoy the distinctive character of
the uplands will help to increase the attractiveness of Greater Manchester as a place to live
and visit, and generate local economic benefits, but this will need to be balanced with the
pressures that increased access brings.
8.35 The distinctive character, sensitivity and visual prominence of the uplands mean that any
development will need to be of a small scale and carefully located and designed.
Consequently, it has been assumed that very little development will take place within the
GMCONSULT.ORG 155Places for Everyonearea, and the uplands will make a negligible contribution to future housing and employment
land supply during the plan period. In particular, no land is proposed to be removed from
the Green Belt for development within the uplands.
Policy JP-G 5
Uplands
Our upland areas contain important component parts of the green infrastructure network, including
significant areas of blanket bog priority habitat, Sites of Biological Importance (SBIs), Sites of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), Special Protection
Areas (SPAs), woodlands and habitats vulnerable to climate change. In making planning decisions
and carrying out other associated activities, we will seek to:
1.Integrate any new development into the landscape by utilising existing tree/woodland cover
and dips in the landform, and adopting the unifying gritstone vernacular where possible;
2. Enhance the full range of upland habitats as part of an ecologically connected network,
including heather moorland, blanket bog, meadows, acid grassland, native woods, and
healthy watercourses;
3. Significantly extend the area of active blanket bog, both through the protection of existing
sites and the positive restoration of degraded areas to contribute to important functions
such as flood risk management and carbon sequestration;
4.Protect and naturally regenerate clough woodland, providing a natural connection between
the uplands, foothills and lowlands;
5. Increase the role of the area in water storage, flood risk management (through Natural
Flood Management) and water quality improvements, as part of a catchment-based
approach; and
6. Enable more people to enjoy the distinctive character of the uplands in sustainable ways
which balance the pressures that increased access brings with the physical and mental
health benefits that this landscape offers.
Urban Green Space
8.36 Whilst our extensive areas of open countryside are enormously important, the conurbation's
urban green spaces are of greater significance to many residents on a day-to-day basis and
are the areas with which they have greatest contact.These places have most value to people
at a local level. Whilst always functioning as green infrastructure, urban green spaces are
not always natural, often containing formal or informal recreational facilities such as
playgrounds and sports pitches. These are covered in more detail in Policy JP-P 7 'Sport
and Recreation' .
156 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone8.37 Urban green infrastructure includes parks, playing fields and other sports and recreation
facilities, but they also include nature reserves, woodlands, allotments, cemeteries, former
rail corridors, and other undeveloped land. Urban green spaces can therefore have widely
differing characteristics and values placed upon them. In addition to these valuable green
spaces, other types of green infrastructure are also found within the urban area, such as
residential gardens, street trees and green roofs.
8.38 Urban green spaces are essential to the liveability of urban areas, making a vital contribution
to mental and physical health, and more generally to the overall quality of life.They can offer
a moment of tranquillity within a busy area, and provide people with opportunities for
recreation, social interaction, and to connect with nature.They often form part of the network
of green transport routes, supporting more walking and cycling and less car use.
8.39 Significantly, they will become increasingly important as a result of climate change, helping
to cool overheating urban areas, manage flood risk and enable wildlife to adapt. Other
important environmental functions include the ability to mitigate air pollution and help manage
water quality. They can be particularly vital for children, providing places to play and
opportunities for outdoor learning.They can also help bring communities together, providing
places for events and opportunities for community food-growing projects. Urban green space
is therefore essential for environmental and social wellbeing, but it also makes a major
contribution to economic growth and securing investment. Urban green infrastructure will
form a vital part of a Nature Recovery Network for Greater Manchester.
8.40 Urban green spaces are often a key part of the character and history of the local area. Some
are important heritage assets in their own right, recognised by national or local designations,
or provide the setting for them. They are a central element in understanding the story of a
place, and several have wider historical and social significance.
8.41 The national Monitor of Engagement with the Natural Environment survey suggests that
two-thirds of all visits to the natural environment in England are within 2 miles of home, and
two-fifths are within 1 mile.(97) Access to these smaller green spaces at short distances is
therefore important to deliver the health, wellbeing and other benefits that result from visiting
the natural environment. However, less than half of Greater Manchester residents currently
live within 300 metres of an accessible natural green space of at least 2 hectares in area.
The places of greatest deficiency tend to be the more densely developed urban areas. Part
of the overall strategy is to make best use of previously-developed land in order to reduce
the need for developing greenfield (not previously-developed) sites but this can only result
in quality places if it is accompanied by considerable improvements in the accessibility,
quality and functionality of green space, particularly in higher density urban locations.
97 March 2015 to February 2016 -
www .gov.uk/go vernment/collections/monitor-of-engagement-with-the-natur al-en vironment-sur vey-pur pose-and-results
GMCONSULT.ORG 157Places for EveryonePolicy JP-G 6
Urban Green Space
To ensure there is an appropriate scale, type, quality and distribution of accessible urban green
space that can support a high quality of life and other important green infrastructure functions:
existing urban green space will be protected and enhanced in balance with other
considerations; and
we will work with developers and other stakeholders to deliver new high quality urban green
spaces which meet accessibility standards.
Development should be designed to support the positive use of nearby green spaces, such as
by offering a high quality setting, providing natural surveillance, and facilitating easy access by
walking and cycling.
Trees and Woodland
8.42 Trees and woodland are extremely important components of our Green Infrastructure Network,
fulfilling a very wide range of functions including sequestering and storing carbon, enhancing
biodiversity, providing access to nature, managing water, air, soil and noise pollution, reducing
flood risk, stabilising land, reducing soil erosion, strengthening landscape character, and
providing shade and cooling to combat high temperatures. For example, woodlands can
slow the flow of water, increase infiltration, stabilise river beds and banks, and intercept
pollutants, all of which will help to achieve North West River Basin Management Plan
objectives. Trees in the urban environment can soften otherwise harsh environments, filter
wind and humanise the scale of tall buildings, creating pleasant public spaces at street level.
Trees also play a major role within the urban environment, softening otherwise harsh
environments, filtering wind and providing contrast to the scale of tall buildings, creating
pleasant public spaces at street level.
8.43 Our woodlands vary in character, from upland oak woods to wet woodland, and from ancient
broadleaved woodland to plantation and young woodland. Many of our important woodlands
have been designated for their nature conservation interest. Trees and woodland are often
important features within areas of priority green infrastructure (see Policy JP-G 2 'Green
Infrastructure Network' ) and within the other key parts of the green infrastructure network
specifically identified within the GMSF (see Policy JP-G 3 'River Valleys and Waterways' , 
Policy JP-G 4 'Lowland Wetlands and Mosslands'  and Policy JP-G 5 'Uplands' ).
8.44 Impressive efforts have been made over the past three decades to increase tree cover and
the results of this are starting to take effect(98) and these efforts are now being brought
together under the Greater Manchester Tree and Woodland Strategy, being prepared on
98 http://www .cityoftrees .org.uk/timeline
158 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonebehalf of Greater Manchester by the City of Trees initiative(99), with the intention of being
formally adopted as guidance which can inform planning decisions. Maturing woodlands
provide significant areas of Greater Manchester with a character that now appears greener
and much less grey than in the past, but there is considerable scope to secure further
improvements across a much wider area. Currently around 15.7% of Greater Manchester
is beneath tree canopy.(100)The City of Trees initiative identifies a target to plant one tree
for every resident in Greater Manchester with the aspiration of raising Greater Manchester's
level of tree cover to at least the national average and this would have major environmental,
social and economic benefits that would support implementation of this Plan. It would also
contribute to the broader Northern Forest project stretching from Liverpool to Hull, which
aims to address the North’ s low level of woodland cover and support an increase in tourism
by planting 50 million trees over the next 25 years.
8.45 Whilst new planting will be essential, it will also be important to protect and enhance existing
trees and woodland, especially within or close to urban areas where they make a major
contribution to quality of life. Expanding and connecting areas of woodland would help to
make them more resilient to external threats such as climate change and will be essential
in the development of a Nature Recovery Network.
8.46 The following policy incorporates the Woodland Trust’ s woodland access standards which
provide a target for improving public access to woodland. There will be some parts of our
area where fully achieving the standards will not be possible, for example due to existing
land uses or the presence of other priority habitats, but the standards provide a relevant
guide and aim.
Policy JP-G 7
Trees and Woodland
In making planning decisions and carrying out other associated activities, we will work to deliver
the aims and objectives of the Greater Manchester Tree and Woodland Strategy, aiming  to
significantly increase tree cover, protect and enhance woodland, and connect people to the
trees and woodland around them, including by:
1. Protecting and expanding the mosaic of woodland habitats, linking fragmented areas of
woodland, in particular wooded cloughs and pockets of ancient and riverside (riparian)
woodland;
2.Encourage habitat diversity through conserving and managing existing woodland and trees
that are of heritage, cultural and/or aesthetic value, including ancient woodland and veteran
trees;
99  ( http://www .cityoftrees .org.uk/ )
100 See www .cityoftrees .org.uk/ne ws/largest-i-tree-eco-sur vey-uk-highlights-%C2%A333million-ann ual-value-g reater-manchester%E2%80%99s-trees
GMCONSULT.ORG 159Places for Everyone3. Aiming to plant a tree for every resident in the plan area over the next 25 years as part of
the City of Trees initiative;
4.Targeting tree-planting at the areas of greatest need where the green infrastructure benefits
can be maximised, whilst avoiding the loss of, or harm to, other priority habitats, including
encouraging woodland planting schemes on areas of low grade agricultural land and land
in need of remediation;
5. Establishing a new City Forest Park in Salford, Bolton and Bury, which will provide a vast
urban forest close to the City Centre;
6. Considerably increasing the provision of street trees within urban areas;
7. Promoting the provision of community orchards to increase fruit consumption;
8.Promoting the opportunity for woodland conservation to raise awareness for the sustainable
use of timber;
9. Securing a diversification of broadleaved species, in order to increase biodiversity and
disease resilience;
10.Improving public access to woodland and trees particularly by sustainable travel models to
capture the health and wellbeing benefits whilst managing the associated pressures;
11.Encouraging the positive management of woodland to bring it into a more productive state,
improve habitat diversity, and more effectively contribute to important green infrastructure
functions such as flood risk management, urban cooling and carbon storage/sequestration;
12.Where development would result in the loss of existing trees, requiring replacement on the
basis of two new trees for each tree lost, with a preference for on-site provision; and
13. Protecting trees and woodland during the construction phase of development.
Standards for Greener Places
8.47 The use of defined standards can help to ensure that there is sufficient quantity and quality
of green infrastructure to meet the needs of residents and to deliver the overall green
infrastructure network described in Policy JP-G 2 'Green Infrastructure Network' . A variety
of standards have been developed by different organisations.We are committed to developing
our own standards and in doing so will have regard to whichever of these are most relevant
and will provide appropriate supporting guidance as they develop.
160 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-G 8
Standards for Greener Places
We will develop standards in relation to:
Access to natural green space, which seek to maximise the overall proportion of people
in our boroughs who have access to natural green space. The Accessible Natural
Greenspace Standards (ANGSt) published by Natural England will provide the principal
starting point as their focus on ensuring good accessibility to different sizes of green space
for all residents make them an appropriate approach at a sub-regional level. More detailed
standards regarding specific habitats, designations, quality or functions of green space may
be set out in district local plans, taking account of local circumstances and opportunities.
A “Green Factor" , which sets out the level of on-site green infrastructure that new
developments are expected to provide so as to meet their occupants' needs and contribute
to the extent and interconnectedness of the wider network. The Green Factor will provide
a baseline expectation based on the proportion of the site that is covered by different types
of green infrastructure features.
Development has a major role in helping to achieve such standards, both through on-site provision
of green infrastructure and the creation or improvement of off-site green infrastructure. The site
allocations in this Plan provide opportunities to incorporate major areas of new accessible green
infrastructure, delivering overall net gains in green infrastructure value to the benefit of local
communities even if the quantity in that particular location may reduce.The way in which existing
built areas have developed over time means that it will not be realistically possible to meet all
of the standards in all parts of the plan area but they are an important aspiration to work towards
wherever possible.
Biodiversity and Geodiversity
8.48 Biodiversity (the variety of living organisms) and geodiversity (the range of rocks, minerals,
fossils, soils and landforms) underpin the value of the natural environment and its ability to
provide a wide range of important benefits, including supporting human health and quality
of life. Achieving a major net enhancement of biodiversity value and improving access to
nature are key priorities for this Plan and central components of the wider approach to green
infrastructure and the natural environment.
8.49 The Plan area contains a wide range of important sites designated for their high nature
conservation value, including the internationally designated South Pennine Moors, Rochdale
Canal and the Manchester Mosses, 22 nationally designated Sites of Special Scientific
Interest, and approximately 470 locally designated Sites of Biological Importance and
Regionally Important Geological Sites.
GMCONSULT.ORG 161Places for Everyone8.50 The effective conservation of biodiversity will require more than simply the protection of
existing designated sites and priority habitats, particularly given the scale of development
proposed in this Plan. A wider strategy for Nature Recovery is needed, including habitat
restoration and creation, and the transformation of broad landscape areas into a diverse
Nature Recovery Network.
8.51 A large area in the west of the sub-region extending into Warrington has been designated
as the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area (NIA).This area is dominated
by the lowland wetlands (see Policy JP-G 4 'Lowland Wetlands and Mosslands'), and seeks
to take a landscape-scale approach to ecological enhancement. The NIA will be integrated
into a wider Nature Recovery Network for Greater Manchester.
8.52 If our overall aims of a major net enhancement of biodiversity value and improved access
to nature are to be achieved then all new development will have to play its part, each
delivering a net gain in biodiversity. This could involve the protection and improvement of
existing habitats, the creation of new ones, and/or the strengthening of connections between
them. Recognised metrics will be applied to new development proposals to calculate and
demonstrate a measurable net gain in biodiversity of no less than 10%.
Figure 8.5 Designated wildlife sites in Greater Manchester
162 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone8.53 Agricultural land is also of significance in the safeguarding of soil resources, with 'best and
most versatile' land(101) safeguarded because of its long-term potential for delivering both
food and non-food crops. Soils in Greater Manchester are, however, significant for more
than their agricultural value with extensive uplands and lowland areas characterised by deep
peaty soils, which have a high environmental value and are identified as a priority in the
Government’ s 25-year environment plan .(102) Over half of the UK’ s soil carbon store is
contained in peat soils.(103) Development will ordinarily be directed away from valuable soils
and the Plan's strong preference for brownfield development will assist in this. However,
given the overall scale of development that needs to be accommodated, a limited amount
of development on high grade agricultural land is necessary as it is critical to the delivery of
wider development proposals.
Policy JP-G 9
A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and Geodiversity
Across the plan as a whole, a net enhancement of biodiversity resources will be sought, including
by:
1.Increasing the quality, quantity, extent and diversity of habitats, particularly priority habitats
identified in national or local biodiversity action plans and those that support priority species;
2.Improving connections between habitats, to protect and enhance the provision of corridors,
ecological networks (including Nature Recovery Networks) and stepping stones that enable
the movement of species, especially as the climate changes;
3. Enhancing the management of existing habitats, including through habitat restoration,
avoiding habitat fragmentation and combating invasive species;
4.Protecting sites designated for their nature conservation and/or geological importance, with
the highest level of protection given to international and then national designations in
accordance with legislation and national policy;
5. Facilitating greater access to nature, particularly within urban areas;
6.Supporting the development and implementation of the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature
Recovery Network; and
7.Safeguarding, restoring and sustainably managing our most valuable soil resources, tackling
soil degradation/erosion and recovering soil fertility, particularly to ensure protection of
peat-based soils and safeguard 'best and most versatile' agricultural land.
101 Grades 1, 2 and 3a within the Agricultural Land Classification, see http://pub lications .natur alengland.org.uk/pub lication/35012
102 HM Government (2018) A Green Future: Our 25 Y ear Plan to Improve the Environment , see
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/25-y ear-en vironment-plan
103 Defra (2009) Safeguarding our Soils: A Strategy for England, paragraph 12, see
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/saf eguarding-our-soils-a-str ategy-f or-england
GMCONSULT.ORG 163Places for EveryoneDevelopment will be expected to:
a. Follow the mitigation hierarchy of:
i. Avoiding harm to biodiversity, particularly where it is irreplaceable, and including
consideration of alternative sites where appropriate, then
ii. Mitigating (within the local area) any harm to biodiversity, then
iii. Compensating (within the local area) for any remaining harm to biodiversity
b. Avoid fragmenting or severing connectivity between habitats;
c. Achieve a net gain in biodiversity
d. Make appropriate provision for long-term management of habitats and geological features
connected to the development; and
e. Provide robust evidence in accordance with relevant government and other guidance,
including field surveys wherever development of 'best and most versatile' agricultural land
is proposed or to establish the status of the land within the Agricultural Land Classification
system.
Whilst off-site habitat enhancement and creation required as part of the mitigation hierarchy (or
to achieve a measurable net gain in biodiversity of no less than 10%) should be local to the site
regard should be had to supporting strategic biodiversity priorities and initiatives.
The Green Belt
8.54 Our Green Belt was originally designated in full in 1984 as part of the Greater Manchester
Green Belt. It has since seen a series of minor amendments through individual district plans,
currently it totals 53,753 hectares in size, equating to approximately 46.7% of the total land
area covered by this Plan.The scale of development that needs to be accommodated within
the Plan area up to 2037 means that some changes to the Green Belt boundaries are
necessary, but these have been minimised as far as possible, having regard in particular to
the need to promote sustainable patterns of development. This will result in a net reduction
in the Plan area's designated Green Belt of 1,754 hectares (3.3%), ensuring that
approximately 45.2% of the Plan area will still be Green Belt.
8.55 The Green Belt makes up a considerable proportion of land in the Plan area, and it is therefore
vital that its various parts play a beneficial role that supports the environmental, social and
economic wellbeing of the city-region’ s residents. We will plan, in particular, for the
enhancement of its green infrastructure functions, such as improved public access and
habitat restoration, helping to deliver environmental and social benefits for our residents and
164 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneproviding the high quality green spaces that will support economic growth. In particular it
assists in protecting and enabling the positive use and enhancement of land which has
essential natural environment and green infrastructure functions supported by other policies
in the Plan, such as:
Landscape, see Policy JP-G 1 'Valuing Important Landscapes' ;
Recreation, see Policy JP-P 7 'Sport and Recreation' ;
Biodiversity and Geodiversity, see Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity
and Geodiversity' ; and
Sustainable flood management, see Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the Water
Environment' .
8.56 The Green Belt also plays an important role in restricting unplanned development in a
city-region with a complex urban form, ensuring that its cities, towns and smaller settlements
retain their identity.
8.57 To deliver the inclusive and prosperous future outlined in the Greater Manchester Strategy,
we have sought to maximise the use land outside of the Green Belt, giving the highest priority
to brownfield land. Development of suitable brownfield sites and optimising the density of
development are key drivers for the overall strategy, leading to a significant focus on the
existing urban area.
8.58 The majority of the development required to deliver the Plan's spatial strategy will be within
the existing urban area. This approach alone is not, however, sufficient to meet our full
development needs.
8.59 Discussions have taken place with neighbouring local authorities to determine whether it
would be appropriate for them to meet some of our development needs, but it has been
agreed that this would not be appropriate as it would require them to release parts of their
own Green Belt and would be likely to lead to less sustainable commuting patterns. In order
to address this shortfall, a process of site selection was undertaken, to identify sites. It first
gave consideration to previously-developed land and/or that well-served by public transport.
Following that it identified sufficient sites to meet the identified needs in this plan which fitted
our overall Vision, Strategic Objectives and the sustainability principles of the plan.
8.60 The need to deliver the positive long-term outcomes of the Greater Manchester Strategy is
considered to amount to exceptional circumstances which justify altering the boundaries of
the Green Belt. Therefore in some locations land previously in the Green Belt has had that
designation removed to enable development to take place as detailed in the allocations in
Chapter 11 'Allocations' , additionally these areas are identified on the Policies Map.
GMCONSULT.ORG 165Places for Everyone8.61 In other locations land which was not previously in the Green Belt has now been designated
as such because it is assessed to meet one or more of the five purposes, for example to
prevent settlements merging, and necessary to keep it permanently open. The locations of
proposed additions to the Green Belt are detailed in Appendix B 'Additions to the Green
Belt'. These areas form part of the designated Green Belt as defined on the Policies Map in
Appendix C 'Places for Everyone Policies Map' .
8.62 In amending the Green Belt boundary, through the allocations in this Plan, opportunities
have been identified to improve/enhance Green Infrastructure within the land to remain within
the Green Belt. Additionally opportunities have been identified to mitigate harm to the retained
Green Belt caused by these amendments.
Policy JP-G 10
The Green Belt
The Green Belt as defined on the Policies Map will be afforded strong protection in accordance
with the National Planning Policy Framework.The Green Belt as shown in Figure 8.6 'The Green
Belt 2021'  will continue to be managed positively to serve the five purposes set out in national
policy:
to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas;
to prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another;
to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment;
to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns; and
to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban
land.
Positive and beneficial use of the Green Belt will be supported where this this can be achieved
without harm to its openness, permanence or ability to serve its five purposes. In particular, the
enhancement of its green infrastructure functions will be encouraged, such as improved public
access and habitat restoration, helping to deliver environmental and social benefits for our
residents and providing the high quality green spaces that will support economic growth.
Within the allocations identified on the Policies Map, Green Belt policies will be strictly applied
to the development areas removed from the Green Belt by this plan except in the case of planning
applications complying with the relevant allocations policies (see 11 'Allocations' ).
166 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneFigure 8.6 The Green Belt 2021
Safeguarded Land
8.63 National policy states that Green Belt boundaries in development plans should be altered
only exceptionally and should not normally be needed to be altered at the end of the plan
period. National guidance details that safeguarded land can be identified in order to meet
long term development needs stretching well beyond the plan period.
8.64 Safeguarded Land helps to protect the Green Belt by providing a reserve of land to meet
development needs in the longer term without having to encroach on Green Belt. It is land
that sits between a settlement edge and the Green Belt that could be identified in a
development plan to meet future development needs if required. Identifying land in this way
means that Green Belt boundaries do not need to be altered every time a development plan
is reviewed and therefore enables Green Belt boundaries to endure into the future.
GMCONSULT.ORG 167Places for Everyone8.65 The Plan allocates a number of sites for development, both for new homes and employment.
A number of these sites have capacity for development beyond the plan period, therefore
helping to ensure that the Green Belt boundaries in this Plan endure into the future.
8.66 To supplement the capacity in these sites, the plan also identifies a small number of sites
as safeguarded land. This land will help to meet longer term development needs which
cannot be met within the urban areas or on previously developed land and will further
safeguard the Green Belt boundaries identified in this plan.
8.67 It is important that protected open land is not released for development unless the need to
do so can be justified, that the site is in a sustainable location, taking account of the Spatial
Strategy, for the intended use and that it does not harm important landscapes, green features
or local residential amenity.
Policy JP-G 11
Safeguarded Land
The following area of open land, outside the urban area and not in the Green Belt, is identified
on the Policies Map and protected from development:
Land adjacent to the proposed HS2 Manchester Airport Station
Development on this land will only be permitted where it would:
Be acceptable were it in the Green Belt; and
Not prejudice the future use of the land.
Safeguarded Land will only be released for development where the following apply:
There is evidence that the development is needed and that 'urban' brownfield and greenfield
sites are not available to meet those needs;
The proposed development is sustainable and is in accordance with the overall Spatial
Strategy;
The proposed development is supported by a comprehensive scheme for its delivery,
including the provision of necessary infrastructure and measures to positively mitigate
environmental impacts; and
The proposed development is supported by an appraisal of the landscape and visual impacts
and incorporates appropriate positive mitigation.
Where the release of safeguarded land can be justified, this will be done through a review of
this Plan or through the preparation of a local planning authority's local plan.
168 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 169Places for EveryonePromoting Inclusion
9.1 Delivering a more inclusive Greater Manchester is at the heart of everything that the Greater
Manchester Strategy is trying to achieve. The ultimate measure of the plan’ s success will
be whether it has helped to enhance the lives of all residents within our plan area. The last
few decades have seen increasing inequalities across the country. Although Greater
Manchester has an excellent range of employment, housing and leisure opportunities, the
ability of people to access them can vary considerably. Some neighbourhoods have not
shared in the benefits of recent economic growth and there are places in Greater Manchester
where a significant proportion of the population suffer from deprivation with low levels of
educational attainment, poor health and life expectancy. Many people are unable to find a
suitable home at a cost they can afford.
9.2 This Plan has an important role in helping to address these inequalities and disadvantages.
A key aim must be to enable the full potential of every person and every place to be realised,
with them being able to both contribute to, and benefit from, the successes of Greater
Manchester.The positive impacts of development and investment must be spread as widely
as possible. It will also be important to respond to the diverse needs and identities of different
people and communities, with everyone being able to flourish wherever they live. Residents
should be able to actively contribute to decisions about places that will affect them, increasing
empowerment and a feeling of ownership about the way in which Greater Manchester
evolves.
9.3 Supporting these social improvements is clearly of fundamental importance in its own right,
but will also help to deliver more sustained economic growth in the long-term. Delivering
them will require a collaborative approach between the GMCA, local authorities, residents,
developers and other organisations.
9.4 This Plan promotes greater inclusion in a wide variety of ways, some of which are set out
in this chapter but many of which will be delivered through other parts of the plan. Such
measures include:
Delivering sustainable places that can meet the needs of all sections of communities,
both now and in the future
Achieving the high quality, inclusive design of places and developments
Encouraging the efficient reuse of previously-developed land and buildings as part of
the coordinated regeneration of urban areas, particularly those with high levels of
deprivation
Significantly increasing the supply of new housing that helps to meet the wide variety
of needs at a price people can afford 
Enhancing the supply of employment opportunities at a variety of skill levels to achieve
more inclusive growth
172 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneSupporting improvements in education and research facilities
Enabling all residents to lead healthier lives in safer places with good access to facilities
that support health and well being
Providing excellent transport networks that help people to access opportunities across
Greater Manchester, particularly by walking, cycling and public transport
Increasing the range and accessibility of cultural, leisure and sporting opportunities
Improving access for all neighbourhoods to green space and nature
Supporting greater inclusion through the design and implementation of individual
development proposals
Sustainable Places
9.5 Greater Manchester consists of a varied network of places, both urban and rural, many with
strong and proud identities. If this Plan is to have a positive impact, then a key aim must be
to raise the quality of all places in a way that is sustainable in the long-term. This will help
to enhance wellbeing for residents, as well as making Greater Manchester more attractive
to potential visitors and investors.
9.6 Every place in Greater Manchester is unique, having carved out its own specific role within
the sub-region. The mix of uses, types of business and demographic profile of residents
varies from place to place.This diversity is a major strength of Greater Manchester, allowing
people to find the type of location that they require or desire.
9.7 The Greater Manchester Strategy sets out the ambition that all parts of Greater Manchester
will be neighbourhoods of choice, with good quality affordable homes in safe and attractive
communities, well served by public transport, so that the people that live in them are
connected to jobs and opportunity and have access to excellent local amenities, green
spaces and a high quality cultural and leisure offer. One of its ten priorities is for Greater
Manchester to be an age-friendly city region. If Greater Manchester is to be genuinely
inclusive then each of its places must be open to everyone, providing the type of area where
people can start well, live well and age well. This will enable people to remain within or near
their favoured neighbourhood, close to family and friends, as their requirements change.
9.8 High levels of development are proposed over the plan period, and much of this will be
accommodated within places that already have a strong identity. A key challenge will be to
ensure that this development is fully integrated into that place, making a positive contribution
rather than detracting from its coherence and character. All places will need to evolve and
adapt to changes in society and technology, but it will be important that this supports
improvements in their overall quality. Local distinctiveness and identity will need to be
enhanced, avoiding the pitfalls of expansion seen in many other cities that have become a
GMCONSULT.ORG 173Places for Everyonecontinuous urban area where one place is hard to distinguish from another. The unique
character of its constituent towns and neighbourhoods is a key strength of Greater Manchester
that must be retained.
9.9 If quality of life is to be enhanced then it will be vital to maximise the opportunities that our
places offer and limit the constraints that they place on how people live. All neighbourhoods
must be designed to enable residents to live healthier, happier and more fulfilling lives, with
the barriers to doing so minimised as far as possible. This must include recognising and
responding to the difficulties that people may face due to age, disability, illness or financial
circumstances. Achieving all of this will help to ensure that all places are characterised by
empowered and informed residents, workers and visitors, with a sense of ownership and
high levels of societal participation and social interaction.
9.10 High quality design will be fundamental to achieving all of this, helping to ensure that Greater
Manchester can deliver the attractive places that will enable it to compete successfully with
other major cities across the world. Good design need not result in additional costs, and
indeed can lead to significant savings in the long-term, both for occupiers and society more
generally. It can also help to increase the acceptability of development to existing residents,
and enhance the reputation of the developer. Relatively small design changes can make a
considerable difference to the overall quality of a development, and the contribution that it
makes to the success of a place. A high level of care is therefore required from developers
throughout the design process. All development should achieve a high design quality,
consistent with the ten characteristics set out in the National Design Guide.(104)
Policy JP-P 1
Sustainable Places
We aim to become one of the most liveable city regions in the world, consisting of a series of
beautiful, healthy and varied places, each having the following key attributes that all development,
wherever appropriate, should be consistent with:
1. Distinctive, with a clear identity that:
A. Responds to the natural environment, landscape features, historic environment and
local history and culture;
B. Enables a clear understanding of how the place has developed; and
C.Respects and acknowledges the character and identify of the locality in terms of design,
siting, size, scale and materials used
104 Ministry of Housing Communities & Local Government (2019) National Design Guide
174 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Visually stimulating, creating interesting and imaginative environments which raise the
human spirit through the use of green space, public art and quality design 
3. Socially inclusive:
A. Responding to the needs of all parts of society
B. Enabling everyone to participate equally and independently
C. Providing opportunities for social contact and support; and
D. Promoting a sense of community
4. Resilient, capable of dealing with major environmental and economic events 
5. Adaptable, able to respond easily to varied and changing needs and technologies 
6. Durable, being built to last and using robust materials that reflect local character, weather
well and are easily maintained 
7. Resource-efficient with:
A. A low carbon footprint;
B. Efficient use of land;
C. Minimised use of new materials;
D. High levels of recycling
8. Safe, including by designing out crime and terrorism, and reducing opportunities for
anti-social behaviour
9.Supported by critical infrastructure, such as energy, water and drainage and green spaces
10. Functional and convenient, enabling people and uses to act efficiently with minimal effort,
and responding to needs relating to servicing, recycling facilities, refuse collection and
storage
11. Incorporating accessibility design standards within all spaces with support for tackling
inequality and poverty to form part of creating sustainable places 
12. Legible, being easy to understand and navigate, with the protection and enhancement of
key views and new development well-integrated into the place 
GMCONSULT.ORG 175Places for Everyone13.Easy to move around for those of all mobility levels, particularly by walking and cycling, with
enjoyable routes free from obstacles and disorienting stimuli, and with places to rest
14. Well-connected to other places, particularly by public transport and digital infrastructure
enabling everyone to take advantage of the employment, cultural and leisure opportunities
across Greater Manchester and beyond
15. Comfortable and inviting, with indoor and outdoor environments:
A. Offering a high level of amenity that minimises exposure to pollution; and
B.Addressing microclimate issues such as sunlight, indoor air quality, overheating, shade,
wind and shelter
16. Incorporating high quality and well managed green infrastructure and quality public realm,
with:
A.Opportunities for recreation and outdoor play for children, and interaction between the
generations;
B. Public and private spaces clearly distinguished;
C. Development clearly defining, and promoting activity within, public spaces
D. High quality landscaping with schemes
17.Well-served by local shops, services and amenities, including education and health facilities
Heritage
9.11 Greater Manchester has a uniquely diverse cultural heritage represented by its rich and
extensive historic and built environment including designated and non-designated heritage
assets. Its development has evolved over a period of more than 5000 years, gradually
changing from a heavily wooded landscape populated by hunter gatherers and upland camp
sites, to become an overwhelmingly cleared rural landscape dotted with farmsteads. Many
towns and villages of Greater Manchester can trace their origin to Saxon or Viking settler
place names, often reflecting distinctive landscape features or farmsteads.Today’ s principal
towns established market and borough status from the 13th century but it was the impact
of the industrial revolution of the late 18th and 19th centuries that would transform the
character, appearance and economic fortunes of Greater Manchester. This growth was
based on the textile industry, particularly cotton, and facilitated by natural resources such
as water and coal, technological advancement, plentiful labour and improved communications
linking it to a national and global market. All of this has left a huge imprint on the landscape
and contributes to our local identity and sense of place.There is a great opportunity to retain
and find uses for the best of this heritage and ensure the unique urban and industrial character
of Greater Manchester continues to play a part in its future growth and development.
176 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone9.12 The conservation and enhancement of the historic environment will start with the preparation
and implementation of up-to-date evidence of the historic environment will be used to help
shape and inform the implementation of planning policies at a strategic and local plan level.
Key sources of information include the National Heritage List for England, the Greater
Manchester Historic Environment Record, Places for Everyone Heritage Topic Paper, national
and local Heritage at Risk surveys, the Greater Manchester Historic Landscape
Characterisation project, the Greater Manchester Textile Mills Survey, conservation area
appraisals and management plans and site specific assessments.
Policy JP-P 2
Heritage
Through this Plan we will proactively manage and work with partners to positively conserve,
sustain and enhance its historic environment and heritage assets and their settings. Opportunities
will be pursued to aid the promotion, enjoyment, understanding and interpretation of heritage
assets, as a means of maximising wider public benefits and reinforcing Greater Manchester's
distinct identity and sense of place.
Local Plans will set out the key elements which contribute to the district's identity, character and
distinctiveness and which should be the priority for safeguarding and enhancing in the future, and
demonstrate a clear understanding of the historic environment and the heritage values of sites,
buildings or areas and their relationship with their surroundings.This knowledge should be used
to inform the positive integration of our heritage by:
1.Setting out a clear vision that recognises and embeds the role of heritage in place-making;
2. Utilising the heritage significance of a site or area in the planning and design process,
providing opportunities for interpretation and local engagement;
3. Integrating the conservation and enhancement of heritage assets and their settings, with
creative contextual architectural responses that contribute to their significance and sense
of place;
4. Delivering positive benefits that sustain and enhance the historic environment, as well as
contributing to the economic viability, accessibility and environmental quality of a place,
and to social wellbeing; and
5. Exploring opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that restoration of historic
buildings offer.
Particular consideration will be given to ensure that the significance of key elements of the
historic environment which contribute to Greater Manchester's distinctive identity  and sense of
place are protected from harm. These include historic town centres, places of worship, historic
GMCONSULT.ORG 177Places for Everyonetransport routes including the canal network, industrial buildings and structures including textile
mills, farmsteads and other sites, buildings and areas of identified archaeological, architectural,
artistic and historic value.
Development proposals affecting a designated heritage asset (or an archaeological  site of
national importance) and a conservation area should conserve those elements which contribute
to its significance including those identified in any conservation area appraisal as making a
positive contribution to the area. Harm to such elements will only be permitted where this is
clearly justified and outweighed by the public benefits of the proposal.
Development proposals should identify assets of archaeological interest and use this information
to avoid harm or minimise it through design and appropriate mitigation. Where applicable,
development should make provision for the protection of significant archaeological assets and
landscapes.The protection of undesignated heritage assets of archaeological interest equivalent
to a scheduled monument should be given equivalent weight to designated heritage assets.
Where heritage assets have been identified as being at risk, Local Plans should identify specific
opportunities for them to contribute to regeneration and place-making, and they should set out
strategies for their repair and re-use.
Proposals should be informed, as necessary, by the findings and recommendations of the
appropriate heritage assessment(s) in the development plan evidence base and/or any updated
heritage assessment submitted as part of the planning application process.
Culture
9.13 The industrial revolution provided fertile conditions for the creation of Greater Manchester
as the birthplace of revolutionary ideas that have had profound impact on lives all around
the world.The Co-operative movement was founded in Rochdale, the Suffragette Movement
was born in Manchester and Salford Museum and Art Gallery was the UK’ s first free public
library and museum. The Greater Manchester Culture Strategy highlights the importance of
a diverse mix of creative and independent businesses to the vibrancy, prosperity and
distinctiveness of our places. We are rightly proud of our rich cultural heritage and thriving
cultural sector, from grass-roots community and heritage groups to internationally significant
cultural organisations and cutting edge digital festivals. Greater Manchester has a diverse
and distinctive offer which preserve and tell our stories, to ensure that Greater Manchester
remains exciting, forward thinking and relevant.
9.14 In Greater Manchester alone, the Visitor Economy is worth £2.6bn GVA per year and supports
105,000 jobs and the Creative Industries are worth £4.4bn GVA per year and support 78,500
jobs. These sectors also play a vital role in our international reputation and contribute to the
overall wellbeing of communities and the quality of life of our residents. Our city region is
home to a diverse range of venues and organisations who bring life to our high streets and
town and city centres and attract visitors from all around the world.
178 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone9.15 The continued enhancement of cultural opportunities is central to place-making across
Greater Manchester. The importance of culture will need to be reflected in the way in which
our cities, towns and neighbourhoods develop, with individual developments contributing
towards this.
9.16 Many of Greater Manchester’ s cultural assets are located in mixed use areas with sensitive
uses in close proximity, including existing and proposed residential development.The ‘agent
of change’  principle will be crucial to the ongoing viability of some of our cultural assets and
will help to ensure that mixed-use areas function successfully.
Policy JP-P 3
Cultural Facilities
Through this Plan we will proactively develop and support cultural businesses and attractions
in our cities and towns through a range of measures including:
1. Protecting existing heritage, cultural and community venues, facilities and uses;
2.Supporting  the development of new cultural venues in town centres and places with good
public transport connectivity;
3.Promoting new, or enhanced existing, locally-distinct clusters of cultural facilities, especially
where they can provide an anchor for local regeneration and town centre renewal;
4. Identifying protecting and enhancing strategic clusters of cultural attractions;
5.Considering the use of vacant properties and land for pop-ups or meanwhile uses for cultural
and creative activities during the day and at night-time to stimulate vibrancy and viability
and promote diversity in town centres;
6. Maximising opportunities for redundant heritage assets and the role they can play in
economic and social well-being;
7. Considering the designation of ‘Creative Improvement Districts’  where there is evidence
that the designation will enhance the local economy and provide facilities and workspace
for the creative industries; and
8. Supporting a mix of uses which derive mutual benefits from, and do not compromise, the
creative industries and cultural facilities in the Creative Improvement District in line with the
Agent of Change principle. If development would potentially result in conflict between a
cultural activity and another use, especially in terms of noise, then the development
responsible for the change must secure the implementation of appropriate mitigation before
it is completed.
Retail and Leisure
9.17 Varied and high-quality retail, leisure and cultural facilities are vital to providing the quality
of life that will help to attract people to live in Greater Manchester and in contributing to
inclusive places. Such facilities are also a key part of the overall tourism function of Greater
GMCONSULT.ORG 179Places for EveryoneManchester, drawing visitors to the area. A diverse range of town centres and local centres
of varying sizes and character provide more local facilities, with some having quite extensive
catchments extending into surrounding districts whilst others serve a very local market but
are nevertheless essential for residents.
9.18 Our town centres are at the heart of our communities. They are some of our most well
connected places and have been a focus for walking, cycling and public transport investment
over many years. But they are facing serious challenges. The growth of internet shopping
and large out-of-town retailers has squeezed many town centres. The UK has the highest
level of internet shopping in the world(105), with 18.0% of all retail sales now taking place
online.(106)There has been a 19.9% growth in online retailing in just 12 months.(107)The
implications of the Covid 19 pandemic may accelerate these trends.
9.19 We must help our town centres adapt to changing markets, and build on their strengths. In
this context, despite the significant increase in the resident, working and visiting populations
set out in this plan, it is anticipated that most of the demand for new retail and leisure
floorspace can be accommodated within existing centres.
9.20 In accordance with national planning policy, it is appropriate for retail and leisure facilities
to be directed towards designated centres wherever possible. This will help to maintain the
vitality and viability of those centres, and their continued ability to meet the needs of residents.
Although they are significant in terms of their size and function, the Trafford Centre and
Middlebrook Retail and Leisure Park are not designated centres and will continue to be
treated as out-of-centre locations.
Policy JP-P 4
New Retail and Leisure Uses in Town Centres
The existing hierarchy of centres for retail and leisure uses will be maintained and enhanced.
The upper levels of the hierarchy of centres are:
A. City Centre (within Manchester and Salford)
B. Main town centres:
1. Altrincham (Trafford)
2. Ashton-under-Lyne (Tameside)
3. Bolton (Bolton)
4. Bury (Bury)
105 https://www .invespcro .com/b log/global-online-retail-spending-statistics-and-trends/
106 Office for National Statistics (June 2018) Retail sales, Great Britain: May 2018
107 Office for National Statistics (June 2018) Retail sales, Great Britain: May 2018
180 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5. Oldham (Oldham)
6. Rochdale (Rochdale)
7. Wigan (Wigan)
A new town centre is proposed for designation at Salford Quays in the Publication Draft Salford
Local Plan: Development Management Policies and Designations. Should this designation
become part of the Salford Local Plan, Salford Quays will be classed as a Main Town Centre
for the purposes of this policy.
9.21 The boundaries of the centres and detail of other centres at lower levels of the hierarchy are
defined in district local plans. Appropriate large-scale retail and leisure development will be
accommodated within the centres in the upper levels of the hierarchy. The need for the
expansion of any existing centres, or the provision of new centres, will be identified in district
local plans.
Education, Skills and Knowledge
9.22 Economic growth and the success of cities are increasingly reliant on the creation and
application of knowledge. It is the places with an excellent supply and broad range of skills
that will be best-placed to attract investment and jobs, and which will be most able to cope
with the long-term challenges of growing automation and globalisation and thereby reduce
levels of deprivation.
9.23 Knowledge is a fundamental component of personal freedom and social inclusion, enabling
people to take advantage of opportunities and expanding the choices available to them.The
aim of ensuring that everyone can contribute to, and benefit from, economic growth can only
be achieved if residents have the necessary skills. As technological advances accelerate,
learning throughout life will become even more important.
9.24 Greater Manchester has a proud history of being a forward-thinking city region, having been
at the global forefront of technological and transport innovations during the industrial
revolution, leading the development of computing through the work of Alan Turing, and more
recently discovering and identifying multiple applications for the ground-breaking
two-dimensional material graphene. This work continues, but many residents find it difficult
to access the opportunities available within Greater Manchester due to poor levels of
educational attainment and skills training. Widening access to knowledge for all residents
is therefore vital and will need to respond to the training needs associated with new
technological advances.
9.25 The huge extent of university activity is one of the greatest strengths of Greater Manchester,
helping to differentiate it from many of its international competitors. With over 100,000
students attending its universities, Greater Manchester has one of the largest concentrations
GMCONSULT.ORG 181Places for Everyoneof students in Europe, and an enormous supply of new graduates across a wide range of
subjects each year who can help to drive future economic growth.The largest concentration
of research activity is within Corridor Manchester in the City Centre, which has the largest
single-site clinical-academic campus in Europe. The universities will be a vital component
of developing Greater Manchester as a globally important city region.
9.26 Until 2010, Greater Manchester was seeing a reduction in the number of school-age children,
but since then the number has grown and a 7% increase in those aged 5-14 is projected
over the period up to 2037. The spatial pattern of this recent growth has been very mixed,
with much of the increase focused in the inner parts of the conurbation surrounding the City
Centre. The future pattern of change will be influenced by the type and location of new
housing as well as the relative attractiveness of existing neighbourhoods to families with
children. Ensuring that there are sufficient school places in the right locations and at the
right times to meet the needs of existing and new residents will be a key challenge and
priority.
9.27 Other policies in this Plan contribute to the development and application of the sub-region’ s
knowledge base, including by:
Increasing the supply of high quality housing in a more diverse range of locations to
attract and retain greater numbers of skilled worker
Improving transport links to locations across the North of England in order to maximise
the ability to draw on skills from outside Greater Manchester
Providing a wide range of sites and premises capable of attracting knowledge-intensive
businesses
Promoting training opportunities through new developments
Facilitating the delivery of high quality digital and other infrastructure, thereby enabling
residents and businesses to access knowledge and opportunities
Policy JP-P 5
Education, Skills and Knowledge
Significant enhancements in education, skills and knowledge to benefit existing and new residents
will be promoted, including by:
1. Enabling the delivery of new and improved accessible facilities for all ages, such as early
years, schools, further and higher education, and adult training to ensure our workforce is
ready to benefit from new employment opportunities;
182 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Ensuring the delivery of sufficient school places to respond to the demands from new
housing, such as through:
a. Working with education providers to forecast likely changes in the demand for school
places; and
b. Where appropriate, requiring housing developments to make a financial contribution
to the provision of additional school places and/or set aside land for a new school,
proportionate to the additional demand that they would generate;
3. Supporting the continued growth and success of the university sector, such as through:
a. Enhancing the existing campuses and developing new ones;
b.Strengthening the world-leading research capabilities and promoting opportunities for
business spin-offs; and
c.Continuing to help develop Greater Manchester as the UK’ s best destination for students
Health
9.28 Good health is one of the key determinants of quality of life. As well as being of great
importance in its own right, it also has a significant impact on the ability of people to enjoy
the immense range of opportunities across Greater Manchester and to make a positive
economic contribution.
9.29 Healthy life expectancy in Greater Manchester is currently three to four years below the
national average for men and women.There are considerable inequalities of health outcomes
within Greater Manchester, with average life expectancy in the least deprived areas being
more than a decade longer than in the most deprived areas.The high prevalence of long-term
conditions, such as cardiovascular and respiratory disease, means that Greater Manchester
residents can expect to experience poor health at a younger age than in other parts of the
country. Obesity, smoking and alcohol are all significant issues. An increase in the proportion
of older people will be expected to exacerbate health pressures, although this is less of an
issue than in many other parts of the UK.
9.30 In April 2016, Greater Manchester became the first region in the country to take control of
its combined health and social care budgets, a sum of more than £6 billion. Additionally, in
2017 Greater Manchester took on public health responsibilities alongside the ten local
authorities.(108)The Health and Social Care Act 2012 has given local authorities a core
responsibility for public health, joining up local health policy with all other areas of work. As
part of this, a key aim is to better integrate health and social care services including wider
community health services.
108 The Greater Manchester Combined Authority (Public Health Functions) Order 2017
GMCONSULT.ORG 183Places for Everyone9.31 Greater Manchester has a wide range of attributes and enormous potential, but its long-term
prospects will be contingent on delivering major improvements in public health. It cannot be
considered a success unless existing health inequalities are addressed. The Greater
Manchester Population Health Plan (2017-21) sets out Greater Manchester Health and
Social Care Partnerships approach to delivering a radical upgrade in population health across
the city region.
9.32 This will require a diverse range of coordinated measures, many of which lie outside the
scope of this plan, but it will be vital that the positive contribution of this Plan is maximised
as far as possible. As a result, the overall strategy and many of the policies and proposals
in other parts of the plan will support improvements in health and wellbeing, and reductions
in health inequalities, such as by:
Promoting a successful economy for Greater Manchester, where everyone is able to
share in the benefits of growth, given that household income is a key determinant of
good health
Increasing the supply of high quality and affordable homes that meet minimum size and
accessibility standards, helping to ensure that everyone has a decent place to live
Enabling people to adopt healthier lifestyles, including through the development of a
high quality green infrastructure network throughout Greater Manchester, encouraging
the provision of a wide range of recreation and sports facilities, including food growing
opportunities, and supporting an increase in the proportion of trips that are made by
walking and cycling
Reducing the risks to human health, including through taking an integrated
catchment-based approach to addressing flood risk, reducing levels of air pollution,
providing cooling and shading to combat high temperatures, promoting high levels of
fire safety, and designing places to minimise opportunities for crime, terrorism and
anti-social behaviour
9.33 The submission of Health Impact Assessments for development proposals will help ensure
that the effects of development on both health and wellbeing are considered and responded
to during the planning process. Health Impact Assessments should aim to enhance the
potential positive aspects of a proposal while avoiding or minimising any negative impacts,
with particular emphasis on disadvantaged sections of communities that may be affected.
It is expected that Health Impact Assessments are undertaken in support of all developments
which require an Environmental Impact Assessment, and other proposals which, due to their
location, nature or proximity to sensitive receptors, are likely to have a notable impact on
health and wellbeing.
184 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-P 6
Health
To help tackle health inequality new development will be required, as far as practicable, to:
A. Maximise its positive contribution to health and wellbeing, whilst avoiding any potential
negative impacts of new development;
B. Support healthy lifestyles, including through the use of  active design principles making
physical activity an easy, practical and attractive choice; and
C. Be supported by a Health Impact Assessment for all developments which require an
Environmental Impact Assessment, and other proposals where the local planning authority
considers it appropriate.
Improvements in health facilities will be supported, responding to the changing needs and
demands of both existing and new residents, including through:
1. Requiring, where appropriate, the provision of new or improved health facilities as part of
new developments that would significantly increase demand;
2. Enabling the continued enhancement and successful operation of our hospitals; and
3. Facilitating greater integration of health and social care, and the provision of integrated
wellness hubs, including the co-location of health, community and wellness services.
Sport and Recreation
9.34 Our goal is to positively change the lives of people across Greater Manchester through
physical activity and sports. Greater Manchester has an international reputation for sporting
excellence. Manchester’ s global name recognition is perhaps seen most prominently in
terms of its two major football clubs, Manchester United and Manchester City, but the sporting
significance of Greater Manchester is far broader than this, being the home of numerous
professional clubs, the hugely successful British Cycling, and the National Football Museum,
and it has hosted a wide range of international sporting events from the 2002 Commonwealth
Games to the Rugby League World Cup Final.
9.35 Sports participation in Greater Manchester is slightly lower than the national average. 72.9%
of adults in Greater Manchester (16+) were ‘active’  or fairly ‘active’  as of May 2018. This
represents an increase of 0.5 percentage points compared to May 2017 but is 1.9 percentage
points below the England average. Nationally, there is a major problem of inactivity amongst
younger people, with only 32% of 5-15 year olds being defined as active, and just 9% of 2-4
year olds.(109)
109 Health Survey for England, 2015
GMCONSULT.ORG 185Places for Everyone9.36 The Greater Manchester Strategy highlights that an active life can reduce anxiety, lift mood,
reduce stress, promote clearer thinking and a greater sense of calm, increase self-esteem,
and reduce the risk of depression. More generally, sport and recreation can be a major
contributor to quality of life, and hence access to such opportunities is an important element
of social inclusion.
9.37 Through the Greater Manchester mo ving prog ramme   we are helping people of all ages to
be more active and to live well.The availability of sport and recreation opportunities is strongly
linked to the provision of green infrastructure and urban green space. However, the good
design of places more generally can enable recreation to be integrated more easily into
everyday life, particularly for children. One of the ambitions of the Greater Manchester
Strategy is that the sub-region will be at the leading edge of providing our children with
excellent places to play, develop and learn.(110) Play is essential to children’ s development,
enabling them to learn, socialise, gain independence and make sense of the world, and has
long-term benefits for health through to old age.
9.38 Ensuring the continued availability of and easy access to a high quality range of sport and
recreation facilities, meeting accessibility standards, would therefore help to achieve key
objectives such as improving the health of residents, and making Greater Manchester a
more attractive place to live and visit. The appropriate level of provision will often depend
on local circumstances such as the type and scale of demand, and the availability of suitable
land. Consequently, standards for access to some recreation facilities such as parks, sports
pitches and allotments will be set by individual local authorities and set out in Local Plans.
9.39 An important component for the overall strategy for green infrastructure, and to key locations
such as the uplands, lowland wetlands, and river valleys and canals, is to improve public
access to good recreational opportunities, including food growing opportunities, in a manner
compatible with other green infrastructure functions. This will help to reconnect people to
nature as well as improving health and wellbeing.
Policy JP-P 7
Sport and Recreation
A network of high quality and accessible sports and recreation facilities will be protected and
enhanced, supporting greater levels of activity for all ages, including by:
1. Creating a public realm that provides frequent opportunities for play and that all ages can
enjoy together
2. Developing a common standard for the provision of designated play areas to meet the
needs of the population
110 Greater Manchester Combined Authority (October 2017) Our people our place: The Greater Manchester Strategy , p.21
186 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone3. Where appropriate setting out more comprehensive and detailed recreation standards in
district local plans, having regard to existing and future needs
4.Requiring new development to support the achievement of strategic and local plan standards
by providing new and/or improving existing facilities commensurate with the demand they
would generate, ensuring that they meet accessibility standards
5. Locating and designing recreation facilities in relation to housing so as to ensure that they
are accessible but also minimise the potential for complaints due to disturbance to residential
amenity from recreational activity
6. Protecting and enhancing the public rights of way network, including to:
a. Provide safe and attractive routes to sports and recreation facilities
b.Improve access to, and connections between different parts of, the green infrastructure
network across Greater Manchester and beyond
c.Expand the network of strategic recreation routes offering longer distance opportunities
for walking, cycling and horse-riding
d. Provide everyday options for green travel
7. Encouraging the incorporation of sports facilities in all education settings, made available
for community use where possible, ensuring that they meet accessibility standards.
8.Enabling the continued development of major sports facilities and events, which can further
enhance Greater Manchester’ s international sporting reputation.
GMCONSULT.ORG 187Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 188Places for EveryoneAn Integrated Network
10.1 One of the Greater Manchester Strategy’ s ten priorities is to deliver an integrated network
with world-class connectivity that keeps Greater Manchester moving and that drives prosperity
whilst protecting the environment, improving air quality and transitioning to a zero carbon
future.
10.2 Good connections permeate all aspects of life in the Plan area. Businesses need to connect
with skilled workers, suppliers and markets. Residents need to be connected with jobs,
products, services and their friends, families and communities. Tourists need to be able to
reach our city-region from all around the world and to be able to visit our attractions. Strong,
integrated connections are therefore needed at all levels: neighbourhood, city-wide, regionally,
nationally and internationally.
10.3 Historically, connectivity has been primarily about transport, but increasingly digital
connectivity is fundamental to our lives, enabling us to connect with people irrespective of
location, and to access an unparalleled range of learning, employment and retail opportunities.
10.4 As part of Greater Manchester, our boroughs are already highly connected places. At the
international level, Manchester Airport offers direct flights to over 200 destinations worldwide,
and the Manchester Ship Canal and M58/M62 provide freight connections to the deep-water
facilities at the Port of Liverpool. Nationally, London is just two hours away by train (with
journey times set to improve following the introduction of High Speed 2) and Greater
Manchester is at the heart of the national motorway network. More locally, Greater Manchester
has extensive local rail connections complemented by Metrolink, the largest light rail network
- in terms of route KMs - in the UK, which is continuing to be expanded.(111)
10.5 However, there are significant barriers as well. As with the rest of the UK, Greater
Manchester’ s high-speed broadband coverage has fallen behind international competitors:
only 4% of Greater Manchester has full fibre to the premises (FFTP) connectivity.(112)Traffic
congestion affects many key highways and, in 'A Congestion Deal for Greater Manchester',
it is estimated to cost city-region businesses £1.3bn each year.(113)
10.6 Public transport suffers from a lack of capacity on key routes and with poor reliability. Although
many parts of the Plan area have good public transport, there remain areas that are poorly
served and others that are not connected at all. Despite a few exemplar schemes, the quality
and extent of cycling infrastructure is limited, which means relatively few people choose to
travel by bike.
10.7 In July 2019 the Greater Manchester Combined Authority (GMCA) declared a climate
emergency. As part of this declaration, GMCA noted the findings of the International Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) report “Global warming of 1.50C”, in particular:
111 Department for Transport (2018) Statistical data set: Light rail and tram statistics - LRT0203
112 Greater Manchester Combined Authority (2018) The Greater Manchester Digital Strategy 2018-2020 , paragraph 7.1
113 Mayor of Greater Manchester, GMCA and Transport for Greater Manchester (March 2018) A Congestion Deal for Greater Manchester , p.3
GMCONSULT.ORG 191Places for EveryoneThat human activities are estimated to have already caused approximately 1.00C of
global warming.
That if we continue at the current rate, we are likely to surpass the Paris Agreement
target of 1.50C as early as 2030; and
That at the current level of commitments, the world is on course for 30C of warming with
irreversible and catastrophic consequences for humans and the natural world.
10.8 Achieving Greater Manchester’ s carbon targets will require substantial reductions in carbon
emissions from transport which this Plan supports. The Greater Manchester Strategy sets
out a future for Greater Manchester as a place where people live healthy lives, and a place
that is at the forefront of action on climate change. Building on this, the 5-year Environment
Plan for Greater Manchester sets an ambitious target to be carbon neutral by 2038. Although
these targets are in the future, action must be taken now if we are to make them a reality,
and significant reductions in carbon emissions from transport are vital in achieving these
ambitions.
10.9 Whilst other sectors have achieved significant carbon reductions, surface transport emissions
(i.e. not including aviation) have barely fallen in the UK. In 2017, transport emissions had
reduced by just 3% on 1990 levels (road transport emissions have in fact increased 6%). In
2017, transport overtook energy as the sector emitting the largest amount of CO2. Overall,
transport now accounts for 27% of UK greenhouse gas emissions, with the vast majority
deriving from petrol- or diesel-fuelled road transport. We know, from 2018 UK Greenhouse
Gas Emissions Final Figures, that Greater Manchester’ s CO2 emissions have broadly
reflected the national trend described above.(114)
10.10 The GM 5-year Environment Plan sets out five specific decarbonisation priorities for transport
that will contribute most significantly to reducing carbon emissions and which align with the
Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh. These are:
Increasing use of public transport and active travel modes;
Phasing out fossil-fuelled private vehicles and replacing with zero emission alternatives;
Tackling the most polluting vehicles on our roads;
Establishing a zero-emission bus fleet; and 
Decarbonising road freight and shifting more freight movement to rail and water.
10.11 Resilience is another key issue across the transport network.The network frequently suffers
disproportionately from relatively small failures, such as when a delayed train causes
disruption across the rail network, or when a single traffic accident causes congestion across
the city-region’ s motorways. The long-term threat from climate change on transport
infrastructure is also an issue, with extreme temperatures causing maintenance problems
and other extreme weather – such as flooding, ice and snow – causing major disruption and
dangerous travel conditions.
114 BEIS, 2018 UK Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Final Figures p.12, p.14
192 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone10.12 Traffic is a major contributor to poor air quality. It is estimated that approximately 5% of
deaths each year in Greater Manchester are attributable to particulate air pollution, equating
to approximately 1,200 early deaths each year due to illnesses linked to air pollution.(115) Poor
air quality can have long term health impacts on all and immediate effects on the most
vulnerable in our society; the youngest, the oldest, those living in areas of deprivation and
those with existing respiratory or cardiovascular disease are the most likely to develop
symptoms due to exposure to air pollution. Air pollution also makes our towns and cities less
pleasant places to live. The Greater Manchester Low Emissions Strategy states that road
transport contributes to over 65% of emissions of nitrogen oxides and 79% of fine particulates
at the roadside in the city-region(116), severely reducing air quality around many major roads.
10.13 In 2016 the 10 GM authorities declared a single Air Quality Management Area, based on a
precautionary level of 35µg/m3 rather than the legal limit of 40µg/m3.
10.14 The 10 GM authorities are currently developing a Clean Air Plan, to accelerate compliance
with the legal limit for Nitrogen dioxide and to protect and promote the health of its population
and the environment. This will see the introduction of a Clean Air Zone covering the whole
of the GM conurbation, to tackle the most polluting vehicles on the road network, alongside
further supporting measures.
115 Public Health England, Public Health Outcome Framework, 2016
116 Greater Manchester Combined Authority and Transport for Greater Manchester (December 2016) Greater Manchester Low-Emission Strategy,
page 9, 2014 EMIGMA data.
GMCONSULT.ORG 193Places for EveryonePicture 10.2 Exposure to Environmental Noise Major Roads DEFRA 2017
10.15 The areas with the highest levels of noise pollution are heavily concentrated around transport
infrastructure, particularly the motorway network. The amount of noise created is affected
by speed, type of vehicle, in addition to tyre and road composition.
10.16 Although road casualties in Greater Manchester have reduced by around 75% in the past
20 years, DSD Report 1911: 'Reported Road Casualty Statistics Greater Manchester' shows
that there are still over 650 people killed or seriously injured on the city-region’ s roads each
year, half of them pedestrians or cyclists.(117)
10.17 Analysis by Transport for Greater Manchester, in 'A Congestion Deal for Greater Manchester',
suggests that population growth could lead to over 800,000 extra residential trips each day
on Greater Manchester’ s transport networks(118), and there will be an increase in trips into
Greater Manchester from growth in neighbouring areas.
117 Transport for Greater Manchester (2017) DSD Report 1911: Reported Road Casualty Statistics Greater Manchester 2016: District Tabulations
118 Mayor of Greater Manchester, GMCA and Transport for Greater Manchester (March 2018) A Congestion Deal for Greater Manchester , p.2
194 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone10.18 In recent years, there has been a significant reduction in inbound car trips to the city centre
in the morning peak, from 32,000 in 2002 to 22,600 in 2019(119), reflecting, among other
factors: the rapid expansion of the Metrolink system, a doubling of rail patronage, the success
of the LSM Busway, and reductions in capacity on radial routes to provide additional bus,
cycle and pedestrian priority.
10.19 The GM Travel Diary Survey (GM TRADS (2017-2019)) shows that, in the Plan area, around
32% of households do not own or have access to a car. However, the proportion of
households with two or more cars is now at its highest ever at 23.7%. Car use is highest in
Tameside (71%) and lowest in Manchester (38%), as a percentage of all journeys (as either
driver or passenger).(120)
10.20 There is evidence that younger adults (17-29 year olds) are driving less now than  in the
early 1990s, with this change being driven by factors such as increased city centre living,
cultural changes, lower employment rates, less disposable income and a decline in home
ownership. One report that suggests a return to previous levels of car use is not expected
is entitled 'Y oung People's Travel - What's Changed and Why? Review and Analysis'.(121)
This may be accentuated in the future by an increasing ‘sharing economy’, as seen in
initiatives such as car clubs, ridesharing, and bike hire schemes.
119 Transport for Greater Manchester (2020)  Highways Forecasting and Analytical Services: SRAD Report 2024 Transport Statistics Manchester
2018-19 – Table 23 Car and Non-Car Trips into Manchester Key Centre 07:30-09:30
120 Transport for Greater Manchester, TRADS (2015-2017), not published
121 Centre for Transport and Society (UWE, Bristol) and Transport Studies Unit (University of Oxford) (January 2018) Y oung People’ s Travel –
What’ s Changed and Why? Review and Analysis
GMCONSULT.ORG 195Places for EveryonePicture 10.3 National Travel Survey 2018, Table NTS0205
10.21 In contrast, the rapid rise in digital demand seems likely to continue, with more services
being delivered digitally and ever-increasing data transfers requiring faster, higher-capacity
broadband and mobile connections. As the Plan area becomes ‘smarter’  – utilising data to
deliver services more swiftly and efficiently and adopting innovation such as connected and
autonomous vehicles, artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things (where an increasing
range of everyday devices are connected, monitored and operated via the internet) – travel
patterns will change and digital will increase in importance. As stated in Our People, Our
Place: The Greater Manchester Strategy, it is ultimately our ambition for the city-region to
be the UK’ s leading digital city and one of Europe’ s top five.(122)
10.22 Our challenge is therefore to provide outstanding connectivity that supports low carbon
economic growth and greater levels of social inclusion. It must also accommodate the forecast
increase in demand for travel, while minimising the adverse environmental and quality of
life impacts.
122 Greater Manchester Combined Authority (October 2017) Our people our place: The Greater Manchester Strategy , paragraphs 2.2, 7.1, and
7.13
196 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone10.23 A fundamental aspect of this will be minimising the need to travel, which will help reduce
the pressure on transport systems. This will be achieved by creating local neighbourhoods
where people can live, work and access services and shops, alongside behavioural change,
such as mode shift, flexible and home working.
10.24 A massive change in people’ s travel behaviour is needed so that walking and cycling become
the natural choice for short journeys and public transport for longer trips. This will help to
support more active lifestyles, which in turn will promote good health. It will also address
some of the negative impacts of a high-level of car use, such as traffic congestion, air
pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, noise pollution and poorer quality places.
Picture 10.4 Change in daily trips, now-2040
GMCONSULT.ORG 197Places for Everyone10.25 The vision for 2040 is for half of all daily trips in Greater Manchester to be made by public
transport, cycling and walking.This will mean a million more trips each day using sustainable
and active modes of travel. Our analysis suggests that achieving this will enable us to deliver
our economic growth ambitions without increasing overall motor-vehicle traffic in Greater
Manchester.
10.26 The Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh(123) outlines how significant
investment in sustainable modes of transport will be essential to achieving this vision. The
Strategy is supported by Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan(124) that sets out the
immediate and longer term programme for transport interventions needed to support
sustainable growth. Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan will also be used to incorporate
the strategic transport interventions needed for the PfE allocations into Greater Manchester’ s
wider programme and funding requirements. Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan is the
framework for transport investment, across Greater Manchester, required to support growth
throughout the Plan period and as such should be read alongside this chapter.
10.27 We will continue to invest in a wide range of initiatives intended to ensure that the transport
system as a whole works more effectively, to reduce carbon and create cleaner air as well
as to eliminate barriers to travel and proactively respond to changing transport innovations,
including:
The Clean Air Plan, a package of interventions that are reasonably expected to reduce
NO2 concentrations to legal levels and have wider air quality benefits;
Carbon Reduction measures that support the 5 Y ear Environment Plan and the long-term
environmental ambition for carbon neutrality by 2038;
The roll-out and mainstreaming of innovation and future mobility technologies;
Further phases of Greater Manchester’ s smart ticketing initiative;
Targeted behaviour change activities through established programmes; and
Safety and security measures and programmes to make the transport network safe and
secure for all users.
10.28 Central Government funding and support from developers, will be essential for the delivery
of some of these transport interventions. New developments will also help generate the
demand for transport services that will make new investment viable.
Policy JP-C 1
An Integrated Network
In order to help deliver an accessible, low carbon Greater Manchester with world-class
connectivity, we will support a range of measures, including:
123 GMCA (2017) Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040
124 Visit http://www .tfgm.com/2040  for the latest version of the Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040  Delivery Plan
198 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.Delivering a pattern of development that minimises both the need to travel and the distance
travelled by unsustainable modes to jobs, housing and other key services, including
healthcare, education, retail, recreation and leisure facilities, green space and green
infrastructure;
2. Enabling the provision of high quality digital infrastructure;
3. Locating and designing development, to deliver a significant increase in the proportion of
trips that can be made by walking, cycling and public transport;
4. Transforming transport infrastructure and services by securing investment in new and
improved transport infrastructure and services that will:
promote social inclusion, support economic growth, reduce carbon emissions and
protect our environment and air quality;
meets customers’  needs by being integrated, reliable, resilient, safe and secure,
well-maintained, environmentally responsible, attractive and healthy; and
provide access to jobs and other key services, including healthcare, education, retail,
recreation and leisure facilities, greenspace and green infrastructure.
5.Ensuring that development and transport investment fully considers the needs of all people
and those modes which make most efficient and sustainable use of limited road space, by
following the Global Street Design Guide(125) hierarchy (highest priority first):
a. Pedestrians (and people using mobility aids);
b. Cyclists, powered two-wheelers, and public transport users;
c. People doing business or providing services (such as taxis/private hire, deliveries or
waste collection)
d. People in personal motorised vehicles
6.Developing local transport industry skills and education to ensure the right skills are available
into the future.
Digital Connectivity
10.29 Digital connections are increasingly important to every aspect of our lives, from socialising
and shopping to learning, business and accessing essential services. They enable us to
connect to people on the other side of the world as easily as on the same street. As these
connections open up a range of opportunities it is important everyone can access them so
that they can fully participate in society and our economy.
10.30 Any truly global city will need to have widespread, affordable, reliable, secure and
future-proofed digital infrastructure that provides a competitive edge for businesses and
supports high-levels of social inclusion.This will be essential to capitalise on new innovations,
125 https://nacto.org/global-street-design-guide-gsdg/
GMCONSULT.ORG 199Places for Everyonesuch as artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things and connected and autonomous vehicles.
Big data will also enable the city-region to be managed more effectively. By facilitating more
home-working, good digital infrastructure can also help reduce the need for travel and
therefore help reduce carbon emissions, traffic congestion and air pollution.
10.31 Digital connections will be imperative to the design, development and delivery of future
services in the context of an expanding global city. Such services may include heat, energy,
utilities and mobility.
10.32 In order to achieve its ambition to be the UK's leading digital city and in the top five in
Europe(126) it is fundamental for all parts of the city-region to have access to world-class
digital connections at an affordable price.The Plan area already has a vibrant digital economy,
with particular strengths in high-value sectors such as the creative industries, health
innovation, and advanced manufacturing and materials. However, the area suffers from
similar problems to many other parts of the country in terms of limited roll-out of full fibre
broadband, uneven access to affordable digital connections, and limited access to mobile
networks, especially in rural areas.The Plan area is covered by Greater Manchester's current
strategy for becoming a Digital city-region as set out in the Greater Manchester Digital
Strategy 2018-2020.
10.33 Improving digital infrastructure and ensuring that new development is connected to it is
therefore a high priority. The development industry has a significant role in enabling this
priority, as well as benefiting from it. It will be important to accelerate the delivery of full fibre
gigabit-capable networks and to be at the forefront of the roll-out of next generation mobile
technology. Recent decades have shown the speed with which digital technology evolves,
with a new generation of mobile technology being introduced around every ten years. The
digital infrastructure will therefore need to adapt and evolve throughout the Plan period.
Policy JP-C 2
Digital Connectivity
We support the provision of affordable, high quality, digital infrastructure. Developers are expected
to work and share costs with telecoms operators as appropriate to maximise coverage and
enable consumers to make informed choices. It is expected that internet connections will work
immediately when residents move into new properties.
In making decisions we will support a range of measures, including:
1. Enabling the roll-out of latest generation mobile technology and full fibre to the premises
connectivity, in a way that maximises coverage whilst protecting townscape quality and
ensuring an ability to respond to updated/changing technology;
126 Greater Manchester Combined Authority (October 2017) Our people our place: The Greater Manchester Strategy , paragraph 7.13
200 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2.Requiring all new development to have full fibre to premises connections, unless technically
infeasible, and to incorporate multiple-ducting compliant with telecoms standards, to facilitate
future-proof gigabit-capable network connections; and
3.Facilitating the provision of free, secure, high speed public wi-fi connections, particularly in
the most frequented areas.
Public Transport
10.34 If Greater Manchester’ s overall vision is to be achieved then there will have to be an increase
in the use of public transport, particularly for medium and longer-distance trips.
10.35 One of the main factors supporting a growth in public transport services and usage is
population density. The more people that live in an area the greater the potential for more
frequent, affordable and accessible public transport. As such, the policies elsewhere in the
Plan encourage concentrated regeneration and development that have the potential to
increase the attraction and availability of public transport.
10.36 It will be vital to deliver a comprehensive and integrated public transport network, which
enables people to change between different services and make a much wider range of trips
than just those to and from Manchester city centre.This will be important if the public transport
system is to respond to the needs and complexities of people’ s travel demands and provide
a genuine alternative to the car. It will also be vital that the public transport network is fully
integrated with the walking and cycling network, so that people can easily access it without
driving.
10.37 The public transport network plays a vital role in tacking congestion and providing access
to work, leisure and other destinations. Increasing usage of public transport is key to achieving
our right mix objectives of zero net growth in motor vehicle traffic. An ambitious programme
of investment to improve and extend the reach of public transport is set out in Our Five Y ear
Transport Delivery Plan. This includes interventions that are committed for delivery in the
next five years, and interventions that currently require further development in the next five
years and beyond.
10.38 We aim to invest in the bus and highway network to reverse the decline in bus patronage
and increase bus use by measures including:
Development of Quality Bus Transit Corridors through whole-route upgrades of key bus
routes and Bus Corridor Upgrades focused on delivering improvements to bus journey
time and reliability;
Development of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) links for longer and middle-distance journeys;
New multi-modal interchanges;
Development of new bus services; and 
 Enhancement of our Ring and Ride offer.
GMCONSULT.ORG 201Places for Everyone10.39 We plan to build on the success of Metrolink through measures to improve reliability, capacity
and customer experience including:
New stops / travel hubs on the Metrolink network;
New Metrolink connections, including exploring the feasibility of Tram-Train;
Renewing the Metrolink fleet assets providing more trams and expanding Tram
Management Systems to increase capacity and resilience; and
A City Centre Metro Tunnel.
10.40 Working with rail industry partners, we plan to deliver a number of key priorities and continue
work on long term, large scale projects that will improve the reliability, capacity and customer
experience of rail travel, including:
Central Manchester / Castlefield Corridor capacity expansion;
A programme of rail improvements on key rail corridors including further electrification
to address capacity issues and reduce the carbon footprint and air quality impact of rail
operations;
Station enhancements including access for all and platform lengthening;
New stations; and
HS2 / NPR (Northern Powerhouse Rail) including growth strategies at Piccadilly, the
Airport and Wigan.
10.41 Additionally, we will work with our rail partners to help to ensure that sufficient stabling and
depot facilities are available to improve network resilience.
10.42 Improved access to Metrolink, Bus Rapid Transit stops and Rail stations through the provision
of Travel Hubs that expand the catchment of rapid transit (by facilitating the “first and last
mile”  of a trip) and Park and Ride facilities, may also be required to enable those more distant
from public transport to access the network. Shared services (such as car clubs and bike
hire), demand-responsive services such as Local Link and taxis, and electrification of both
private and shared vehicles with appropriate Ultra Low Emission Vehicle (ULEV) charging
infrastructure, are also likely to play an important role.
10.43 This will all require an enormous amount of additional investment in infrastructure and
services, and in supporting initiatives such as integrated smart ticketing, reform of the bus
market and rail refranchising. Careful prioritisation of investment will be needed to ensure
that maximum benefit is delivered from the available public and private funding. Even with
a major increase in investment, there will still be some locations that are not particularly
well-served by public transport. It will be important to ensure that options are available that
enable people to make the trips that they need to without, owning or having access to a car.
10.44 The complexity of the public transport network, coupled with the scale of investment needed,
means that it is not possible at this stage to identify all the interventions needed. Further
work will be required throughout the Plan period to identify and deliver new routes and
202 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneservices that function effectively as part of the overall network.The new routes and services
will be influenced by development and, as they are delivered, they will influence new
development in turn.
10.45 The scale and lead-in times for the more significant public transport infrastructure, such as
a potential city centre tunnel, will mean that construction may only begin towards the end of
the plan period and completion may be beyond 2037.
High Speed Rail 2 (HS2) and Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR)
10.46 Improved public transport between Greater Manchester and other cities will help reduce
long-distance car use, support business, and open-up a wider range of employment and
leisure opportunities for residents. Delivery of HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail will put
Manchester Piccadilly, Manchester Airport and Wigan at the heart of a new high-quality rail
network with high-speed connections to London and Birmingham, and faster direct routes
to Leeds, Sheffield and Liverpool. Additionally, a lthough not in the Plan area, the HS2
connection to, and solving capacity issues for local services moving through, the Stockport
area, will be important for residents in the PfE Plan area.
10.47 The first northern phase of HS2 will create a high-speed line to Crewe and allow classic
compatible services to run to Stockport and Manchester Piccadilly.
10.48 New High Speed 2 (HS2) railway lines are planned to be operational within the City Region
by 2033. As currently proposed, there will be two HS2 lines running through the City Region,
having split in two just south of the conurbation. One leg travels to a transformed Manchester
Piccadilly station via a new station to the west of Manchester Airport; the second leg runs
through western Trafford to join the West-Coast Mainline south of Wigan with Wigan North
Western also being served by HS2.
10.49 HS2 is one of the most significant transport infrastructure projects in the UK over recent
decades and will bring significant benefits to the city region, particularly when coupled with
the introduction of Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR). Together they will provide high speed
rail connections to London via Birmingham and between the cities of the north.
10.50 Proposals for HS2 and NPR will consolidate the position of Greater Manchester as one of
the most connected areas in the UK and will support existing businesses, inward investment
and job creation. We support the economic benefits of HS2, but we will seek to ensure that
any negative impacts on our communities and natural environment are kept to a minimum.
10.51 On 6 June 2019 Secretary of State issued revised safeguarding directions for HS2 Phase
2b Western Leg (Crewe to Manchester) and Eastern Leg (West Midlands to Leeds), with
connections onto the existing network which replace all previous versions. Additional
Safeguarding Directions were issued 15 April 2020 independently of the June 2019 Directions,
which continue to apply. Safeguarding Directions require local planning authorities to consult
HS2 Ltd on all relevant planning applications within the safeguarded area as set out in the
Directions in order that the proposals can be assessed for any conflict with plans for the
GMCONSULT.ORG 203Places for Everyonerailway. The aim of safeguarding is not therefore necessarily to prevent development on the
land that may be needed to build and operate the railway, but to ensure that no conflict is
created.
10.52 It should be noted that Government has made it clear that Safeguarding Directions(127)will
be kept under review and updated as the project evolves and as the level of engineering
detail facilitates a greater understanding of the actual land required.
Policy JP-C 3
Public Transport
Major improvements to the public transport network are at various stages of development and
an ambitious programme for delivering public transport interventions is set out within Our Five
Y ear Transport Delivery Plan. In order to help deliver major improvements to public transport,
we will support a range of measures, including:
1.Enhanced connections to other major cities, delivering a hub of high-speed rail connection
to London and Northern Powerhouse Rail;
2.Increased capacity at the bottlenecks in Manchester city centre on both light and heavy rail
networks to enable improvements to reliability, resilience and capacity across the whole of
Greater Manchester;
3. Improved public transport routes and services to the City Centre and wider Core Growth
Area;
4. Improved public transport routes and services to Manchester Airport;
5.Better integration of services and between public transport modes and enhanced connections
between other town centres, key locations, major allocations and public transport
interchanges, and the upgrading of key sections of the strategic public transport network;
6. More and higher quality public transport stations and interchanges with suitable capacity
and better integration of different public transport modes and services;
7. Improved access to rapid transit routes including first/last mile solutions.
10.53 Further information on the strategic approach to public transport is set out in the Greater
Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh and Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan
provides further detail on the public transport interventions currently proposed.
127 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/collections/saf eguarding-inf ormation-and-maps-f or-hs2
204 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneOur Streets
The Strategic Road Network
10.54 Greater Manchester benefits from a strategic location on the national motorway network,
but some stretches of the city-region’ s motorways and trunk roads (known as the Strategic
Road Network) are among the most congested and unreliable in the country. Major investment
is already coming forward through the Highways England Roads Investment Strategy (RIS)
to address some of these issues, for example through progression of the Smart Motorway
programme for the M56, M62 and M6 and the Simister Island interchange improvements.
10.55 We continue to work in partnership with Department for Transport, Highways England and
Transport for the North to address other SRN issues through major studies such as the
Manchester M60 North West Quadrant Study, which is looking at the operation of the M60
between Junctions 8 and 18, and the Trans-Pennine Tunnel Study, which is exploring options
to improve highway connectivity between the Greater Manchester and Sheffield City Regions.
The recommendations of these and other studies could have major implications, both in
terms of improving connectivity and network reliability and the physical impacts of new
infrastructure. In the southern part of Greater Manchester, the study at the Airport around
the M56 and the proposed study of the M60 corridor in the south-east will also be key.
However, the scale and lead-in time for some of the infrastructure proposals and the five-year
planning/investment periods for RIS may mean that they are only completed towards the
end of the Plan period or beyond.
Streets for All
10.56 Streets for All is Greater Manchester’ s integrated approach to taking decisions about all
streets in our city-region in a way that helps to balance the complex demands of everyone
who uses, lives and works alongside our streets. The significant economic and population
growth in Greater Manchester, over the past 20 years, has also led to rapid growth in demand
for travel and traffic across the conurbation. In parallel, the city-region has also seen a growth
in communities living in and around our urban centres and the City Centre. This has led to
a range of pressures on streets, in local neighbourhoods, town and city centres and on major
corridors, such as excess traffic, parked vehicles and local air pollution.
10.57 Streets for All provides a new way of managing streets to help achieve the ambition for 50%
of all journeys in Greater Manchester to be made by walking, cycling and public transport
by 2040.
10.58 Central to this is enabling people to switch more of the short journeys – that are currently
made by car – to walking or cycling. Half of all journeys will continue to be made by car and
we will continue to support those journeys, but if we want more people to spend more time
on streets, travelling sustainably, we need a people-centred approach to the decisions we
make about how streets are designed and managed. This will be essential for delivering a
high quality of life, meeting environmental objectives, supporting social inclusion, and enabling
us to compete with cities across the world for residents, skilled workers and tourists.
GMCONSULT.ORG 205Places for Everyone10.59 Recognising that streets vary greatly is at the heart of the Streets for All approach. Each
street is unique, and many of them change in character throughout the day, across the week
and along their length. Streets for All entails nurturing the distinct character of each street,
based on a good understanding of what both local communities and people travelling want
from different streets.
10.60 There will remain some places where streets act as vital social spaces, supporting community
cohesion and local businesses, while others function mainly as routes for the movement of
goods and people. Understanding this balance between functions will enable us to address
a range of issues including:
Poor air quality and high carbon emissions from road transport;
Congestion caused by increased use of private vehicles;
Low levels of physical activity as people make fewer journeys on foot or by bike;
Too many road traffic injuries and deaths;
Communities divided by major roads;
Declining use of buses;
Fewer children playing in our streets;
Increased isolation, particularly for older or mobility impaired people, and those without
access to a car; and
Limited community cohesion and social interaction influenced by poor quality of place
and hostile environments.
10.61 Streets for All allows all these issues to be addressed through a single, coherent approach.
Whilst the emphasis will be on sustainable travel, there will still be a need for targeted
improvements to the highway network so that people and goods can move around the
city-region efficiently. It will, however, be essential that any highways investment is part of
a comprehensive multi-modal strategy that supports the overall aim of increasing walking,
cycling and public transport, to avoid generating a higher proportion of car journeys.
10.62 There is great potential to increase walking, cycling and public transport to and from the city
centre, in our town centres and in local neighbourhoods. The ambition is to better support
these types of journeys through a combination of good urban planning and making streets
safer and more welcoming. This means:
People will benefit from an attractive and inclusive walking environment;
Streets will provide a safe and connected cycling experience;
Goods will reach their destinations on time, with minimal impact on local communities;
Streets will facilitate a reliable, integrated and accessible public transport network;
Streets will feel like welcoming and healthy places to spend time;
They will enable us to harness future mobility innovations; and
On our streets, we will make best use of existing assets.
206 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-C 4
Streets for All
Streets will be designed and managed to make a significant positive contribution to the quality
of place and support high levels of walking, cycling and public transport.Targeted improvements
to the highway network will be supported through studies and scheme development, where they
complement the aim of securing a significant increase in the proportion of trips made by walking,
cycling and public transport (as set out in Policy JP-C 5 'Walking and Cycling' and Policy JP-C
3 'Public Transport' ).
We will work with Department of Transport, Highways England, Transport for the North and
TfGM to ensure:
1. The design and management of streets will follow a Street for All approach, including by:
a. Understanding the ‘movement and place function’  of streets as the starting point for
improvement;
b. Ensuring that streets are welcoming for all, and respond to the needs of those with
reduced mobility;
c. Delivering new and improved walking and cycling routes as part of the delivery of the
“Bee Network”;
d.Maximising the ability of pedestrians and cyclists to navigate easily, safely and without
delay, and minimising barriers and obstacles to their movement;
e.Providing frequent opportunities for people to rest, linger and socialise, and for children
to play, particularly in streets with a high ‘place function’;
f. Setting aside space for cycle parking (including for bike-sharing schemes where
appropriate), high-quality public transport waiting areas, and other facilities that will
support sustainable modes of travel;
g. Incorporating increased levels of greenery including trees where possible;
h. Offering shelter from wind and rain, and shade from the sun;
i. Delivering priority for public transport and facilities for public transport users;
j. Providing appropriate places and routes for servicing, deliveries and ‘drop-off ’;
k. Mitigating the impacts of air and noise pollution and carbon emissions from road
transport ;
l.Ensuring the efficient movement of people and goods on streets with a high ‘movement
function’  and;
m. Harnessing new mobility innovations such as traffic signals technology and ULEV
charging infrastructure.
2.Improvements to the highways network are part of a multi-modal strategy to increase public
transport, cycling and walking and improve access for all;
3. Any new infrastructure minimises the negative effects of vehicle traffic; and
4. New infrastructure includes provision for utilities and digital infrastructure where required.
GMCONSULT.ORG 207Places for Everyone10.63 Further information on Street for All and the strategic approach to highway infrastructure
improvements is set out in the Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh and
Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan provides further detail on the highway infrastructure
interventions currently proposed .
Walking and Cycling 
10.64 Currently around half of the trips made by our residents are less than 2km in length with
40% of these trips being made by car.There is therefore great potential for increasing cycling
and walking in the Plan area which will be fundamental in achieving the city region’ s overall
transport vision.
10.65 Both walking and cycling have minimal costs and are open to people of all ages. So
encouraging more people to walk and cycle will support greater social inclusion and
independence. The increased physical exercise they bring, particularly in comparison to
driving, will also help benefit peoples' health and wellbeing. By encouraging fewer people
to drive for shorter journeys we will help reduce carbon emissions, congestion, air and noise
pollution and the other negative impacts of vehicle traffic.
10.66 If walking and cycling are to become the natural choice for shorter journeys, then a dramatic
improvement in the quality and extent of our walking and cycling infrastructure will be required.
New and improved routes will be needed, and the barriers that currently discourage people
from walking and cycling will need to be removed. High-quality walking and cycling
infrastructure will also be vital in increasing the use of public transport, and so will need to
be integrated with the public transport network.
10.67 Central to all of this will be the delivery of the Greater Manchester Cycling and Walking
Infrastructure Proposal (Bee Network), which is a vision for Greater Manchester to become
the first city-region in the UK to have a fully joined up walking and cycling network.(128) Greater
Manchester’ s Cycling and Walking Investment Plan (Change a Region to Change a Nation)
sets out our ambition to connect every neighbourhood and community in Greater Manchester,
covering over 1,800 miles of route. The network will have a single identity across Greater
Manchester, using the symbol of the worker bee, which will represent a promise of route
quality: that all such routes will be easily useable by a competent 12 year old on a bike, or
by a parent pushing a double buggy. A broad range of improvements will be required, varying
from route to route, including easy crossing points of major roads, innovative junction designs,
‘active’  neighbourhoods with through motor traffic removed, and the creation of fully
segregated cycleways on major corridors.
128 Mayor of Greater Manchester, Greater Manchester Combined Authority and Transport for Greater Manchester (2018) Greater Manchester’ s
cycling and walking infrastructure proposal
208 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-C 5
Walking and Cycling
In order to help deliver a higher proportion of journeys made by walking and cycling, we will
support a range of measures, including:
1.Creating safe, attractive and integrated walking and cycling infrastructure, connecting every
neighbourhood and community using national and locally adopted design guidance;
2.Ensuring routes are direct, easily navigable and integrated with the street and public transport
network;
3.Creating active neighbourhoods and street networks which are more permeable to walking
and cycling than to the private car, creating an active incentive to walk and cycle;
4. Creating, where needed, dedicated separate space for people walking and cycling, with
pedestrians and cyclists given priority at junctions and crossings which form part of the Bee
Network;
5.Increasing the capacity and quality of walking and cycling infrastructure in locations where
significant growth in the number of short journeys is anticipated, and where quality of place
improvements are proposed;
6.Utilising and enhancing green infrastructure, including canals, parks and recreation grounds,
to create opportunities for walking and cycling; and
7.Ensuring that new developments are planned and constructed with walking and cycling as
the primary means of local access, and fully integrated into the existing walking and cycling
infrastructure in accordance with JP-C7.
10.68 Further information on the strategic approach to walking and cycling is set out in the Greater
Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh. Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan and
Greater Manchester’ s Walking and Cycling Investment Plan (Change a Region to Change
a Nation) provide further detail on the walking and cycling interventions currently proposed.
Freight and Logistics
10.69 Freight is essential for both our economy and productivity. It supports a broad range of
sectors, including manufacturing, retail and waste management. Logistics is also an important
sector in its own right, with significant growth potential within the Plan area. The PfE Plan
identifies a strong portfolio of employment sites, many of which will be suitable for logistics,
including regional and national distribution centres. Logistics is also becoming even more
important to everyday life, with the increase in internet shopping and demands for same or
next day deliveries.
10.70 Ideally, more freight should be moved by rail and water, particularly over longer distances,
to reduce highway congestion, greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. The Plan area
benefits from having a large rail freight terminal at Trafford Park, which provides daily services
to/from the major ports of Felixstowe, Southampton and London Gateway. Sustainable freight
GMCONSULT.ORG 209Places for Everyonewill be further enhanced by the completion of Port Salford, which will provide rail connections
via the main Manchester-Liverpool line, shipping links along the Manchester Ship Canal to
the deep-water facilities at the Port of Liverpool, and a new on-site container terminal. It will
be important to make the most of these facilities as additional opportunities for new rail and
water-served sites elsewhere in the Plan area are limited.
10.71 Many logistics sites in the Plan area will be reliant on road-based freight, taking advantage
of the strategic location within the national motorway network.This reinforces the importance
of delivering the strategic highway improvements identified above.The Plan area also benefits
from outstanding air freight connections at Manchester Airport and its World Freight Terminal.
10.72 The growth in on-line retailing and ‘just in time’  approaches to manufacturing and other
businesses is increasing the number of smaller scale deliveries, contributing to congestion
and pollution particularly in urban areas. Higher population and employment densities in
locations such as the city centre will exacerbate these pressures. It will therefore be important
to manage such deliveries in a way that minimises their adverse impacts, such as through
centres where deliveries can be consolidated, the use of low- and zero-emission vehicles
including electric vehicles, cargo bikes and E-cargo bikes, changing procurement practices,
and avoiding the need for repeat delivery attempts.This could require shared facilities where
different operators can consolidate their deliveries.
Policy JP-C 6
Freight and Logistics
We will support the more efficient and sustainable movement of freight, including by:
1. Protecting existing rail- and water-served sites and associated infrastructure.
2. Completing the tri-modal Port Salford, including a rail spur from the Manchester-Liverpool
line, canal berths on the Manchester Ship Canal, and a container terminal.
3. Accommodating the expansion of air freight activities at Manchester Airport.
4. Enabling the provision of consolidated distribution centres and the use of low- and
zero-emission vehicles including electric vehicles, cargo bikes and E-cargo bikes for local
and last mile deliveries.
5. Ensuring that new development makes appropriate provision for deliveries and servicing
in terms of road safety, traffic congestion and environmental impacts, in accordance with
Policy JP-C7.
Transport Requirements of New Development
10.73 The location, design and density of development is fundamental, as it influences how far
people need to travel and their ability to make these journeys by sustainable modes as well
as equality of opportunity for all. Good access to local facilities and amenities is critical to
210 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneencouraging sustainable journeys by providing opportunities to work, learn, shop, play and
socialise locally. To be sustainable, developments need to be located close to existing
facilities or be mixed use developments that provide community facilities such as schools,
healthcare centres, shops, parks and play areas. Higher density developments help to make
the provision of these community facilities and public transport economically viable.
10.74 The design of new development will be critical in encouraging more people to walk, cycle
and use public transport. It will also help minimise the negative effects of car dependency,
such as traffic congestion, greenhouse gas emissions, air and noise pollution and poorer
quality places. Given the importance of these issues, and the related objectives in improving
health and quality of life, it is critical that we get this right.
10.75 Increased traffic is often one of the biggest concerns for existing residents when faced with
new development, however there is potential for growth to provide new opportunities for
improved public transport, cycling and walking that can benefit both new and existing
communities.
10.76 Although the focus is on increasing walking, cycling and public transport, it must be recognised
that there is a need to accommodate other forms of transport. New development will be
designed to make these journeys as sustainably as possible, for example by supporting the
use of low- or zero-emission vehicles by providing the appropriate ULEV charging
infrastructure for both private and shared vehicles. Improvements to the public transport
network are planned, but it will be impossible to provide every area with good public transport
access at all times. Flexible on-demand and shared services such as car clubs, Local Link
and taxis, will have an important role to play in filling the gaps in public transport routes and
services, and so it will be important that new developments are designed to accommodate
them where appropriate.
Policy JP-C 7
Transport Requirements of New Development
Planning applications will be accompanied by a Transport Assessment/Transport Statement
and Travel Plan where appropriate. We will require new development to be located and designed
to enable and encourage walking, cycling and public transport use, to reduce the negative effects
of car dependency, and help deliver high quality, attractive, liveable and sustainable environments.
We will do this by:
Connectivity and P ermeability
1.Prioritising safe and convenient access to the site and buildings for all users in accordance
with the user hierarchy in Policy JP-C 1 'An Integrated Network' , including;
Prioritising new and enhanced walking, cycling and public transport routes and stops,
through and around the site. These routes should:
GMCONSULT.ORG 211Places for Everyonebe direct, safe and convenient;
connect to nearby facilities, employment areas, public transport stops; and
improve the coverage, quality and integration of the wider walking and cycling
infrastructure and public transport provision;
Ensuring that new developments are planned and constructed with walking and cycling
as the primary means of local access, and fully integrated into the existing walking and
cycling infrastructure
Ensuring that new development is connected visually and physically; within the site
and to the surrounding built environment;
2. Ensure appropriate connectivity to the existing highway network.
Design
3. Reducing the need to travel by ensuring that community facilities, services and amenities
are provided within the site or within walking distance of new development;
4. Incorporating highway design at a human scale using street-based prescriptions such as
those within Manual for Streets and/or any locally adopted design guidance, to ensure that
highways do not dominate the development;
Public Transpor t
5.Ensuring (through funding improvements where appropriate) that the nearest public transport
stops (both within and adjacent to the development site) are attractive to users in terms of
seating, shelters, information and easy step-free access;
6. Subsidising new or amended public transport services where the development would
otherwise have inadequate public transport access ;
Parking Infr astructure
7. Complying with any parking standards set out in local plans including making adequate
parking provision for disabled car drivers and passengers;
8. Ensuring that car parking provision is well integrated and unobtrusive, so it supports the
street scene; and where appropriate parking provision is flexible and can be adapted over
time to reflect demand.
9. Incorporating enough secure and covered cycle parking to meet long-term demand from
occupiers and visitors in a convenient location that helps to maximise its use, and for
workplaces, where appropriate providing:
i. Showers, changing facilities and lockers for cyclists and walkers
ii. Pool or hire bikes for use by occupiers
iii. Information in advance about facilities to visitors.
10.Promoting alternatives to car ownership, such as the use of ULEV car clubs rather than the
provision of private car parking spaces;
212 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11. Promoting the increased provision of ULEV charging infrastructure including meeting any
standards set by local plans.
Access and Ser vicing
12.Providing designated pick-up/drop-off points for taxis and other demand-responsive transport
services where appropriate, taking into account the potential increase in demand if car
ownership falls;
13. Making appropriate provision for deliveries and servicing (including requiring Delivery and
Servicing Plans for appropriate developments), in a way that:
meets road safety requirements,
reduces transport emissions and other environmental impacts,
reduces traffic congestion, the number of vehicle movements and the need for repeat
deliveries;
Constr uction Management
14. Ensuring Construction Management Plans are produced for developments, where
appropriate, to mitigate construction logistics and environmental impacts including air quality
and noise on the surrounding area and encourage sustainable deliveries.
District Local Plans may set out mechanisms through which new development will be required
to make a proportionate financial contribution to the delivery of new transport infrastructure
and/or services, necessary to support its successful functioning in accordance with relevant
national policy, guidance and regulations.
GMCONSULT.ORG 213Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 214Places for Everyone11.1 To deliver the inclusive and prosperous future outlined in the Greater Manchester Strategy,
we have sought to maximise the use of land outside of the Green Belt, giving the highest
priority to brownfield land.
11.2 The majority of the development required to deliver this Plan’ s spatial strategy will be within
the existing urban area. Figure 11.1 'Existing land identified for office, industrial/warehousing
and housing development 2020' shows the existing land identified for office, industrial and
housing development through our land availability assessments. This land supply includes
the identification of suitable brownfield sites and where appropriate the optimisation of density
ratios, in line with the overall strategy. As appropriate, district Local Plans will allocate sites
from this supply.
Figure 11.1 Existing land identified for office, industrial/warehousing and housing development 2020
11.3 As set out in both 6 'Places for Jobs'  and 7 'Places for Homes' , insufficient land has been
identified within these assessments to meet our development needs.
GMCONSULT.ORG 217Places for Everyone11.4 Discussions have taken place with neighbouring local authorities to determine whether it
would be appropriate for them to meet some of our development needs, but it has been
agreed that this would not be appropriate as it would require them to release parts of their
own Green Belt and would be likely to lead to less sustainable commuting patterns.
11.5 Some additional development sites, outside the urban area, are therefore required to deliver
our inclusive growth needs. The role of this Plan is to identify these sites, provide the policy
context for their development and make the associated changes to the Green Belt. Combined
with the existing land supply these sites will enable us to meet our overall objectives.
11.6 The sites identified reflect the overall spatial approach set out in 4 'Strategy' with the aim of
making the most of existing locations and assets whilst providing opportunities across the
Plan area that help address current disparities. The identification of the sites within this
section will help to achieve the sustained economic growth in the Core and our southern
parts of the conurbation whilst significantly boosting the economic competitiveness of the
northern districts in Greater Manchester. This is not only linked to the provision of new jobs
and opportunities but also the choice and quality of housing, the infrastructure required to
support the new development and the delivery of high quality places.
11.7 The strategic employment allocations have been selected based on their location and the
opportunity they provide to address some of the economic disparities evident within the
conurbation. Some of these sites straddle local authority boundaries and are of a scale that
are nationally and, in some cases, globally significant in terms of attracting new businesses
and investment.
11.8 The strategic housing allocations provide an opportunity to widen housing choice within
districts. This will include the provision of affordable housing as well as larger and higher
value homes in those areas which there is currently a lack of such housing. This will create
a more inclusive housing offer across our boroughs and improve the overall housing offer
within individual districts and improve their ability to attract and retain residents.
11.9 To ensure that these strategic allocations deliver scale and quality of development required
the use of masterplans, where appropriate, will be an important component in ensuring a
comprehensive approach to development which is aligned with the delivery of associated
infrastructure. This approach will help to deliver high quality, sustainable places which
maximises the benefits of the land release for development.
11.10 If successful places are to be created then it will be vital that developments deliver the
infrastructure and facilities necessary to support them. The specific type and scale of
infrastructure required to support this new development is set out within the policies. This
includes infrastructure relating to accessibility, public transport, social infrastructure (such
as schools, health and community facilities) and green infrastructure (including open spaces
and biodiversity resources). More general requirements that would be applied to all
development are set out in the broader thematic policies set out in earlier sections of the
plan.
218 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.11 Where this plan releases sites from the Green Belt, as set out in 'The Green Belt' , Green
Belt policies will be strictly applied except in the case of planning applications complying
with the relevant allocation policies in this section.
11.12 Picture 11.2 'Places for Everyone Allocations 2021'  shows all the sites allocated within this
Plan. These are defined on the Policies Map and a detailed policy framework for each
allocation is set out in this Chapter.
Picture 11.2 Places for Everyone Allocations 2021
2021 Policy Name Places for Everyone 2021
Policy NumberDistrict
Northern Gateway Heywood /
PilsworthJPA1.1 Cross Boundary
Northern Gateway Simister and
BowleeJPA1.2 Cross Boundary
GMCONSULT.ORG 219Places for Everyone2021 Policy Name Places for Everyone 2021
Policy NumberDistrict
Stakehill JPA2 Cross Boundary
Medipark JPA3.1 Cross Boundary
Timperley Wedge JPA3.2 Cross Boundary
Bewshill Farm JPA4 Bolton
Chequerbent North JPA5 Bolton
West of Wingates JPA6 Bolton
Elton Reservoir JPA7 Bury
Seedfield JPA8 Bury
Walshaw JPA9 Bury
Global Logistics JPA10 Manchester
N.B. Number no longer in use JPA11 Manchester
Beal Valley JPA12 Oldham
Bottom Field Farm
(Woodhouses) JPA13 Oldham
Broadbent Moss JPA14 Oldham
Chew Brook Vale (Robert
Fletchers)JPA15 Oldham
Cowlishaw JPA16 Oldham
Land south of Coal Pit Lane
(Ashton Road)JPA17 Oldham
South of Rosary Road JPA18 Oldham
Bamford and Norden JPA19 Rochdale
Castleton Sidings JPA20 Rochdale
Crimble Mill JPA21 Rochdale
Land north of Smithy Bridge JPA22 Rochdale
220 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2021 Policy Name Places for Everyone 2021
Policy NumberDistrict
Newhey Quarry JPA23 Rochdale
Roch Valley JPA24 Rochdale
Trows Farm JPA25 Rochdale
Land at Hazelhurst Farm JPA26 Salford
East of Boothstown JPA27 Salford
North of Irlam Station JPA28 Salford
Port Salford Extension JPA29 Salford
Ashton Moss West JPA30 Tameside
Godley Green Garden Village JPA31 Tameside
South of Hyde JPA32 Tameside
New Carrington JPA33 Trafford
M6 Junction 25 JPA34 Wigan
North of Mosley Common JPA35 Wigan
Pocket Nook JPA36 Wigan
West of Gibfield JPA37 Wigan
Table 11.1 List of Places for Everyone Allocations
GMCONSULT.ORG 221Places for EveryoneCross-Boundary Strategic Allocations
Northern Gateway
Picture 11.3 JPA 1 Northern Gateway
The Northern Gateway is an extensive area located around Junction 18 of the M60 motorway
extending east to Junction 19 of the M62 and north to Junction 3 of the M66. It comprises two key
sites within the wider North-East Growth Corridor:
Heywood / Pilsworth (Bury and Rochdale) (see Policy JP Allocation 1.1 'Heywood /
Pilsworth (Northern Gateway)' ); and
Simister and Bowlee (Bury and Rochdale) (see Policy JP Allocation 1.2 'Simister and
Bowlee (Northern Gateway)' )
11.13 The Northern Gateway straddles the districts of Bury and Rochdale and is positioned at a
strategically important intersection around the M60, M62 and M66 motorways. As such, it
represents a highly accessible opportunity for growth in Greater Manchester with wider
benefits on a regional and national level. The central theme of the spatial strategy for the
222 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonejoint plan is to deliver inclusive growth across the city region complemented by a key aim to
boost the competitiveness of the northern parts of Greater Manchester.The Northern Gateway
is one of the key locations that will help to deliver these fundamental objectives.
11.14 This strategic allocation will enable the delivery of a large, nationally-significant employment
opportunity to attract high quality business and investment, with a complementary housing
offer on the M62 corridor, where there is strong evidence of market demand.
11.15 The allocation at Heywood/Pilsworth provides an opportunity for a substantial and high
quality employment-led development. The scale and location of this allocation will help to
rebalance the Greater Manchester economy, ensure the joint plan plays its part in driving
growth within the north of England and enable Greater Manchester to be competitive both
nationally and internationally.
11.16 This will be supported by new communities as part of the Heywood/Pilsworth allocation as
well as at Simister/Bowlee which have transformational potential in enabling new housing,
community facilities and new transport infrastructure to come forward in what is currently an
area with significant pockets of high deprivation, low skills and worklessness.
11.17 To be successful and sustainable, the employment and housing opportunities need to be
accessible by a range of transport modes and be linked directly to existing and new
communities in the surrounding area via new recreational routes and corridors of green
infrastructure which in turn provide an attractive setting for development. Outside of the
motorway network, much of the area proposed for development is currently served by an
inadequate transport network and this will require substantial investment to improve
connectivity, potentially including investment in rapid transit. The prospective residents will
require new community facilities and these will be provided in accessible locations within
walking distance of homes.
11.18 The opportunities at Heywood/Pilsworth and Simister/Bowlee will need to incorporate
extensive supporting infrastructure. The full delivery of the allocation at Heywood/Pilsworth
is likely to extend beyond the plan period.
GMCONSULT.ORG 223Places for EveryonePolicy JP Allocation 1.1
Heywood / Pilsworth (Northern Gateway)
Picture 11.4 JPA 1.1 Heywood / Pilsworth (Northern Gateway)
Any proposals for this allocation must be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan relating
to the area to come forward in the plan period that has been previously approved by the LPA(s).
It shall include a clear phasing strategy as part of an integrated approach to the delivery of
infrastructure to support the scale of the whole development in line with Policy JP-D
1 'Infrastructure Implementation' . This should include the delivery of highways infrastructure,
surface water drainage, grey infrastructure including utilities provision, green and blue
infrastructure, broadband and electric vehicle charging points, recreation provision and social
infrastructure and ensure coordination between phases of development.
Development at this allocation will be required to:
1.Be of sufficient scale and quality to enable a significant rebalance in economic growth within
the sub-region by boosting the competitiveness of the north of the conurbation and should;
i. Deliver a total of around 1,200,000 sqm of industrial and warehousing space (with
around 700,000 sqm being delivered within the plan period). This should comprise a
224 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonemix of high quality employment premises in an attractive business park setting in order
to appeal to a wide range of business sectors including the development of an Advanced
Manufacturing Park;
ii.Deliver around 1,000 additional homes along with a new primary school in the eastern
part of the allocation to support the early delivery of the infrastructure and provide a
buffer between existing housing and the new employment development;
iii.Deliver around 200 new homes, which includes an appropriate mix of house types and
sizes and the provision of plots for custom and self-build housing, in the west of the
allocation off Castle Road ensuring that an appropriate buffer is incorporated to separate
this part of the allocation from the wider employment area and that appropriate highways
measures are in place to prevent the use of residential roads by traffic associated with
the wider employment area; and 
iv. An appropriate range of supporting and ancillary services and facilities.
2. Make provision for significant new and improved highways infrastructure to enable the
proposed level of development to be accommodated, including:
i. Improvements to Junction 3 of the M66;
ii. Improved links between Junction 3 of the M66 and Junction 19 of the M62;
iii. Other off-site highway works where these are necessary to ensure acceptable traffic
movement, including a contribution towards the mitigation proposed at Croft Lane,
Hollins Lane/Hollins Brow
3. Support the delivery of improved public transport infrastructure through the site allocation
(including Bus Rapid Transit corridors) and close to the allocation (including potential
tram-train on the East Lancashire rail line between Bury and Rochdale) to enhance
sustainable connectivity to the wider sub-region and adjoining districts and neighbourhoods;
4.Deliver a network of safe and convenient cycling and walking routes through the allocation
designed to national and GM standards of design and construction and local planning
requirements;
5.Make provision for affordable housing in accordance with local planning policy requirements;
6.Provide financial contributions for offsite additional primary and secondary school provision
to meet needs generated by the development;
7. Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, broadband and electric
vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant joint plan or local planning policies;
8.Ensure the design and layout allows for effective integration with surrounding communities,
including active travel links and connections to local services, employment opportunities
and over the M62 to proposed new development at Simister/Bowlee (JPA1.2);
9.Retain, enhance and replace existing recreation facilities, where required, and make provision
for new recreation facilities to meet the needs of the prospective residents in accordance
with local planning policy requirements;
10. Make provision for new, high quality, publicly accessible multi-functional green and blue
infrastructure to provide health benefits to workers and residents as well as creating a
visually attractive environment and providing linkages to the site's wider drainage strategy
GMCONSULT.ORG 225Places for Everyonein accordance with Policy JP-G 2 'Green Infrastructure Network'  and Policy JP-G 8 'Standards
for Greener Places'.This should include the integration and enhancement of existing features
such as Hollins Brook/Brightly Brook SBI and Whittle Brook;
11. Minimise impacts on and provide net gains for biodiversity assets within the allocation in
accordance with Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and Geodiversity' ;
12. Ensure that any development is safe from and mitigates for potential flood risk from all
sources including Whittle Brook, Castle Brook and Brightley Brook and does not increase
the flood risk elsewhere. The delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate
flood risk and drainage strategy which ensures co-ordination between phases of
development;
13. Ensure that sustainable drainage systems are fully incorporated into the development to
manage surface water and control the rate of surface water run-off, discharging in accordance
with the hierarchy of drainage options. Where possible, natural SuDS techniques should
be utilised, prioritising the use of ponds, swales and other infrastructure which mimic natural
drainage and be designed as multi-functional green infrastructure connecting to the wider
green and blue infrastructure network in accordance with Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the
Water Environment' and nationally recognised SuDS design standards. Proposals to
discharge to the public sewer will need to submit clear evidence demonstrating why
alternative options are not available ;
14. Make appropriate provision for the long term management and maintenance of areas of
green infrastructure, biodiversity features and other areas of open space and sustainable
drainage features;
15. Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of
1,000 sqm / 50 dwellings or more;
16.Provide an appropriate buffer between the development and the motorway/local road network
where required to serve multiple functions including air quality, noise, visual mitigation and
high quality landscaping;
17. Protect and, where appropriate, enhance heritage assets and their setting within the
allocation, including the Grade II Listed buildings Brick Farmhouse and Lower Whittle
Farmhouse and the wider historic character of the surrounding setting in accordance with
the findings and recommendations of the assessment of heritage assets that forms part of
the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated assessment submitted as part of the planning
application process; and 
18.Carry out a detailed assessment and evaluation of known and potential archaeological sites
including Meadow Croft Farm, historic landscape features and built heritage assets, to
establish specific requirements for the protection and enhancement of significant heritage
assets.
11.19 This allocation has been identified as a large, nationally significant location for new
employment-led development within the Northern Gateway opportunity area between Bury
and Rochdale. The scale of the opportunity will help to deliver a significant jobs boost to
wider northern and eastern parts of the conurbation, increasing the economic output from
226 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonethis area and helping to rebalance the Greater Manchester economy. It also includes the
potential to deliver a significant amount of new housing as well as an appropriate range of
supporting and ancillary services and facilities.
11.20 Planning permission has been granted for a scheme to deliver around 135,000 sqm of
employment floorspace, 1,000 homes and a new primary school on the eastern part of the
allocation at South Heywood and this land is included in the allocation for removal from the
Green Belt. As well as delivering an early phase of the employment development this proposal
will help to create a more mixed-use urban extension. The new school will not only provide
space to accommodate children from the new development but will also help tackle a shortage
of local school places. The residential development along with secured public funding is a
key element to delivering improved linkages from Junction 19 of the M62. The employment
floorspace and homes covered by this planning application are included in the current
baseline supply.
11.21 Although the allocation has the capacity to deliver a total of around 1,200,000 sqm of new
employment floorspace, it is anticipated that around 700,000 sqm of this will be delivered
within the plan period (in addition to the 135,000 sqm that has an extant planning permission
at South Heywood). Nevertheless, it is considered necessary to release the site in full at this
stage given that the scale of the proposed development means that it will need to be
supported by significant strategic infrastructure and this level of investment needs the certainty
that the remaining development and associated economic benefits will still be able to come
forward beyond the plan period.
11.22 This allocation benefits from being in close proximity to existing regionally renowned
employment sites at Heywood Distribution Park and Pilsworth and the development of this
site will complement other opportunities in the Northern Gateway as well as other key sites
in the north of the sub-region such as Logistics North.
11.23 Whilst the location of this allocation along the key M62 corridor will be particularly attractive
to the logistics sector, it is important that it provides high quality business premises for a
range of other sectors including advanced manufacturing and higher value, knowledge-based
businesses. This variety will not only provide a better range of good quality jobs but has the
potential to provide premises for new and growing sectors, thus diversifying both the local
and sub-regional economy.
11.24 The size of the proposal would also support the provision of an appropriate range of
supporting services and facilities, such as a new local centre, hotel, leisure and conference
facilities. However, it is important that these are of a scale that is appropriate to the main
employment use of the allocation.
11.25 The delivery of such an allocation will require significant investment in infrastructure if it is
to be successful and sustainable.The allocation clearly has excellent access to the motorway
network but will benefit from improved linkages between Junction 19 of the M62 and Junction
3 of the M66. The local authorities will continue to explore opportunities for a new junction
at Birch which could provide additional accessibility and be of benefit to the allocation in the
GMCONSULT.ORG 227Places for Everyonelonger term. Furthermore, in conjunction with the development of the allocation, there will
be an expectation that opportunities are fully explored to deliver a rail freight spur exploiting
the existing heavy rail connections from the East Lancashire Railway line which adjoins the
allocation to the north and Calder Valley line to the east.
11.26 The allocation will also need to be served by a wide range of public transport and significant
interventions will be required in order to promote sustainable travel and make the allocation
more accessible to the local labour pool. This could potentially include rapid transit linking
the expanded Heywood employment area with surrounding neighbourhoods and key locations
helping to maximise the public transport accessibility of the employment opportunities and
to better integrate existing and new communities with the rest of Greater Manchester. The
potential tram-train on the East Lancashire rail line between Bury and Rochdale should be
explored and the allocation will also need to be supported by safe and attractive walking
and cycling routes to promote healthier and more sustainable journeys to work.
11.27 It should be noted that the existing Birch Industrial Estate is located within the allocation.
This is a successful estate that has benefited from recent investment and would be retained
as part of any development. This allocation will also share the benefits of the improved
accessibility of the area.
11.28 The area also includes an existing golf club and school playing field. Whilst the intention is
for these to be retained, they could potentially be incorporated into the wider development
if they were to subsequently become available.
11.29 In addition to the 1,000 homes with planning permission at South Heywood, the allocation
is also considered to have the potential to accommodate around 200 further dwellings on
land accessed via Castle Road in Unsworth. However, it is important that an appropriate
buffer is incorporated into the development to create separation from the wider employment
development and that appropriate highways measures are in place to prevent the
inappropriate use of residential roads by vehicular traffic associated with the wider
employment area.
11.30 Any housing development within the allocation will be required to make provision for affordable
housing and recreation to meet the needs of the prospective residents in line with Local Plan
policy requirements.
11.31 The land is relatively undulating and the contours offer opportunities to create an attractive
and interesting setting for the development as well as providing some natural screening.
This should be complimented by the creation of a good quality green and blue infrastructure
network which will provide publicly accessible open spaces to provide recreational
opportunities to workers and residents in the wider area. Such a network should seek to
maximise the value of existing features and areas of nature conservation value. There are
some existing recreation facilities, ponds, reservoirs and brooks within and adjacent to the
allocation and any development should seek to retain and enhance such features, where
appropriate. Other opportunities for new blue infrastructure may exist to further enhance
228 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonevisual amenity, provide SUDS and widen local biodiversity. A management plan will be
required to demonstrate how the retention and improvement of green and blue infrastructure
and nature conservation assets will continue to be managed.
11.32 Delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy
which ensures co-ordination between phases of development. Measures such as rainwater
recycling, green roofs, water butts and permeable driveway surfaces should be considered
to mitigate the impact of potential flood risk both within and beyond the site boundaries. As
a green and blue infrastructure network will provide more sustainable options to discharge
surface water, only foul flows should connect with the public sewer.
11.33 Traffic to and from the site is likely to include travel on the M62 which passes close to
designated European sites and, as such, a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment
will be required for planning applications involving 1,000 or more sqm or 50 or more residential
units.
11.34 Given that the site is located adjacent to the M62 and M66 motorways, there will be a need
to incorporate a buffer between the allocation and the motorway to serve multiple functions
including air and noise mitigation and high quality landscaping. Mitigation through tree
planting could be undertaken in conjunction with proposals for the Northern Forest.
11.35 There are two Grade II Listed buildings within the allocation boundary and known significant
archaeological sites, notably at Meadow Croft Fold. In addition, there are a number of
potentially significant archaeological sites, locally listed buildings and structures throughout
and adjacent to the allocation. Any development would need to consider the impact on their
setting through the completion of a Heritage Impact Statement. There will be a need to
undertake detailed archaeological work including field walking and evaluation trenching,
leading to further investigations and recording and, if necessary, preserving features in situ.
GMCONSULT.ORG 229Places for EveryonePolicy JP Allocation 1.2
Simister and Bowlee (Northern Gateway)
Picture 11.5 JPA 1.2 Simister and Bowlee (Northern Gateway)
Any proposals for this allocation must be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan that
has been previously approved by the LPA(s). It shall include a clear phasing strategy as part of
an integrated approach to the delivery of infrastructure to support the scale of the whole
development  in line with Policy JP-D 1 'Infrastructure Implementation' . This should include the
delivery of highways infrastructure, surface water drainage, grey infrastructure including utilities
provision, green and blue infrastructure, broadband, electric vehicle charging points, recreation
provision and social infrastructure and ensure coordination between phases of development .
Development at this allocation will be required to:
1.Deliver a broad mix of around 1,550 homes to diversify the type of accommodation across
the Simister, Bowlee and Birch and Langley areas. This should include an appropriate mix
of house types and sizes, accommodation for older people, plots for custom and self-build
and a mix of housing densities with higher densities in areas of good accessibility and
potential for improved public transport connectivity and lower densities adjacent to existing
villages where development will require sensitive design to respond to its context;
230 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Facilitate the required supporting transport services and infrastructure including:
i. An upgrade of the local highways network 
ii. Traffic restrictions on Simister Lane to prevent this route from being a form of
access/egress to and from the allocation;
iii. Improved public transport provision through the allocation (including Bus Rapid
Transit corridors) and close to the allocation (including potential Bus Rapid Transit
or Metrolink extension to Middleton) in order to serve the development; and 
iv. Other off-site highway works where these are necessary to ensure acceptable
traffic movement.
3.Deliver a network of safe and convenient cycling and walking routes through the allocation
designed in accordance with national and GM standards of design and construction and
local planning policy requirements;
4.Make provision for affordable housing in accordance with local planning policy requirements;
5. Make provision for a new two form entry primary school;
6. Make financial contribution towards off-site secondary school provision to meet the needs
generated by development;
7. Make provision for a new local centre in an accessible location which includes a range of
appropriate retail, health and community facilities and ensure it is integrated with existing
communities;
8. Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, broadband and electric
charging points in accordance with relevant joint plan or local planning policies;
9.Ensure the design and layout allows for effective integration with surrounding communities,
including active travel inks and connections to local services and the new areas of
employment at Heywood/Pilsworth (JPA1.1);
10.Retain, enhance and replace existing recreation facilities where required and make provision
for new recreation facilities to meet the needs of the prospective residents in accordance
with local planning policy requirements;
11. Make provision for new, high quality, publicly accessible, multi-functional green and blue
infrastructure within the allocation to provide health benefits to residents as well as creating
a visually attractive environment and providing linkages to the sites wider drainage strategy
in accordance with Policy JP-G 2 'Green Infrastructure Network'  and Policy JP-G 8 'Standards
for Greener Places' .This should include enhancement of existing watercourses throughout
the allocation;
12. Minimise impacts on and provide net gains for biodiversity assets within the allocation,
including the Bradley Hall Farm SBI, in accordance withPolicy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement
of Biodiversity and Geodiversity' ;
13. Ensure that any development is safe from and mitigates for potential flood risk from all
sources including Whittle Brook, Castle Brook and Brightley Brook and does not increase
the flood risk elsewhere. The delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate
flood risk and drainage strategy which ensures co-ordination between phases of
development;
GMCONSULT.ORG 231Places for Everyone14. Ensure that sustainable drainage systems are fully incorporated into the development to
manage surface water and control the rate of surface water run-off, discharging in accordance
with the hierarchy of drainage options. Where possible, natural SuDS techniques should
be utilised, prioritising the use of ponds, swales and other infrastructure which mimic natural
drainage and be designed as multi-functional green infrastructure connecting to the wider
green and blue infrastructure network in accordance with Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the
Water Environment' and nationally recognised SuDS design standards. Proposals to
discharge to the public sewer will need to submit clear evidence demonstrating why
alternative options are not available;
15. Make appropriate provision for the long term management and maintenance of areas of
green infrastructure, biodiversity features, other areas of open space and sustainable
drainage features;
16. Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of
1,000 sqm / 50 dwellings or more;
17. Incorporate appropriate noise and air quality mitigation measures and high quality
landscaping along the M60 motorway corridors and local road network if required within
the allocation;
18. Incorporate necessary remediation measures in areas affected by contamination and
previously worked for landfill purposes;
19. Protect and enhance the heritage and archaeological assets within the vicinity of the
allocation and their setting in accordance with the findings and recommendations of the
assessment of heritage assets that forms part of the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated
assessment submitted as part of the planning application process.
11.36 The delivery of this urban extension has transformational potential in enabling new housing
development of 1,550 units, community facilities and new transport infrastructure to come
forward in what is currently an area that contains significant pockets of high deprivation. Any
housing development within the allocation will be required to make provision for recreation
and affordable housing to meet the needs of the prospective residents in line with Local Plan
policy requirements, across a range of housing types, sizes and tenures.
11.37 The delivery of such a major opportunity will require significant investment in infrastructure
if it is to be successful and sustainable. In particular, the allocation will need to benefit from
a wide range of public transport improvements in order to promote sustainable travel and
improve linkages to new employment opportunities at JPA1.1 Heywood/Pilsworth.This could
potentially include Bus Rapid Transit linking Manchester City Centre to the Northern Gateway
allocation. The allocation may also benefit from a potential Bus Rapid Transit or Metrolink
extension to Middleton. Higher density development close to these corridors will help support
the viability of new services. These public transport improvements will also need to be
supported by safe and attractive walking and cycling routes to promote healthier and more
sustainable shorter journeys to work.
232 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.38 The development of a large-scale community such as this will require new facilities for
residents such as shops, health facilities, community facilities and recreational areas.These
will be provided in accessible locations within walking distance of homes. In addition, demand
on school places will also increase and therefore investment in new facilities for primary and
secondary education will be required.
11.39 The semi-rural nature of this part of Greater Manchester and the character and setting of
small villages such as Simister and Bowlee will be respected and will inform the layout,
density and built form of development in these locations. Areas of open land and green
infrastructure will be incorporated to maintain the identities of these places, including the
retention of historic field boundaries, routeways and woodlands where practical. The allocation
also includes existing areas of biodiversity value, notably the streams and flushes at Bradley
Hall Farm which form a Site of Biological Importance in the eastern part of the allocation.
This SBI and other areas of identified biodiversity value should be taken fully into account
in the masterplanning of the site.
11.40 Delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy
which ensures co-ordination between phases of development.  Measures such as rainwater
recycling, green roofs, water butts and permeable driveway surfaces should be considered
to mitigate the impact of potential flood risk both within and beyond the site boundaries.  As
a green and blue infrastructure network will provide more sustainable options discharge
surface water, only foul flows should connect with the public sewer.
11.41 Traffic to and from the site is likely to include travel on the M62 which passes close to
designated European sites and, as such, a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment
will be required for planning applications involving 1,000 or more sqm or 50 or more residential
units.
11.42 Given that the site is located adjacent to the M62 motorway, there may be a need to
incorporate a buffer between the allocation and the motorway to serve multiple functions
including air and noise mitigation and high quality landscaping. Mitigation through tree
planting could be undertaken in conjunction with proposals for the Northern Forest.
11.43 There are a number of assets of historical significance in proximity to the allocation, and
whilst outside the allocation boundary, any development would need to consider the impact
on their setting through the completion of a Heritage Impact Assessment.
GMCONSULT.ORG 233Places for EveryoneStakehill
Policy JP Allocation 2
Stakehill
Picture 11.6 JPA 2 Stakehill
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 150,000 sqm of high quality, adaptable, employment floorspace within a
‘green’  employment park setting, with a focus on suitable provision for advanced
manufacturing and other key growth sectors, taking advantage of its accessible location
and proximity to Junction 20 of the M62, and complementing the other opportunities within
the North-East Growth Corridor;
2.Provide around 1,680 high quality homes, including larger, higher value properties, to support
the new jobs created within the North-East Growth Corridor and create a sustainable and
high quality extension to the urban area;
3. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development.The scale of the residential
development on the northern part of the allocation provides an opportunity to adopt a 'garden
village' approach to create a locally distinctive residential offer;
234 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone4. Ensure that the design of the scheme preserves or enhances the setting of the listed St
John's Church and war memorial in line with the findings and recommendations of the
Historic Environment Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated
assessment submitted as part of the planning application process;
5.Protect and enhance archaeological features and where appropriate carry out archaeological
evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trial trenching for areas specified in
the Stakehill Historic Environment Assessment 2020 to understand where especially
significant archaeology must be preserved in situ;
6. Have regard to views from Tandle Hill Country Park in terms of the design, landscaping
and boundary treatment in order to minimise the visual impact as much as possible;
7. Retain a strategic area of Green Belt between the A627(M) spur and Thornham Lane to
maintain separation between the urban areas of Rochdale and Middleton;
8. Support the delivery of improved public transport to and within the area to promote more
sustainable travel and improve linkages to the employment opportunities from surrounding
residential areas;
9. Contribute to the proposed new railway station at Slattocks which is currently being
investigated by TfGM and ensure that new development is designed in a way to maximise
the benefits of the new rail station through the creation of high quality walking and cycling
routes;
10. Provide good quality walking and cycling routes to connect to new and existing residential
areas and local transport hubs in order to encourage sustainable short journeys to work
and promote healthier lifestyles;
11. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
12.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
13. Improve access arrangements in and around Stakehill Industrial Estate to assist in the
separation of residential and employment traffic as much as possible and to make appropriate
provision for lorry parking;
14. Ensure that the existing settlements and pockets of housing are taken fully into account
through the masterplanning of the area;
15. Deliver high quality landscaping and green and blue infrastructure within the site both to
enhance the attractiveness of the scheme and provide opportunities for recreation to both
residents and people working in the area. This should include good quality boundary
treatment, particularly on the boundary separating the development area and land to be
retained as Green Belt to the south to provide an attractive defensible Green Belt boundary;
16. Retain and where possible enhance areas of biodiversity within the area, notably the
Rochdale Canal Site of Special Scientific Interest, along with the existing brooks and ponds
within the site;
17. Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of
1,000 sqm / 50 dwellings or more;
18.Contribute and make provision for additional primary and secondary school places to serve
the development. This will include provision of land and financial contributions to deliver
the expansion of Thornham St John's Primary School located within the allocation;
GMCONSULT.ORG 235Places for Everyone19.Given the scale of the new housing provision it will be necessary for the proposal to deliver
social infrastructure to ensure that the needs of new and existing communities are properly
met; and 
20. Incorporate appropriate noise and air quality mitigation taking account of the M62 and
A627(M) motorway corridors.
11.44 Stakehill provides a significant opportunity for both Oldham and Rochdale to contribute to
the future economic growth of Greater Manchester, capitalising on its proximity and
connectivity to the motorway and rail network. It has the potential to provide a significant
contribution to the sub-regional requirement for employment floorspace within key growth
sectors and attract additional investment and economic activity to the area.The scheme will
also generate a range of benefits for the local and wider economy. It would involve the loss
of Green Belt, however, it offers an excellent location, as part of the North-East Growth
Corridor and Northern Powerhouse with connections through to Liverpool and Leeds. The
level of housing provided will contribute towards the delivery of our housing need, diversifying
our housing stock and supporting the proposed employment opportunities across the
North-East Growth Corridor and elsewhere.
11.45 The location of the housing and employment development within the allocation takes account
of existing land uses and the potential to separate out residential and industrial traffic. The
residential development will be focused to the north of Thornham Lane and to the south of
the A627(M) spur. The employment development will be located to the south and east of
the existing industrial estate.
11.46 Stakehill Industrial Estate has a strong reputation as an employment location and has
excellent access to the motorway network.  Public transport on the western edge of the site
is good but public transport access, particularly from Oldham borough, requires
improvement. This existing successful business park can provide a focus for a significantly
expanded employment offer in this area which will complement the other opportunity areas
within the North-East Growth Corridor gateway providing different types of premises and
appeal to a wide range of uses and sectors.
11.47 As well as the expansion of the employment offer, an opportunity exists to deliver a significant
amount of housing that will both support the new employment development and boost the
supply of housing in this part of the sub-region. The site lies between the successful and
attractive neighbourhoods of Chadderton and Slattocks. This area is characterised by
generally good accessibility, a number of popular schools and proximity to a range of retail
facilities and other services.
11.48 There will need to be significant public transport improvement to and within the site as a
whole.The site lies between Castleton and Mills Hill railway stations, and walking and cycling
connections to these two stations should be improved as part of the development. While the
edges of the site nearest to these stations are potentially within walking distance it is unlikely
that such trips will be made without additional supporting bus services that link these modes
of transport. A new southerly link to Mills Hill station could form part of any expansion of the
236 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneindustrial estate. The scale of development proposed does offer the opportunity to deliver
significant public transport improvements that will improve sustainable travel options to both
existing and future residents and workers within the site.This includes the potential to deliver
a new rail station at Slattocks on the Calder Valley line along with an associated Park & Ride
facility. This opportunity is currently being investigated further by TfGM and a contribution
from the proposed development would assist in the delivery of this new station.  Investment
in public transport infrastructure or services will also be needed to provide access to the
sites employment opportunities for Oldham residents, which needs to be investigated further
by TfGM. Investment in public transport and associated infrastructure should be
complemented by a high quality pedestrian and cycling network that links the new
development to surrounding neighbourhoods and key services/facilities.
11.49 The development would involve the loss of an area of Green Belt but an area of Green Belt
is to be retained between the A627(M) spur and Thornham Lane to provide some separation
between the urban areas of Rochdale and Middleton. Whilst the development does not
encroach into the areas around Tandle Hill Country Park, the relative proximity of some
development to the park means it is vital that development provides high quality landscaping
and open spaces to create an attractive environment and increase opportunities for links
between the site for both informal and formal recreation. The impact of the development on
views from Tandle Hill Country Park should be given particular consideration. As well as
landscaping, any development should demonstrate how the design and materials used within
the development can help mitigate against any visual impact. The site does include areas
of biodiversity in the form of Sites of Biological Importance, ponds and brooks. These and
other nature conservation features should be retained and, where possible, enhanced.
11.50 A proportion of the site to the south is also to be retained as Green Belt, providing an
opportunity to significantly enhance the biodiversity value of the site and for the incorporation
of sustainable drainage systems integrated as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure
network reflecting its ‘green’  employment park setting.
11.51 As the development site forms part of the setting of the Church of St John, a Grade II listed
building, the masterplan must seek to retain key views to and from the designated heritage,
specifically those from the footpath on Church Avenue. The masterplan will also consider
these sensitivities in terms of design, density and provision of green space to preserve the
tranquillity of the Church. Similarly, where practical, historic field boundaries as highlighted
by the Historic Environment Assessment 2020 should be retained and incorporated in to the
masterplan to help retain the rural character of the site. These areas and assets identified
by the Stakehill Historic Environment Assessment 2020 will require a programme of
archaeological investigation. These sites will be considered through the detailed
masterplanning of this site and any subsequent planning application.
11.52 It is considered that by 2040 these developments may lead to traffic increases on the M62
motorway because of their size and relative proximity to the motorway. The M62 passes
close to designated National and European sites known to be susceptible to traffic pollution,
GMCONSULT.ORG 237Places for Everyoneparticularly nitrate deposition. As such, a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment
will be required for planning applications involving 1,000 or more sqm or 50 or more residential
units.
11.53 The wider opportunity area is adjacent to and includes areas existing development. Any
proposed scheme should have full regard to these areas and consider them through the
detailed masterplanning of the area.
11.54 The scale of residential development means that significant community, leisure and
recreational infrastructure will have to be provided as part of a comprehensive scheme. This
will include the provision of additional school places as well as flexible community and medical
facilities, facilities for sport and recreation and possibly a small local centre.
11.55 In terms of primary school provision, St John’ s CE Thornham Primary School is located
within the site on the northern side of Thornham Lane. There is an opportunity to expand
this small, village school to assist in meeting demand for primary school places generated
from the proposed development and provide a highly accessible school for new residents.
238 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneMedipark/Timperley Wedge
Picture 11.7 JPA 3 Medipark/Timperley Wedge
11.56 Development of this area will take advantage of its well-connected location to create a new
living and working experience providing new homes, jobs and training opportunities to the
benefit of both new and surrounding communities through two allocations:
Medipark (See Policy JP Allocation 3.1 'Medipark' )
Timperley Wedge (See Policy JP Allocation 3.2 'Timperley Wedge' ) 
11.57 Together, Medipark and Timperley Wedge is one of the very best opportunities for a strategic
location in the UK, offering outstanding potential to help the City Region to achieve its
ambition. The allocation is already a well-connected location adjoining Manchester Airport
and the M56 Motorway, on the edge of one of the UK’ s major growing and thriving cities,
and close to the countryside of Cheshire.
11.58 In the future the Location will also benefit from HS2 which is one of the most significant
transport infrastructure projects in the UK over recent decades and together with Northern
Powerhouse Rail (NPR) will provide high speed rail connections to London via Birmingham
GMCONSULT.ORG 239Places for Everyoneand between the cities of the north. The economic benefits of HS2 and NPR will support
existing businesses, inward investment and job creation and the advantages this gives to
new development in this location are hugely significant.
11.59 Strategically situated between Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Wythenshawe
Hospital, Manchester Airport and Airport City, these allocations form part of the Manchester
Airport Strategic Location (Policy JP-Strat 10 'Manchester Airport').The significance of these
locations collectively, as regards delivering in an integrated manner development which
meets the Joint Plan area's needs, is considerable.The Global Logistics (Policy JP Allocation
10 'Global Logistics' ) allocation for B2/B8 will meet a different but complementary need to
Medipark with more specialist knowledge based business and the Timperley Wedge will
serve with the B1 Employment.
11.60 Significant transport improvements are required and will need to be subject to further more
detailed traffic assessment and masterplanning for each of the allocations.
11.61 There is significant potential to provide strong green infrastructure connections between the
two allocations, especially along new walking and cycling routes and across and along in
particular Fairywell Brook both north into Manchester and south towards Manchester Airport
and into the wider countryside south of Timperley Wedge into Cheshire and north along
Timperley Brook towards Altrincham.
240 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP Allocation 3.1
Medipark
Picture 11.8 JPA 3.1 Medipark
Development on this site will be required to:
1. Deliver about 86,000 sqm B1-focused floorspace;
2.Development should be configured to take advantage of transport infrastructure in the area
including the need to accommodate and contribute to the delivery of the proposed Metrolink
Manchester Airport Line Western Leg extension;
3. Deliver a new spine road through the site with connections to the existing road network;
4. Facilitate improvements to the surrounding Strategic, Primary and Local Road Networks,
including entry / egress and links to the strategic highway network, to enable safe access
to and from the area;
5. Improve access to the site by providing links to local cycling and walking networks where
appropriate;
6.Complement the wider Roundthorn Medipark development and the development proposed
in Timperley Wedge;
7. Ensure development within the site should not impact the listed buildings of Newall Green
or the adjacent playing field;
GMCONSULT.ORG 241Places for Everyone8.Incorporate suitable site mitigation to account for the historic landscape features within the
site; and 
9. Reflect the sequential approach to flood risk management, focusing more sensitive
development furthest from Fairywell Brook. High quality natural landscaping, including the
provision of native species, should be delivered adjoining the brook to help mitigate flood
risk and promote biodiversity and green infrastructure.
11.62 The opportunity that this area offers because of its proximity to Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust  (Wythenshawe Hospital) and the wider Roundthorn Medipark Enterprise
Zone development is significant. By attracting investment from knowledge-based industries
to a high quality development, this area can provide a major boost to the economy of the
city and the wider region. This is a singular location close to a major hospital and with
improvements to local transport infrastructure, including Metrolink, it can play its full part in
maximising future economic growth.The proposed arrival of HS2, including the airport station
a short distance to the south, will provide a further stimulus to economic activity in this area.
11.63 The area’ s location within open countryside and adjoining Fairywell Brook means that a high
quality and forward-looking design will be needed. Future flood risk management from the
brook should be considered from the outset to minimise risk to the new development, as
well as affording opportunities to improve amenity and biodiversity, helping to conserve and
enhance elements of the natural environment. Attractive green corridors through the
development will encourage active travel through the site, as well as creating a positive
environment for wildlife. Moreover, development can be planned to provide mitigation that
takes account of the site’ s historic landscape elements.
242 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP Allocation 3.2
Timperley Wedge
Picture 11.9 JPA 3.2 Timperley Wedge
GMCONSULT.ORG 243Places for EveryonePicture 11.10 Timperley Wedge Allocation Policy Plan
Development of the site will be required to:
244 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1. Be in accordance with a masterplan or SPD agreed by the Local Planning Authority to
ensure the site is planned and delivered in a coordinated and comprehensive manner;
Residential De velopment
2. Deliver around 2,500 homes of which 1,700 will be in the plan period as set out in the
Allocation Policy Plan;
3. Deliver high quality residential units which are accessible, integrated with the existing
community and well designed to create a genuine sense of place;
4. Deliver a range of house types, sizes, layouts and tenures through a place-led approach;
5.Deliver residential development at an average density of 35 dph in the northern part of the
allocation area, reflecting the existing urban area. Higher density development at an average
of 70 dph will be appropriate close to the new local centre, Davenport Green Metrolink stop
and the HS2 / NPR Manchester Airport station;
6. Provide a minimum of 45% affordable housing throughout the site;
7.Make specific provision for self-build custom build plots, subject to local demand as set out
in the Council's self-build register;
Emplo yment De velopment
8.Deliver around 60,000 sqm B1 office employment land within a mixed employment residential
area set out in the Allocation Policy Plan; of which 15,000 sqm will be in the Plan period;
9. Create legible streets and space within the employment area with attractive buildings that
respond positively to the landscape and provide accessible linkages to residential areas
and the local centre;
10. Create employment and training opportunities for local people, in particular through the
construction phase, to be set out in a Local Labour Agreement in accordance with Local
Plan policies;
Deliv ery and Phasing
11. Co-ordinate the phasing of development with the delivery of infrastructure on the site,
ensuring sustainable growth at this location;
12.Make a proportionate contribution, by means of an equalisation mechanism, to infrastructure
delivery. Detailed requirements will be set out in the masterplan/SPD;
Transpor t Integ ration and Accessibility
13. Deliver accessible streets which prioritise cycling, walking and public transport over the
private car;
14. Deliver a network of new safe cycling and walking routes through the allocation, including
enhancements of Brooks Drive and creating new/enhancing existing Public Rights of Way;
15. Accommodate and contribute to the delivery of the Manchester Airport Metrolink Line
Western Leg extension including Metrolink stop(s);
GMCONSULT.ORG 245Places for Everyone16.Deliver a new spine road through the site with connections to the existing road network and
local access to development sites, incorporating separate pedestrian and cycling space
and provision for future bus rapid transit to improve east west connections between
Altrincham and Manchester Airport;
17. Make the necessary improvements to the Strategic, Primary and Local Road Networks to
enable the proposed level of development and mitigate the impact of increased vehicle
numbers, including:
i. Road Widening at Dobbinetts Lane 
ii. Junction improvement to Thorley Lane/Runger Lane 
iii. New roundabout junction at Thorley Lane/Green Lane/Clay Lane 
iv. Contributions to improvements at M56 Junction 3 and Terminal 2 roundabout 
Comm unity F acilities
18. Provide a new local centre with convenience shopping facilities as a hub for local services
in the region of 3,000 sqm of retail floorspace close to the Davenport Green stop of the
Metrolink Western Leg extension;
19.Provide additional primary school places, including a new primary school and contribute to
the provision of secondary school places;
20. Provide and contribute to new health facilities to support the new community;
Green Belt
21. Create defensible Green Belt boundaries utilising, where appropriate, existing landscape
features;
22.Mitigate any impact on and improve the environmental quality and accessibility of remaining
Green Belt land;
Green Infr astructure
23. Provide a significant area of enhanced and accessible green infrastructure (including new
public rights of way) within a rural park to remain in the Green Belt identified on the Allocation
Policy Plan, ensuring protection of heritage assets in this area;
24.Create wildlife corridors and stepping stone habitats within the development areas to support
nature recovery networks, provide ecosystem services and accessible green infrastructure
including green links:
i. From Clay Lane through to Brooks Drive and Fairywell Brook 
ii. Through Davenport Green Ponds SBI to Medipark
25. Provide a range of types and sizes of open space within the allocation boundary in
accordance with the Council's open space standards, including local parks and gardens;
natural and semi-natural greenspace, equipped and informal play areas; outdoor sports
pitches and allotment plots, ensuring arrangements for their long term maintenance;
246 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone26. Protect Manor Farm identified in the Allocation Policy Plan and promote its use for future
sports provision including, where appropriate, new access and car parking;
27. Promote improvements to leisure facilities at Hale Country Club;
Natur al En vironment
28. Protect and enhance natural environment assets within the site and surrounding area,
including SBIs, woodland and hedgerows;
29. Deliver a clear and measurable net gain in biodiversity, including provision for long-term
management of habitats and geological features which may include SUDs systems of high
biodiversity value created as part of the overall flood risk and drainage strategy;
30.Protect and enhance the habitats and corridors along Fairywell Brook and Timperley Brook
to improve the existing water quality and seek to achieve 'good' status as required under
the North West River Basin management plan (2019);
Landscape
31. Retain important landscape views and landscape features such as ponds, woodland and
hedgerows and use these features to develop a distinct sense of place;
32. Provide appropriate landscape buffers across the site, including a substantial landscape
buffer along the Green Belt boundary to mitigate the impact on the rural landscape to the
south west of the allocation area;
Design
33. Ensure new development is place-led, creative and contextual in its response, respecting
the local character and positive local design features of the area;
34. Be in accordance with the Council's adopted Design Guide embracing strategic design
principles, including creating connected communities, redefining streets, delivering inclusive
characterful design and responding to heritage;
35.Respect the urban/rural fringe setting in the design of the development, in terms of its height,
scale and siting and demonstrate high standards of urban design;
Histor ic En vironment
36. Conserve and enhance the historic environment in line with the findings and
recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence
base and any updated HIA submitted as part of the planning application process ;
37. Protect and enhance archaeological features and, where appropriate, carry out
archaeological evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trail trenching for
areas specified in the Timperley Wedge Heritage Assessment 2020 to understand where
especially significant archaeology must be preserved in situ;
Utilities , Environmental Protection and Climate Change
GMCONSULT.ORG 247Places for Everyone38. Mitigate the impacts of climate change and utilise the most energy and water efficient
technologies to achieve zero carbon by 2028;
39. Explore and deliver the most appropriate solutions to providing decentralised low carbon
heat and energy as part of new residential and employment development. This will include
exploring the potential for the development of district heat, cooling and energy networks,
energy centres, the implementation of renewable and low carbon heat and energy
technologies in design and the co-location of potential heat and energy customers and
suppliers;
40. Ensure new development maximizes on-site renewable energy measures in line with the
energy hierarchy, for example, via solar PV and other low carbon technologies, linked to
the provision of and supply to electric vehicle charging infrastructure;
41.Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, full fibre broadband and
electric vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant Places for Everyone or Local
Plan policies;
42. Mitigate flood risk and surface water management issues including provision of SUDS
through the design and layout of development in accordance with a flood risk, foul and
surface water management strategy. The allocation-wide drainage strategy should be
prepared after having fully assessed site topography, flood risk, existing water features and
naturally occurring flow paths to identify where water will naturally accumulate.The strategy
will demonstrate how each phase interacts with other phases of development and further
detail will be set out in the Masterplan / SPD;
43. Incorporate on-site measures to deal with surface water and control the rate of surface
water run off. Planning applications will be expected to apply the full surface hierarchy and
ensure water is managed close to where it falls by mimicking the natural drainage solution;
44. Demonstrate that development proposals will not adversely affect existing water supply
infrastructure that passes through the site. This will include consideration of any changes
in ground levels and management of the construction process;
45. Seek to actively reduce the impact of potential flood risk both within and beyond the site;
46.Incorporate appropriate noise and air quality mitigation, such as woodland buffers, particularly
along the M56 motorway, the Metrolink and HS2/NPR corridor in line with Environmental
(Noise) Regulations;
Safeguarded Land - HS2 Gro wth Area
47. The land identified to the south and west of the HS2 Airport station as shown on the
Allocation Policy Plan, although removed from the Green Belt, is not allocated for
development at the present time;
48. The land is safeguarded in accordance with Policy JP-G 11 'Safeguarded Land' ;
49. Any future allocation is subject to an assessment that the land directly contributes to the
Greater Manchester HS2 / NPR Growth Strategy and it should only be developed after
completion of development set out in the Timperley Wedge masterplan/SPD and following
the delivery of HS2 Airport station; and
50. Should a HS2 Airport station not be developed, the land will return to Green Belt following
a future Plan review.
248 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.64 Development of the site will require a coordinated approach between all landowners and
developers and Trafford Council is committed to working with stakeholders to bring forward
a detailed Masterplan / SPD which provides a framework for the sustainable delivery of a
new community at Timperley Wedge.
Residential de velopment
11.65 The Timperley Wedge allocation will deliver around 1,700 homes in the plan period and
around 2,500 in total. In the northern areas of the allocation site, development will deliver
medium density housing to be in keeping with the existing character of the area. Lower
density is not considered to be appropriate as this would not be an efficient use of land.
Higher density housing, including apartments, will be appropriate close to the local centre,
within the mixed housing and employment area to the south east of the allocation between
the Local Centre and the HS2/NPR Airport Station. The density of areas closest to Green
Belt and areas of ecological or historic importance may need to be lower subject to detailed
design.
11.66 The site is expected to deliver affordable housing across all parts of the site at a minimum
of 45% in line with the requirements identified in the Housing Needs Assessment 2019.The
site offers an opportunity to deliver affordable housing on a greenfield site and make an
important contribution to addressing the acute affordable housing need in Trafford.
11.67 There are a number of existing pockets of residential development across the site some of
which contain locally distinctive design features. New development should therefore be
designed so that it is sensitively integrated into these areas.
Emplo yment de velopment
11.68 Employment development will deliver around 15,000 sqm in the plan period and  60,000
sqm in total. This will be located in the south eastern area of the site at Davenport Green
as a mixed use area with some higher density residential units. It will support the expansion
of Manchester Airport and Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Wythenshawe
Hospital. This land is already allocated for high quality office use.
11.69 The area is close to areas of deprivation, including Wythenshawe in Manchester and
Broomwood in Trafford and it will also be accessible by bus and tram to other areas of
deprivation in Trafford. Targets for the training and employment of local people could,
therefore, be agreed between the developers, the local colleges and the Local Authority to
ensure a realistic number of local people benefit from training and new jobs as a result of
the development.
Deliv ery and phasing
11.70 Approximately 800 new residential units and 45,000 sqm of employment land have been
phased for delivery beyond the plan period as the development is proposed on land located
within the HS2 construction boundary and therefore will be unavailable for a temporary period
whilst the HS2 route, Airport Station and southern tunnel portal are under construction. It is
GMCONSULT.ORG 249Places for Everyonetherefore anticipated that this area will come forward following the completion of HS2 Airport
Station and the build-out is very likely to extend beyond the Places for Everyone plan period.
The timescales for development in this area are, in part, dependent on the HS2 timescales.
The area of land required for construction may therefore be altered if changes are made to
the overall HS2 construction programme. However delivery of development is not dependent
on HS2/NPR and in the unlikely event a rail scheme did not come forward, an alternative
option for delivery of development in this area has been considered and is achievable.
11.71 All areas of development will be expected to make a proportionate contribution to necessary
infrastructure, including transport, social and green infrastructure. Further details on supporting
infrastructure requirements will be set out in the masterplan or SPD together with information
on trigger points for when infrastructure such as road and junction improvements, a new
school and the spine road will be required to be linked to the development trajectory.
Transpor t integ ration and accessibility
11.72 The delivery of new and improved public transport and active travel infrastructure is integral
to the success of the Timperley Wedge allocation enabling modal shift from car travel to
sustainable travel modes. The Western Leg Metrolink extension will provide links to
Manchester Airport, as well as to employment areas in Trafford Park and other main
employment areas in the borough and GM. This will benefit both existing and new residents
providing improved access to jobs and services. A proportionate contribution towards the
Metrolink extension infrastructure is, therefore, appropriate and will need to be agreed with
TfGM.
11.73 The road network currently consists of country lanes which are unable to support the proposed
development but will be enhanced to promote them as cycling and walking routes promoting
healthier lifestyles. These, together with new routes, will provide links through the allocation
and to Medipark, Hale Barns, Timperley and beyond. A new spine road will provide safe
capacity for car use and link to the surrounding road network.The route identified is indicative
at this stage and further work on the most appropriate alignment will be required as part of
future masterplanning / planning applications. It is envisaged the spine road will be delivered
incrementally by the development as and when it requires access from it. The spine road
will have a safe route for walking, cycling and bus rapid transit and will contribute to improving
east/west connectivity between Altrincham and the Airport, as well as the wider southern
Greater Manchester area. The Timperley Wedge/Medipark Transport Locality Assessment
has determined the key necessary transport interventions and supporting interventions
needed to mitigate the impact of the development. These include interventions specific to
each allocation but also shared interventions between the allocations.
11.74 An appropriate proportioning of contributions between the allocations and individual
development plots together with more local interventions will need to be determined by
further masterplanning, detailed design and a Transport Assessment.
Comm unity F acilities
250 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.75 A new local centre close to the proposed Metrolink stop will be a hub for community
infrastructure and will service the needs of the community. The site will be an attractive
location for families, and it is anticipated that this will generate the need for a new primary
school located close to the local centre. Secondary schools within the area can accommodate
the new pupils but will require a contribution per pupil place. Small high street shops and
community facilities including health facilities and a local supermarket would also be
appropriate within the local centre.
Green Belt
11.76 The development will involve the removal of some land from the Green Belt, however, a
considerable area of Green Belt within the allocation boundary will remain. This area of
retained Green Belt will maintain the separation of Timperley and Hale, and will be enhanced
to improve green infrastructure functionality, creating new accessible recreation areas
particularly along the Timperley Brook and the large SBI areas.
11.77 Opportunities exist to enhance areas of SBI, existing woodland and hedgerows throughout
the allocation. The incorporation of ‘old’ (19th century or earlier origins) hedgerows within
development areas will help to enhance the sense of place of the local landscape. These
will also contribute to the green setting of development.
Green Infr astructure
11.78 Where green spaces remain in the part of the allocation area that is to be removed from the
Green Belt, there is a need to provide the highest level of protection in line with policies in
Trafford’ s Local Plan.
11.79 The allocation contains Bowdon Rugby Club along Clay Lane. As part of the development
proposals, it may be appropriate to look at opportunities to relocate the facilities within the
wider allocation area. Such proposals will be considered as part of future detailed
masterplanning work.
11.80 Manor Farm sports fields along Ridgeway Road are an existing valued community resource
and will be protected in line with policies in Trafford’ s Local Plan. The facilities have the
potential to be enhanced and more widely used with a new access created from Clay Lane.
11.81 Hale Country Club is looking to make improvements to its leisure facilities creating job
opportunities and providing a higher quality of leisure experience for local communities.
Natur al En vironment
11.82 The development will need to have regard to existing ecological features and should seek
to enhance these as part of the development.This includes the habitats and green corridors
along Fairywell Brook and Timperley Brook.
Landscape
GMCONSULT.ORG 251Places for Everyone11.83 An area of open land will remain alongside the allocation and development will therefore be
required to consider the landscape setting and enhance the transition between the urban
edge and the open countryside having regard to views / vistas into and out of the site.
Design
11.84 Development will need to set a new high quality design standard for this area and should
draw upon the guidance in the Council’ s adopted Design Guide. Specific parameters for the
development of the site will be set out in the Masterplan / SPD.
Histor ic En vironment
11.85 The Timperley Wedge Historic Environment Assessment 2020 considered the characterisation
of the land in respect to the known archaeological, built heritage and historic landscape
within the allocation. It assessed the potential for the development to affect designated and
non-designated heritage assets, their settings and important views, and this has been taken
into account in considering appropriate quantums of development for the site. The area of
highest archaeological potential is within the south-western portion of the site. Although this
particular area remains in the Green Belt there is potential for enhancement as part of
development proposals.
11.86 Areas of particular sensitivity are the Deer Park and listed structures including Davenport
Green Farmhouse, Hall and Barn.The Assessment makes recommendations for mitigation,
and identifies opportunities for enhancement. Further archaeological investigation and a
Heritage Impact Assessment will be required as part of future planning applications to
understand the heritage significance of these areas. A suitable mitigation strategy should
be developed which also identifies opportunities to enhance the heritage assets.
Utilities , environmental protection and climate change
11.87 Opportunities will be explored to maximise the potential of the Timperley Brook and Fairywell
Brook in terms of urban flood management.The Brooks currently have a rating of ‘moderate’
under the North West River Basin Management Plan (2019), the development should seek
opportunities to improve this to ‘good’.
11.88 A high quality, coordinated drainage strategy will be required which is integrated with the
green and blue environment and which is a key component of the new high quality design
standard for this area.
11.89 Landowners and developers will be expected to work together in the interest of sustainable
drainage.Where necessary, the strategy must be updated and agreed with the local planning
authority to reflect any changing circumstances between each phase of development.
11.90 The incorporation of a swale adjacent to the spine road has the potential to reduce surface
water runoff.
252 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.91 Downstream from this allocation there is an area with an existing risk of flooding and as such
the development of this site has the potential to take a strategic approach to flood risk
management and provide additional opportunities for upstream storage. Further investigation
is needed into this as open areas of water in this location are a risk for bird strike due to the
close proximity of Manchester Airport.
11.92 Noise mitigation such as fencing and bunds will ensure areas like the M56, Metrolink line
and HS2 are not seen to be bad neighbours to development.
Safeguarded Land - HS2 Gro wth Area
11.93 The Greater Manchester HS2/NPR Growth Strategy identifies the opportunities of this
strategically important and well-connected location adjacent to the HS2 Airport station. The
exceptional circumstances for taking this land out of the Green Belt are directly related to
the potential this land has to capitalise directly on the economic benefit brought by HS2. The
south eastern area of the allocation, adjacent to the HS2 station, has therefore been removed
from the Green Belt to support the delivery of the wider Greater Manchester HS2 Growth
Strategy ambitions.
11.94 In the longer term this area may also benefit from Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) (or an
equivalent project) which will deliver fast east west rail connections across the north, further
enhancing public transport connections to the station.
11.95 The area around the Manchester Airport HS2 Station has been removed from the Green
Belt, but will only be considered a sustainable location after delivery of HS2 Airport Station.
It is likely much of this land will be utilised to support HS2 during construction but after the
delivery of HS2, land adjacent to the station could be available for potential housing and
employment development that will benefit from this sustainable, well connected location.
11.96 As part of the delivery of HS2 a substantial landscaped screen / buffer will form a boundary
to this land and housing on Brooks Drive and will form the new Green Belt boundary.
GMCONSULT.ORG 253Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Bolton
Picture 11.11 Bolton District Overview
254 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneBewshill Farm
Policy JP Allocation 4
Bewshill Farm
Picture 11.12 JPA 4 Bewshill
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Provide a location for around 21,000 sqm of industrial and warehousing floorspace to
compliment the adjacent development at Logistics North;
2. Take access from the Logistics North site;
3. Contribute to the existing Logistics North local link demand responsive transport service;
and
4. Provide high quality landscaping especially along its prominent frontage with the A6
11.97 The Logistics site at Over Hulton is currently experiencing considerable pressure for
development and it is expected that it will be completely committed by the early 2020s. This
site provides the opportunity for a modest extension to Logistics North. Development would
be for industrial and warehousing uses to reflect the uses at Logistics North.
GMCONSULT.ORG 255Places for EveryoneChequerbent North
Policy JP Allocation 5
Chequerbent North
Picture 11.13 JPA 5 Chequerbent North
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Provide a location for around 25,000 sqm of industrial and warehousing floorspace in the
Wigan to Bolton Growth Corridor;
2. Be accessed from the A6, with a potential access via Snydale Way, subject to detailed
highway design considerations;
3. Provide good quality access to the site by motor vehicle, public transport, walking and
cycling;
4. Provide financial contribution to mitigate impacts on the Local Road Network including
improvements to Chequerbent roundabout or other improvements identified through a
transport assessment;
5. Require high quality landscaping particularly to the west along Snydale Way and to the
north along the M61; trees and hedgerows along the eastern boundary should be retained
for screening
256 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.98 The Wigan to Bolton growth corridor is an excellent location for logistics and industrial uses.
Strong demand for employment uses in the M61 corridor is evidenced by the success of
other developments, including Logistics North.
11.99 There are no obstacles to the construction of the site and it could come forward within 5
years, subject to release from the Green Belt. Other developments in the vicinity may change
the layout of the Chequerbent roundabout before the development of this site, and the
requirements of this site to contribute to improving the roundabout will be considered at the
time of any planning application.
West of Wingates / M61 Junction 6
Policy JP Allocation 6
West of Wingates / M61 Junction 6
Picture 11.14 JPA 6 West of Wingates / M61 Junction 6
Development at this site will be required to:
GMCONSULT.ORG 257Places for Everyone1. Provide a location for around 440,000 sqm of employment floorspace, consisting of a mix
of large scale warehousing and advanced manufacturing;
2.Be in accordance with an agreed comprehensive masterplan that shows phasing within the
site, and which areas should or should not be developed;
3. Ensure that good quality road access is provided, allowing a link from the A6 to
Westhoughton;
4.Take advantage of the site's location near Junction 6 of the M61, whilst making sure that it
has no significantly adverse affect on the motorway or other surrounding roads;
5.Provide financial contributions to the enhancement of the highway network, public transport
and demand responsive services, cycling and walking or other improvements identified
through a transport assessment;
6.Ensure that the siting and scale of buildings minimises the impact on long range views and
that a high quality scheme of landscaping is implemented to minimise the prominence of
the development and its impact upon the surrounding landscape;
7.Protect the Site of Biological Importance at Four Gates from development and incorporate
very high levels of landscaping, including the retention of existing woodland, hedgerows
and ponds where practicable, so as to minimise the visual impact on the wider landscape
and mitigate against its environmental impacts;
8. Take into account the effects of air and noise pollution from the major highways in and
around the site;
9. Ensure that there is no undue adverse impact of light, air and noise pollution from the
development and its associated operations; and
10. Ensure that the integrity of the extensive network of existing rights of way network is
protected.
11.100 The Wigan to Bolton growth corridor is an excellent location for logistics and industrial uses.
Strong demand for employment uses in the M61 corridor is evidenced by the success of
other developments, including Logistics North.
11.101 The Logistics North site at Over Hulton is currently experiencing considerable pressure for
development, and it is expected that it will be completely committed by the early 2020s.
11.102 Developing the land to the west of Wingates would allow a continuing supply of land for
warehousing and distribution in the M61 corridor and a significant contribution to the economy
of Bolton and the northern part of Greater Manchester. The size of the site and its location
make it particularly appropriate for large scale distribution uses.
11.103 Development would require a new road across the site and to the north to link with junction
6 of the M61. The development should allow for a road to be continued south through
Bowlands Hey providing both a link from the site to the residential areas of Westhoughton
and a western bypass for Westhoughton. There would be the opportunity to provide bus
routes to link to nearby stations at Westhoughton and Horwich Parkway. This would allow
improved access for local residents to new employment opportunities on this site, and existing
employment areas such as Middlebrook and Lostock.
258 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Bury
Picture 11.15 Bury District Overview
GMCONSULT.ORG 259Places for EveryoneElton Reservoir
Policy JP Allocation 7
Elton Reservoir
Picture 11.16 JPA 7 Elton Reservoir
Any proposals for this allocation must be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan that
has been previously approved by the LPA. It shall include a clear phasing strategy as part of
an integrated approach to the delivery of infrastructure to support the scale of the whole
development in line with Policy JP-D 1 'Infrastructure Implementation' . This should include the
delivery of highways infrastructure, surface water drainage, grey infrastructure including utilities
provision, green and blue infrastructure, broadband, electric vehicle charging points, recreation
provision and social infrastructure and ensure coordination between phases of development.
Development within this allocation will be required to:
1. Deliver a broad mix of around 3,500 homes to diversify the type of accommodation in the
Bury and Radcliffe areas. This includes an appropriate mix of house types and sizes,
accommodation for older people, plots for custom and self-build and higher densities of
development in areas with good accessibility and with potential for improved public transport
260 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneconnectivity, particularly in the southern areas of the allocation. It is expected that around
1,900 of these homes will be delivered during the plan period;
2. Make provision for key enabling infrastructure including:
i. A north-south strategic spine road connecting Bury and Bolton Road (A58) to Bury
Road, Radcliffe that is designed to be suitable for buses, would not adversely impact
on the operation of Metrolink services, incorporates provision for active travel and is
in line with local design standards;
ii. A strategic connection from the spine road to Spring Lane, Radcliffe via the former
Coney Green High School site that is designed to be suitable for buses, incorporates
provision for active travel and is in line with local design standards;
iii. Other off-site highway works where these are necessary to ensure acceptable traffic
movement, including works in and around Radcliffe town centre; and
iv. Appropriate structural upgrades to Elton Reservoir, where required.
Residential development within the allocation will be limited until the above infrastructure
(or key elements of it) is implemented as necessary mitigation;
3. Make provision for major investment in public transport infrastructure to enable more
sustainable transport choices, including a requirement for a new Metrolink stop and
associated park and ride facilities in the Warth area;
4. Deliver a network of safe cycling and walking routes through the allocation linking
neighbourhoods with key destinations, designed and constructed in accordance with national
and GM standards and local planning policies;
5.Make provision for affordable housing in accordance with local planning policy requirements,
equivalent to at least 25% of the dwellings on the site and across a range of housing types
and sizes (with an affordable housing tenure split of 60% social or affordable rented and
40% affordable home ownership);
6. Make provision for two new two form entry primary schools to meet the needs of the
prospective school-aged residents;
7.Make provision for a new secondary school to meet the needs of the prospective school-aged
residents;
8. Make provision for new local centres in accessible locations which include a range of
appropriate retail, health and community facilities and ensure they are integrated with
existing communities;
9. Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, broadband and electric
vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant joint plan or local planning policies;
10.Ensure the design and layout allows for effective integration with surrounding communities,
including active travel links and connections to Inner Radcliffe, Radcliffe Town Centre,
Radcliffe Metrolink Station, local schools and Bury town centre;
11. Make provision for recreational facilities to meet the needs of the prospective residents in
accordance with local planning policy requirements;
12. Provide a significant green corridor which remains within the Green Belt and provides a
strategic amount of new, high quality and publicly accessible open space/parkland coupled
with a network of multi-functional green and blue infrastructure within the allocation to
GMCONSULT.ORG 261Places for Everyoneprovide health benefits to residents as well as creating a visually attractive environment and
providing linkages to the sites wider drainage strategy in accordance with Policy JP-G
2 'Green Infrastructure Network'  and Policy JP-G 8 'Standards for Greener Places' . This
should include the enhancement and the integration of the existing assets at Elton and
Withins Reservoirs and the Manchester, Bolton and Bury Canal to create an extensive
recreation, tourism and leisure asset;
13. Minimise impact on and provide net gains for biodiversity assets within the allocation in
accordance with Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and Geodiversity' ;
14. Ensure the allocation is safe from and mitigates for potential flood risk from all sources
including the River Irwell, Elton and Withins Reservoir and surface water and does not
increase the flood risk elsewhere. The delivery of the allocation should be guided by an
appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy which ensures co-ordination between phases
of development;
15. Ensure that sustainable drainage systems are fully incorporated into the development to
manage surface water and control the rate of surface water run-off, discharging in accordance
with the hierarchy of drainage options. Where possible, natural SuDS techniques should
be utilised, prioritising the use of ponds, swales and other infrastructure which mimic natural
drainage and be designed as multi-functional green infrastructure connecting to the wider
green and blue infrastructure network in accordance with Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the
Water Environment'  and nationally recognised SuDS design standards. Proposals to
discharge to the public sewer will need to submit clear evidence demonstrating why
alternative options are not available;
16. Make appropriate provision for the long-term management and maintenance of areas of
green infrastructure, biodiversity features, other areas of open space/parkland and
sustainable drainage features; and 
17. Protect and, where appropriate, enhance heritage and archaeological assets and their
setting, including the Old Hall Farmhouse Grade II listed building and wider historic character
of the surrounding area, in accordance with the findings and recommendations of the
assessment of heritage assets that forms part of the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated
assessment submitted as part of the planning application process.
11.104 The area around Elton Reservoir is of strategic significance, not only for Bury, but also in
the Greater Manchester context given that it will bring forward one of the joint plan's largest
contributions to future housing supply and provide a diverse mix of house types and affordable
housing provision for the Bury and Radcliffe areas.
11.105 The allocation is almost entirely surrounded by the existing urban area and is well-connected
to existing infrastructure although the delivery of around 3,500 new homes will require the
provision of significant levels of new and improved highways, public transport and other
supporting infrastructure. Although the allocation has the capacity to deliver a total of around
3,500 new homes, it is anticipated that around 1,900 of these will be delivered within the
plan period. Nevertheless, it is considered necessary to release the site in full at this stage
262 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonegiven that the scale of the proposed development means that it will need to be supported
by significant strategic infrastructure and this level of investment needs the certainty that
the remaining development will still be able to come forward beyond the plan period.
11.106 Fundamental to the delivery of residential development in this area will be the provision of
major highways infrastructure.This will include the need to incorporate a strategic north-south
spine road through the allocation connecting Bury and Bolton Road (A58) to Bury Road,
Radcliffe. This will provide an essential alternative to Bury Bridge for traffic travelling south
towards Manchester from the west Bury area. The new road must not adversely impact on
the operation of Metrolink services. Furthermore, in order to improve linkages to and assist
in the physical and social regeneration of inner Radcliffe and Radcliffe town centre, there is
a need to provide a significant spur road connecting the allocation to Spring Lane via the
former Coney Green High School site. The new highways infrastructure must be in place
before significant amounts of housing are developed and this should be reflected in the
Phasing Strategy.
11.107 Proposals for development of the allocation will be required to fully assess the impacts on
traffic generation on existing highways and, where necessary, to incorporate or facilitate the
delivery of the required improvements to other roads and junctions.
11.108 The Bury to Manchester Metrolink line runs along the eastern edge of this area and, in order
to reduce reliance on the car, development within the allocation will be required to incorporate
the provision of a new Metrolink stop and any associated park and ride facilities in the Warth
area. Direct walking and cycling connections to the Metrolink stop will also be necessary.
11.109 New development and investment in this area will need to be fully integrated into the existing
urban fabric and with surrounding neighbourhoods and communities. In doing so, any
development will need to facilitate new pedestrian and cycle links through the development
and into surrounding areas. This will include strong linkages to Inner Radcliffe and Radcliffe
town centre, Radcliffe Metrolink and local schools which, in addition to the spur road, will
further help in supporting on-going physical and social regeneration efforts in this area.
11.110 Development of this scale will significantly increase demands for education provision and,
as a result, the development will need to include the provision of new facilities for primary
and secondary education. It will also generate a need to make provision for appropriate local
centres that are more accessible to and meet the day-to-day needs of surrounding
communities.
11.111 A significant amount of the allocation is to remain as Green Belt.This provides the opportunity
to significantly enhance the green infrastructure and biodiversity value of the allocation,
enhance and incorporate existing assets such as the priority habitats and the water features
of Elton and Withins Reservoirs and the Manchester and Bolton and Bury Canal and improve
access to open space for the local community. The development will need to have regard
to existing features of ecological and wildlife interest by minimising impacts on and providing
net gains for biodiversity.
GMCONSULT.ORG 263Places for Everyone11.112 Delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy
which ensures co-ordination between phases of development.  Measures such as rainwater
recycling, green roofs, water butts and permeable driveway surfaces should be considered
to mitigate the impact of potential flood risk both within and beyond the site boundaries.  As
a green and blue infrastructure network will provide more sustainable options discharge
surface water, only foul flows should connect with the public sewer.
11.113 Structural upgrades may be required to Elton Reservoir to reflect any changes to the
categorisation of the reservoir as a result of new residential development being located
downstream.
11.114 There is one Grade II Listed building within the allocation – Old Hall Farmhouse and there
are a number of locally listed buildings and structures throughout the allocation. Any
development will be required to respect the setting of the Farmhouse and capitalise on
opportunities to draw on the contribution that the Farmhouse makes to the character of the
area. The completion of a Heritage Impact Assessment will be required.
264 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneSeedfield
Policy JP Allocation 8
Seedfield
Picture 11.17 JPA 8 Seedfield
Development in this allocation will be required to:
1. Deliver a broad mix of around 140 homes to diversify the type of accommodation in the
Seedfield area;
2.Make necessary improvements to local highway infrastructure to facilitate appropriate access
to the allocation and incorporate enhancements to public transport, pedestrian and cycle
routes in the area;
3.Make provision for affordable housing in accordance with local planning policy requirements,
equivalent to at least 25% of the dwellings on the site and across a range of housing types
and sizes (with an affordable housing tenure split of around 60% social or affordable rented
and 40% affordable home ownership);
4. Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, broadband and electric
vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant joint plan or local planning policies;
GMCONSULT.ORG 265Places for Everyone5.Ensure the design and layout allows for effective integration with surrounding communities,
including active travel links to Burrs Country Park and employment opportunities in Bury
Town Centre;
6.Retain and enhance and/or replace existing recreation facilities and make provision for new
recreation facilities to meet the needs of the prospective residents in accordance with local
planning policy requirements;
7.Retain and enhance the wildlife corridor and green infrastructure elements to the west and
south of the allocation and introduce appropriate mitigation measures to provide health
benefits to residents as well as creating a visually attractive environment in accordance
with Policy JP-G 2 'Green Infrastructure Network' and Policy JP-G 8 'Standards for Greener
Places' ;
8. Minimise impacts on and provide net gains for biodiversity assets within the allocation in
accordance with Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and Geodiversity' ;
9. Ensure the allocation is safe from and mitigates for, potential flood risk from all sources
including surface water, sewer flooding and groundwater. The delivery of the allocation
should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy which ensures
co-ordination between phases of development;
10. Ensure that sustainable drainage systems are fully incorporated into the development to
manage surface water and control the rate of surface water run-off, discharging in accordance
with the hierarchy of drainage options. Where possible, natural SuDS techniques should
be utilised, prioritising the use of ponds, swales and other infrastructure which mimic natural
drainage and be designed as multi-functional green infrastructure connecting to the wider
green and blue infrastructure network in accordance with Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the
Water Environment' and nationally recognised SuDS design standards. Proposals to
discharge to the public sewer will need to submit clear evidence demonstrating why
alternative options are not available ; and
11. Make appropriate provision for the long term management and maintenance of areas of
green infrastructure, biodiversity features and sustainable drainage features.
11.115 The allocation is well-connected to the existing urban area and is less than 2 kilometres from
Bury town centre. It provides an opportunity to deliver a diverse mix of house types and
affordable housing provision for the Seedfield area.
11.116 Around 50% of the allocation is previously-developed and a large part of the remaining land
is used as playing fields. In addition to making provision for the recreational needs of the
prospective residents of the new development, there will also be a requirement to provide
replacement sports pitch provision to off-set the loss of the existing playing fields within the
allocation. It is important that the replacement provision should be accessible, be of an
equivalent or better quantity and quality and laid out and usable prior to the commencement
of any development on the Seedfield allocation.
11.117 The attractive setting of the development will be further strengthened by the provision of
improved east/west pedestrian and cycle linkages, particularly to and from the expanding
leisure attractions at Burrs Country Park.
266 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.118 Delivery of the allocation should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy.
Measures such as rainwater recycling, green roofs, water butts and permeable driveway
surfaces should be considered to mitigate the impact of potential flood risk both within and
beyond the site boundaries.  As a green and blue infrastructure network will provide more
sustainable options discharge surface water, only foul flows should connect with the public
sewer.
GMCONSULT.ORG 267Places for EveryoneWalshaw
Policy JP Allocation 9
Walshaw
Picture 11.18 JPA 9 Walshaw
Any proposals for this allocation must be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan that
has been previously approved by the LPA. It shall include a clear phasing strategy as part of
an integrated approach to the delivery of infrastructure to support the scale of the whole
development in line with Policy JP-D 1 'Infrastructure Implementation' . This should include the
delivery of highways infrastructure, surface water drainage, grey infrastructure including utilities
provision, green and blue infrastructure, broadband, electric vehicle charging points, recreation
provision and social infrastructure and ensure coordination between phases of development.
Development in this allocation will be required to:
1. Deliver a broad mix of around 1,250 homes to diversify the type of accommodation in the
Walshaw area.This includes an appropriate mix of house types and sizes, accommodation
for older people, and provision of plots for custom and self-build housing;
268 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Make provision for significant new and improved highways infrastructure to enable the
proposed level of development to be accommodated, including:
i.The provision of a new strategic through road to enable an alternative to Church Street,
Bank Street and High Street that is designed to be suitable for buses and incorporates
active travel and is in line with local design standards;
ii. Off-site highway works where these are necessary to ensure acceptable traffic
movement from the allocation, including appropriate linkages to the Elton Reservoir
Link Road;
3. Make provision for major investment in public transport in order to encourage more
sustainable transport choices (including potential upgrade of existing bus services or a new
bus service linking Tottington - Walshaw - Elton - proposed new Metrolink stop at Warth -
Bury/Radcliffe);
4. Deliver a network of safe cycling and walking routes through the allocation linking
neighbourhoods with key destinations, incorporating Leigh Lane and Dow Lane and in
accordance with national and GM standards of design and construction and local planning
policy requirements;
5.Make provision for affordable housing in accordance with local planning policy requirements,
equivalent to at least 25% of the dwellings proposed on the site and across a range of
housing types and sizes (with an affordable housing tenure split of 60% social or affordable
rented and 40% affordable home ownership);
6.Make provision for a new one-form entry primary school within the allocation to accommodate
additional demand on school places;
7.Make a financial contribution towards off-site secondary school provision to meet the needs
generated by the development;
8. Make provision for a new local centre in an accessible location which includes a range of
appropriate retail, health and community facilities and ensure that it is integrated within
existing communities;
9. Make provision for other necessary infrastructure such as utilities, broadband and electric
vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant joint plan or local planning policies;
10.Ensure the design and layout allows for effective integration with surrounding communities,
including active travel links and connections to the recreation areas at Dow Lane, Elton
Vale, Whitehead Lodges as well as Walshaw Village and Bury Town Centre;
11. Make provision for new, high quality, publicly accessible, multifunctional green and blue
infrastructure within the allocation to provide health benefits to residents to create a visually
attractive environment and provide linkages to the sites wider drainage strategy in
accordance with Policy JP-G 2 'Green Infrastructure Network' and Policy JP-G 8 'Standards
for Greener Places' . This should include the integration and enhancement of the existing
green infrastructure corridors and assets at Walshaw and Elton Brooks;
12. Minimise impacts on and provide net gains for biodiversity assets within the allocation in
accordance with Policy JP-G 9 'A Net Enhancement of Biodiversity and Geodiversity' ; It is
expected that the biodiversity gain provision will be focused on the Walshaw and Elton
GMCONSULT.ORG 269Places for EveryoneBrook corridors and integrated with other green infrastructure functions such as recreation
and surface water management;
13. Ensure the allocation is safe from and mitigates for potential flood risk from all sources
including surface water, sewer flooding and groundwater. The delivery of the allocation
should be guided by an appropriate flood risk and drainage strategy which ensures
co-ordination between phases of development;
14. Ensure that sustainable drainage systems are fully incorporated into the development to
manage surface water and control the rate of surface water run-off, discharging in accordance
with the hierarchy of drainage options. Where possible, natural SuDS techniques should
be utilised, prioritising the use of ponds, swales and other infrastructure which mimic natural
drainage and be designed as multi-functional green infrastructure connecting to the wider
green and blue infrastructure network in accordance with Policy JP-S 5 'Flood Risk and the
Water Environment' and nationally recognised SuDS design standards. Proposals to
discharge to the public sewer will need to submit clear evidence demonstrating why
alternative options are not available;
15. Make appropriate provision for the long-term management and maintenance of areas of
green infrastructure, biodiversity features, other areas of open space and sustainable
drainage features; and
16. Protect and, where appropriate, enhance heritage assets and their setting, including the
Christ Church Grade II* listed building, in accordance with the findings and recommendations
of the assessment of heritage assets that forms part of the Plan’ s evidence base and any
updated assessment submitted as part of the planning application process.
11.119 This is an extensive area of land occupying a sustainable and well-connected location set
entirely within the existing urban area. The land is loosely bounded by the urban areas of
Tottington to the north, Woolfold and Elton to the east Lowercroft to the south and Walshaw
to the west.
11.120 The allocation has the potential to deliver around 1,250 houses, providing a diverse mix of
house types and affordable housing provision for the local area.
11.121 This number of new homes will require significant improvements to the local highway network
to accommodate increased traffic generation. This will require the provision of a new route
through the allocation that provides an alternative to the use of the existing highway network
through Walshaw and may require a contribution to the proposed strategic route through
the Elton Reservoir allocation which will also allow traffic from the Walshaw area to travel
south without needing to travel through Bury town centre. The development will need to
facilitate improvements to public transport into and around the allocation in order to allow
for more sustainable transport choices.
11.122 The scale of the development will create additional demands for education and the provision
of a new one form entry primary school and contributions to off-site secondary school provision
will be required in order to accommodate needs that cannot be met through existing facilities.
270 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.123 The development will generate the need to make provision for a new accessible local centre
providing facilities such as shops, health facilities and community facilities.
11.124 Existing sport and recreational facilities at Dow Lane and Elton Vale Sports Club are situated
to the south of the allocation and the development should incorporate a green corridor to
provide access from the allocation to these existing recreational assets.
11.125 The development will need to have regard to any existing ecological and wildlife features
including Walshaw and Elton Brooks which run through the northern and southern parts of
the allocation by minimising impacts on and providing net gains for biodiversity. The brooks
should provide the focal point for the creation of a good quality green infrastructure network
providing publicly accessible open spaces and recreational opportunities for residents in the
area. Such a network should seek to maximise the value of existing features and areas of
nature conservation value and offer opportunities for active travel, particularly between
homes, schools, shops, places of work and recreation. Connectivity from west to east is
already well established although there is potential for improved pedestrian and cycle routes
linking Tottington in the north to Elton and Starling in the south.There are existing reservoirs
within the allocation and other opportunities for blue infrastructure may exist to enhance
visual amenity, provide sustainable drainage and widen local biodiversity.
11.126 To reduce the risk of flooding, the development should minimise the risk associated with
inadequate sewer capacity and minimise and control the rate of surface water run-off through
an appropriate drainage strategy and, where possible, safeguard land within the allocation
for flood storage. Measures such as rainwater recycling, green roofs, water butts and
permeable driveway surfaces should be considered to mitigate the impact of potential flood
risk both within and beyond the site boundaries.  As a green and blue infrastructure network
will provide more sustainable options discharge surface water, only foul flows should connect
with the public sewer.
11.127 Christ Church in Walshaw is a Grade II* Listed Building sitting adjacent to the allocation.
Any development will, therefore, be required to respect the setting of the church and capitalise
on opportunities to draw on the contribution that the church makes to the character of the
area. The completion of a Heritage Impact Assessment will be required.
GMCONSULT.ORG 271Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Manchester
Picture 11.19 Manchester District Overview
272 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGlobal Logistics
Policy JP Allocation 10
Global Logistics
Picture 11.20 JPA 10 Global Logistics
Development at this site will be required to:
1.Support growth of the airport to 2030 and compliment the development of the wider Global
Logistics;
2. Deliver around 25,000 sqm B2/B8 employment. Suitable uses for the site will be cargo
facilities but could also include airport operational facilities where it would have no greater
adverse impact than would occur for cargo facilities;
3. Minimise any adverse impact on national and locally designated assets of conservation,
ecological and landscape value. In particular, development should avoid the Cotterill Clough
SSSI, nearby SBIs and ancient woodland, and any existing landscape mitigation affected
by development must be appropriately re-provided. Where it is not possible to avoid harm,
mitigation measures to compensate for any adverse impact will be necessary and should
be agreed with the Council, informed by an up to date environmental assessment. Suitable
GMCONSULT.ORG 273Places for Everyonebuffers should be maintained between development and biodiversity assets with potential
enhancement and provision for green infrastructure;
4. Improve access to training and job opportunities, particularly for people in Wythenshawe;
5. Include surface access and car parking arrangements which encourage the use of public
transport, walking and cycling, and satisfactorily manage impacts on the highway network
(including addressing requirements around Public Rights of Way);
6.Make necessary improvements to local highway infrastructure to mitigate for the impact of
the development, facilitate appropriate access to the site and incorporate enhancements
to public transport, direct and high quality pedestrian and cycle routes in the area; and
7.Include measures to promote sustainable travel including production of a Travel Plan.Travel
Plans could include measures such as public transport vouchers and access to car clubs.
11.128 The opportunity that Manchester Airport and the associated Enterprise Zone provides for
the growth of the wider economy is significant. By attracting investment from globally mobile
industries to an exemplar development at Global Logistics, significant economic growth for
the north of England can be captured.This is a singular location close to a major international
airport, and with improvements to local transport infrastructure, it can play its full part in
maximising future economic growth. The area’ s location within open countryside, adjoining,
and including part of a Site of Biological Interest (SBI), and adjoining a SSSI, demands a
high quality and sensitive design, which will complement, conserve and enhance the natural
environment. Proposals within the site will need to take account of the existing landscape
buffer provided as part of the existing World Logistics Hub.
274 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Oldham
Picture 11.21 Oldham District Overview
GMCONSULT.ORG 275Places for EveryoneBeal Valley
Policy JP Allocation 12
Beal Valley
Picture 11.22 JPA 12 Beal Valley
Development on this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan and design code as agreed by the local
planning authority;
2.Deliver around 480 homes, providing a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver inclusive
neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including the delivery of high-quality family housing;
3. Provide for affordable homes in line with local planning policy requirements;
4. Provide for appropriate access points to and from the site in liaison with the local highway
authority, linking to a new internal spine road that will connect the site to the Broadbent
Moss allocation to the south, and be delivered as part of the comprehensive development
of both sites;
5. Safeguard a route from the proposed spine road through the northern part of the site, as
part of any development, to offer the potential to link the site to Shaw Town Centre and
further improve connectivity to the local area and beyond;
276 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone6. Take account of and deliver any other highway improvements, that may be needed to
minimise the impact of associated traffic on the local highway network and improve
accessibility to the surrounding area, including off-site highway improvements, high-quality
walking and cycling infrastructure and public transport facilities;
7. Contribute to the delivery of the new Metrolink stop and new park and ride facility as part
of the neighbouring Broadbent Moss allocation, which in part will help to serve and improve
the accessibility and connectivity of both allocations;
8. Enhance pedestrian and cycling links to and from the site to the Shaw Metrolink stop, the
new Metrolink stop proposed as part of the Broadbent Moss strategic allocation, the bus
network and surrounding area, to encourage sustainable modes of travel and maximise the
sites accessibility, developing on the existing recreation routes and public rights of way
network. This should be delivered as part of a multi-functional green infrastructure network
(incorporating the retention and enhancement of existing public rights of way), with
high-quality landscaping within the site and around the main development areas, to minimise
the visual impact on the wider landscape, mitigate its environmental impacts, enhance
linkages with the neighbouring communities and countryside and provide opportunities for
leisure and recreation;
9.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Pennines Foothills South / West Pennines;
10.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt;
11. Ensure the protection from development of a large green wedge, between the main
development area and the Metrolink line to the east and its enhancement as part of the
multi-functional green infrastructure network, and contribute towards green infrastructure
enhancement opportunities in the surrounding Green Belt as identified in the Identification
of Opportunities to Enhance the Beneficial Use of the Green Belt assessment;
12.Retain and enhance the hierarchy of biodiversity within the site, notably the existing Shawside
SBI, including areas of priority habitats and the Twingates local nature reserve, following
the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net gain in biodiversity,
integrating them as part of multi-functional green infrastructure network which should ensure
the requirements of wading bird populations are met;
13.Provide further surveys on phase 1 habitats, amphibians, badgers, water voles and bats to
inform any planning application. Regard should be also had to the river course and
broadleaved woodland;
14.Protect and enhance the habitats and corridor along the River Beal to improve the existing
water quality and seek to achieve ‘good status’  as proposed under the EU Water Framework
Directive;
15.Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities
commensurate with the demand generated in line with local planning policy requirements.
This includes the expansion of, and improvement to existing, facilities at Heyside Cricket
Club;
16.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
GMCONSULT.ORG 277Places for Everyoneof existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
17. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
18.Be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment
(2020) in the Plan's evidence base and any updated Heritage Impact Assessment submitted
as part of the planning application process. An up-to-date archaeological desk-based
assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation will be needed;
19.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment feeding into a comprehensive drainage
strategy for the whole site, which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.
The strategy should include details of full surface water management throughout the site
as part of the proposed green and blue infrastructure. Development should deliver any
appropriate recommendations, including mitigation measures and the incorporation of
sustainable drainage systems, integrated as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure
network and delivered in line with the GM Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)
advice. Opportunities to use natural flood management and highway SUD’ s features should
be explored;
20. Include provision for a wetland catchment area, in liaison with the Environment Agency,
the Lead Local Flood Authority and Greater Manchester Ecology Unit, to the south east of
the site within the Flood Zone 3 area, to provide net gains in flood storage for the wider
catchment and / or actively reduce flood risk impacts downstream through additional storage,
integrating it with the wider multi-functional green infrastructure network and incorporating
sustainable drainage infrastructure;
21.Have regard to the Groundwater Source Protection Zone in the design of the development
to ensure there are no adverse impacts to groundwater resources or groundwater quality
and to ensure compliance with the Environment Agency's approach to groundwater protection
and any relevant position statements; and
22. Incorporate necessary remediation measures in areas affected by contamination and
previously worked for landfill purposes.
11.129 The site is currently designated as Other Protected Open Land (OPOL) and Green Belt in
the Oldham Local Plan. There are also two brownfield sites in the northern part of the
allocation; these are included within the red line to ensure they form part of the comprehensive
development of the site.They are not included in the residential capacity set out in the policy,
as they are already identified as part of the potential housing land supply, as set out in
Oldham’ s current Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA).
11.130 Whilst a significant proportion of Oldham’ s housing land will come from the urban area
through maximising the use of brownfield land, it is considered that the site will help to
diversify the existing housing stock in the area and boroughwide. The site has the potential
to meet local housing need in the immediate vicinity and across the borough and contribute
to, and enhance, the housing mix within the area through adding to the type and range of
housing available.
278 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.131 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy. A Housing Strategy
and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council which will
inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.132 The site is in a sustainable and accessible location, on the edge of a large area of open land
and in a strong housing market which offers the potential to provide a range of high-quality
housing in an attractive setting. It is located near to existing residential communities, including
Shaw Town Centre, and has the potential for greater connectivity through the proposed new
Metrolink stop, which would serve both this site and the Broadbent Moss site, providing
increased access to Rochdale Town Centre, Oldham Town Centre, Manchester City Centre
and beyond.
11.133 The main points of access will be from Meek Street or Moss Lane to the south (as part of
the Broadbent Moss allocation), and Oldham Road to the north of New Bank House. These
will link to the proposed spine road running through the site, providing the opportunity to
improve connectivity of the site to Shaw Town Centre, Broadbent Moss to the south and to
the wider area. Cop Road/Bullcote Lane (east of the spine road) will join where the two
intersect and the remaining section of Bullcote Lane, (west of the spine road), will be
downgraded accordingly, providing an emergency access, access to existing properties and
businesses, and for pedestrian and cyclists. The route of the section in the northern part of
the site is to be safeguarded and offers the opportunity to address traffic and congestion
issues within Shaw Town Centre, whilst enhancing accessibility and connectivity.
11.134 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. As such, any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and 
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.135 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.136 The site is split into two halves – the developable area to the west, close to the existing
urban area, and the green wedge to the east, reflecting the topographical constraints of the
site. The policy protects this green wedge from development, and provides an opportunity
to significantly enhance the green infrastructure and biodiversity value of the site, enhancing
the existing assets (Shawside SBI and Twingates local nature reserve) and other
non-designated ecology, as well as improving access to the open countryside for the local
community.
GMCONSULT.ORG 279Places for Everyone11.137 The Beal Valley and Broadbent Moss allocations provide opportunities to secure net gains
for nature. For these sites, net gains can be applied to Green Infrastructure, Deciduous
Woodland, Lowland Fen and Protected Species. The development of the two allocations
should include partnership work with appropriate bodies, to ensure that they contribute
towards a wider ecological network approach.
11.138 The allocations provide an opportunity to demonstrate an exemplar development, using
green infrastructure that can be designed in a way to support local biodiversity, and strengthen
coherent ecological networks beyond the site boundary.There is an opportunity to use SUDs,
following the existing site hydrology, to create a network of wetlands that incorporate and
enhance the existing fen, pond and watercourses within the site.
11.139 Deciduous Woodland is located north of the site, to the east of Shaw Side. Deciduous
Woodland is a Priority Habitat, listed under Section 41 the NERC Act 2006. Lowland Fen
Priority Habitat is located outside the site boundary, buffering the western edge of the site.
11.140 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.141 Development should conserve heritage assets and their setting in accordance with the
findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020). The site
includes Duke Mill, an undesignated heritage asset. Development proposals should have
regard to the findings and recommendations of the Oldham Mills Strategy.
11.142 A flood risk assessment will be required to inform any development. A comprehensive
drainage strategy for the whole site should be prepared as part of the more detailed
masterplanning stage, to ensure that undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing
utilities infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated development. Regard should
be had to the GM SFRA SUDs guidance. Proposals should apply greenfield run off rates
and be supported by a maintenance plan.
11.143 The area in the south eastern corner, which falls within Flood Zone 3, also offers an
opportunity, working with the Environment Agency and Lead Local Flood Authority, to develop
a wetland catchment area. As well as being an attractive feature of the site, this will allow
the site to take a strategic approach to flood risk management, and provide additional
opportunities for upstream flood storage.
280 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneBottom Field Farm (Woodhouses)
Policy JP Allocation 13
Bottom Field Farm (Woodhouses)
Picture 11.23 JPA 13 Bottom Field Farm (Woodhouses)
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Deliver around 30 homes, providing a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver inclusive
neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including a mix of high-quality family housing;
2. Provide affordable homes in line with local planning policy requirements;
3.Provide for appropriate access to and from the site in liaison with the local highway authority
and take account of and deliver any other improvements that may be needed to minimise
the impact of associated traffic on the surrounding areas and roads, including off-site
highways improvements, high-quality walking and cycling infrastructure and public transport
facilities such as waiting facilities at bus stops near the site;
4.Deliver multi-functional green infrastructure and high-quality landscaping within the site and
around the main development areas to minimise the visual impact on the wider landscape,
mitigate its environmental impacts, and enhance linkages with the neighbouring communities
and countryside and provide opportunities for leisure and recreation;
GMCONSULT.ORG 281Places for Everyone5.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Incised Urban Fringe Valleys;
6. Retain and enhance the hierarchy of biodiversity within the site, following the mitigation
hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net gain in biodiversity, integrating them
as part of a multi-functional green infrastructure network with the wider environment;
7. Provide further surveys on amphibians, birds, bats and extended phase 1 habitat surveys
to inform planning applications;
8.Retain and enhance existing Public Rights of Way running through the site, integrating them
as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure network to encourage active travel and
improve connections and access to adjoining communities and countryside;
9. Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation
facilities, commensurate with the demand generated and local surpluses and deficiencies,
in line with local planning policy requirements;
10.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt;
11. Contribute towards green infrastructure enhancement opportunities in the surrounding
Green Belt as identified in the Identification of Opportunities to Enhance the Beneficial Use
of the Green Belt assessment;
12.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
of existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
13. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
14. Conserve and enhance heritage assets and their setting in accordance with the findings
and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020). An up-to-date
Heritage Impact Assessment will be required for any planning applications. Development
should be in keeping with the local character of Woodhouses in terms of materials, design
and landscaping;
15. Take into consideration the findings of the Greater Manchester Historic Environment
Assessment Screening Exercise, and provide an up-to-date archaeological desk-based
assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation will be needed; and
16.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment and a comprehensive drainage strategy
which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.The strategy should include
details of full surface water management throughout the site as part of the proposed green
and blue infrastructure. Development should deliver any appropriate recommendations,
including mitigation measures and the incorporation of sustainable drainage systems as
part of the multi-functional green infrastructure network and be in line with the GM Level 1
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) advice. Opportunities to use natural flood
management and highway SUDs features should be explored.
282 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.144 The site is currently designated as Green Belt in the Oldham Local Plan. However, the site
is brownfield land in the Green Belt.Whilst a significant proportion of Oldham’ s housing land
will come from the urban area through maximising the use of brownfield land, it is considered
that the site will help to diversify the existing housing stock in the area and boroughwide.
The site has the potential to contribute to meeting local housing need in the immediate vicinity
and across the borough and contribute to and enhance the housing mix within the area,
adding to the type and range of housing available.The location of the site, in a strong housing
market, provides the potential for a range of high-quality housing in an attractive and
accessible location.
11.145 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy requirements. A Housing
Strategy and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council
which will inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.146 The site may have ecological value that would need to be mitigated and integrated into the
development as part of a complementary multi-functional green infrastructure.
11.147 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. Any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.148 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.149 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.150 Woodhouses Conservation Area is in close proximity to the site and, whilst outside the
boundary, any development would need to consider the impact on its setting through the
completion of a further Heritage Impact Assessment.
11.151 A flood risk assessment will be required to inform any development and a comprehensive
drainage strategy for the site as a whole should be prepared as part of the more detailed
masterplanning stage, in line with the Greater Manchester Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
(SFRA) SUDs guidance, to ensure that undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing
utilities infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated development. Proposals should
be supported by a maintenance plan.
GMCONSULT.ORG 283Places for EveryoneBroadbent Moss
Policy JP Allocation 14
Broadbent Moss
Picture 11.24 JPA 14 Broadbent Moss
Development on this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan and Design Code agreed by the local
planning authority;
2.Deliver around 1,450 homes providing a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver inclusive
neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including a mix of high-quality family housing. It is
estimated that around 500 of these homes will be delivered post 2037;
3. Provide for affordable homes in line with local planning policy requirements;
4. Deliver around 21,000 sqm employment floorspace extending the existing employment
opportunities at Higginshaw Business Employment Area;
5. Provide for appropriate access points to and from the site in liaison with the local highway
authority. The main points of access to the site will be via Vulcan Street and the new
connections to Shaw and Oldham via the Beal Valley allocation, linking to a new internal
spine road that will be delivered as part of the comprehensive development of the site. The
284 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonespine road will provide a link to the residential area to the east of the Metrolink line, through
delivering an appropriate crossing;
6. Take account of and deliver any other highway improvements that may be needed to
minimise the impact of associated traffic on the local highway network and improve
accessibility to the surrounding area, including off-site highway improvements, high-quality
walking and cycling infrastructure and public transport facilities;
7. Contribute towards the delivery of a new Metrolink stop and park and ride facility, along
with the Beal Valley allocation, which in part will help to serve both allocations and improve
their accessibility and connectivity;
8.Make provision for a local centre adjacent to the new Metrolink stop and new park and ride
facility on the north western part of the site incorporating higher density apartments;
9. Enhance pedestrian and cycling links to and from the site to the new Metrolink stop, the
Beal Valley strategic allocation, bus network and surrounding area, to encourage sustainable
modes of travel and maximise the sites accessibility. This should be delivered  as part of a
multi-functional green infrastructure network (incorporating the retention and enhancement
of existing public rights of way) and high-quality landscaping within the site and around the
main development areas to minimise the visual impact on the wider landscape, mitigate its
environmental impacts, enhance linkages with the neighbouring communities and countryside
and provide opportunities for leisure and recreation;
10.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Pennines Foothills South / West Pennines. A Landscape
Appraisal is required to inform any planning application;
11.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt. Development will be required  to
create a new defensible Green Belt boundary around the development parcels identified
to the east of the Metrolink line;
12. Contribute towards green infrastructure enhancement opportunities in the surrounding
Green Belt, as identified in the Identification of Opportunities to Enhance  the Beneficial
Use of the Green Belt assessment;
13.Retain and enhance areas of biodiversity within the site, most notably the priority habitats,
following the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net gain in
biodiversity, integrating them as part of a multi-functional green-infrastructure network with
the wider environment;
14. Have regard to the recommendations of the Habitat Regulations Assessment and provide
further surveys on phase 1 habitats, badgers, amphibians (including great crested newts)
and bat surveys to inform any planning application;
15.Protect and enhance the habitats and corridor along the River Beal to improve the existing
water quality and seek to achieve ‘good status’  as proposed under the EU Water Framework
Directive;
16.Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities
commensurate with the demand generated and local surpluses and deficiencies, in line
with local planning policy requirements;
17.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
GMCONSULT.ORG 285Places for Everyoneof existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
18. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
19.Be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment
(2020) in the Plan's evidence base and any updated Heritage Impact Assessment submitted
as part of the planning application process. An up-to-date archaeological desk-based
assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation will be needed;
20.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment and a comprehensive drainage strategy,
which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.The strategy should include
details of full surface water management throughout the site as part of the proposed green
and blue infrastructure. Development must avoid Flood Zone 3b, and deliver any appropriate
recommendations, including those within the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)
Level 2 Site Assessment Summary, ensuring development is safe and does not increase
flood risk elsewhere. Natural sustainable drainage systems should be, integrated as part
of the multi-functional green infrastructure network and delivered in line with the GM Level
1 SFRA advice. Opportunities to use natural flood management and highway SUD’ s features
should be explored;
21. Include provision for a wetland catchment area, in liaison with the Environment Agency,
Lead Local Flood Authority and Greater Manchester Ecology Unity, in the northern central
part of the site to the south of Cop Road within the Flood Zone 3 area, to provide net gains
in flood storage for the wider catchment and / or actively reduce flood risk impacts
downstream through additional storage, integrating it with the wider multi-functional green
infrastructure network and incorporating SUDs;
22.Have regard to the Groundwater Source Protection Zone in the design of the development,
to ensure that there are no adverse impacts to groundwater resources or groundwater
quality, and to ensure compliance with the Environment Agency approach to groundwater
protection and any relevant position statements. A detailed hydrological assessment should
support any planning application within this zone;
23. Incorporate necessary remediation measures in areas affected by contamination and
previously worked for landfill purposes; and
24. Incorporate noise and air quality mitigation to protect the amenity of any new and existing
occupiers (both residential and employment), where new residential development adjoins
Higginshaw Business Employment Area and the proposed extension.
11.152 The site is currently designated as Land Reserved for Future Development (LRFD), Other
Protected Open Land (OPOL) and Green Belt in the Oldham Local Plan. Land at Hebron
Street (with planning permission for 77 homes) is included in the red line boundary to ensure
it forms part of the comprehensive development. It is not included in the residential capacity
set out in the policy as it has already been identified as part of the potential housing land
supply, as set out in Oldham’ s current Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment
(SHLAA). It is therefore anticipated that around 874 homes will be delivered during the plan
period.The scale of development proposed means that a proportion of the site capacity may
fall outside the plan period.
286 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.153 Whilst a significant proportion of Oldham’ s housing land will come from the urban area
through maximising the use of brownfield land, it is considered that the site will help to
diversify the existing housing stock in the area and boroughwide. The site has the potential
to meet local housing need in the immediate vicinity and across the borough and contribute
to and enhance the housing mix within the area through adding to the type and range of
housing available.
11.154 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy. A Housing Strategy
and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council which will
inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.155 Development of the site will also provide the opportunity to enhance and extend the existing
employment offer at Higginshaw BEA and across the borough, which would otherwise have
limited opportunity to emerge elsewhere due to the built-up nature of the borough.
11.156 The site is in a sustainable and accessible location, on the edge of a large area of open
land. It is located near to existing neighbouring residential communities and has the potential
for greater connectivity through the proposed new Metrolink stop, which would serve both
this and the Beal Valley site, providing increased access to Rochdale Town Centre, Oldham
Town Centre, Manchester City Centre and beyond.
11.157 The proposed spine road through the site provides the opportunity to improve connectivity
to Shaw Town Centre, Beal Valley to the north and the wider area. Improvements to the
highway network, including Bullcote Lane, Cop Road and the new access points proposed,
will help to improve connectivity to the wider area, in particular Sholver.
11.158 The main points of access to the site will be from Meek Street or Moss Lane to the west and
Vulcan Street to the east. These will link to the proposed spine road running through the
site, providing the opportunity to improve connectivity of the site to the Beal Valley allocation
to the north, and to the wider area. Cop Road/Bullcote Lane (east of the spine road) will join
where the two intersect, and the remaining section of Bullcote Lane, (west of the spine road),
will be downgraded accordingly, providing an emergency access, access to existing properties
and businesses and for pedestrian and cyclists. South of Cop Road, the new link will continue
through the Broadbent Moss allocation, to form an east-west connection with Vulcan St over
the existing Metrolink line. At least one crossing point over the Metrolink line will be required
to connect the eastern and western parts of the site.
11.159 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. As such, any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
GMCONSULT.ORG 287Places for Everyoneb.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.160 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.161 A large proportion of the site is proposed to remain undeveloped and will be retained as
Green Belt, providing an opportunity to significantly enhance the green infrastructure and
biodiversity value of the site, enhancing the existing assets (such as the priority habitats)
and improving access to the open countryside for the local community.
11.162 The Beal Valley and Broadbent Moss strategic allocations provide opportunities to secure
net gains for nature and local communities. For these site allocations net gains can be applied
to Green Infrastructure, Deciduous Woodland, Lowland Fen and Protected Species. The
development of the two site allocations should include elements of partnership work with
appropriate bodies, to ensure they contribute towards a wider ecological network approach.
11.163 The site allocations provide an opportunity to demonstrate an exemplar development using
green infrastructure, that can be designed in such a way that it can support local biodiversity
and strengthen coherent ecological networks beyond the site boundary, creating a resilient
landscape through a network of connected sites.There is an opportunity to use Sustainable
Urban Drainage (SUDs) systems following the existing site hydrology, to create a network
of wetlands that enhance and incorporate the existing fen, pond and watercourses within
the site that is subject to hydrological investigations.
11.164 Deciduous Woodland is located north of the site east of Shaw Side. Deciduous Woodland
is a Priority Habitat listed under Section 41 the Natural Environmental and Rural Communities
(NERC) Act 2006.
11.165 Lowland Fen Priority Habitat is located outside of the site boundary, buffering the western
edge of the site.
11.166 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.167 Development should conserve heritage assets and their settings through a Heritage Impact
Assessment and having regard to the findings and recommendations of the Historic
Environment Assessment (2020).
11.168 A flood risk assessment will be required to inform any development. A comprehensive
drainage strategy for the whole site should be prepared as part of the more detailed
masterplanning stage, to ensure that undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing
utilities infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated development. Proposals should
apply greenfield run off rates and be supported by a maintenance plan. Regard should be
had to the GM SFRA SUDs guidance. The area in the northern central part of the site, and
which falls within Flood Zone 3, also offers an opportunity, working with the Environment
288 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAgency and Local Lead Flood Authority, to develop a wetland catchment area which, as
well as being an attractive feature of the site, will allow a strategic approach to flood risk
management and provide additional opportunities for upstream flood storage.
11.169 Part of the allocation is in within a Source Protection Zone. Any planning applications within
this zone are expected to be supported by a detailed hydrological assessment. This will
need to consider the vulnerability of the land and to propose suitable mitigation measures
which will be employed to reduce the risk of pollution of groundwater.
Chew Brook Vale (Robert Fletchers)
Policy JP Allocation 15
Chew Brook Vale (Robert Fletchers)
Picture 11.25 JPA 15 Chew Brook Vale (Robert Fletchers)
Development at this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan and Design Code agreed by the local
authority;
GMCONSULT.ORG 289Places for Everyone2. Provide a range of commercial, leisure and retail facilities of up to 6,000 sqm, as part of a
mix of uses, to support tourism and leisure facilities, connected to its gateway location to
the Peak District National Park and capitalising on its proximity to Dove Stone Reservoir;
3. Deliver around 90 homes with a mix of low-density family and executive homes and
affordable homes of 2 and 3 bedrooms, in line with local planning policy requirements;
4. Provide an improved access off the  A669 / A635 and improve the existing access road up
to the mill complex, including the river crossing over Chew Brook, up to adoptable standards;
5. Take account of and deliver other highway improvements that may be needed to minimise
the impact of associated traffic on the local highway network and improve access to the
surrounding area, including off-site highway improvements, high-quality walking and cycling
and public transport facilities, including opportunities for bus service provision into the site;
6. Be informed by, and deliver the recommendations of, an appropriate visitor management
plan to ensure that there is no adverse impact on Dove Stone Reservoir, the Peak District
National Park and designated conservation areas. Development must have regard to the
duty to care for the Peak District National Park under Section 62(2) of the Environment Act
1995;
7.Incorporate multi-functional green and blue infrastructure and high levels of landscaping to
minimise the visual impact on the wider landscape, mitigate its environmental impacts, and
enhance linkages with the neighbouring communities and countryside. This should include
footpath networks and recreation routes that incorporate existing trees and habitat areas,
providing a range of formal and informal recreational open space and access to existing
public footpath networks and woodland areas surrounding the site;
8. Be designed to minimise the landscape impact having regard to the findings and
recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and Sensitivity
Assessment for the Open Moorlands and Enclosed Upland Fringes (Dark Peak);
9. Retain and enhance biodiversity within and adjoining the site, notably the areas of priority
habitats, following the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net
gain in biodiversity, integrating them as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure
network with the wider environment;
10.Provide further surveys on extended phase 1 habitats, bats and birds to inform any planning
application;
11. Ensure that development does not have an adverse impact on the integrity of the nearby
Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC). The
recommendations from the Habitat Regulations Assessment must be considered;
12. Be designed to relate positively to Chew Brook and other watercourses running through
the site, integrating them as part of a multi-functional green infrastructure network, creating
a green route along the river / brook, ensuring that development is set back to allow
ecological movement;
13.Provide for opportunities to protect and enhance the habitats and corridor along Chew Brook
to improve the existing water quality and seek to achieve 'good' status as proposed under
the EU Water Framework Directive;
14.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt;
290 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone15. Contribute towards green infrastructure enhancement opportunities in the surrounding
Green Belt as identified in the Identification of Opportunities to Enhance the Beneficial Use
of the Green Belt assessment;
16.Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities
commensurate with the demand generated in line with local planning policy requirements,
and local surpluses and deficiencies;
17.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
of existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
18. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision in liaison with the local authority and Public Health;
19.Be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment
(2020) and addendum (2021) in the Plan's evidence base and any updated Heritage Impact
Assessment submitted as part of the planning application process. An up-to-date
archaeological desk-based assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation
will be needed;
20. Ensure high quality design that is environmentally and sustainably driven, including grey
harvesting and recycling, maximising energy efficiency through good building design and
fuel-efficient technology, a reduction of car usage and household recycling facilities; and
21. Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment, which takes account of any
recommendations from the Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Site Summary Report,
and a comprehensive drainage strategy which includes a full investigation of the surface
water hierarchy. The strategy should include details of full surface water management
throughout the site as part of the proposed green and blue infrastructure. Development
must avoid Flood Zone 3b and deliver any appropriate recommendations, including mitigation
measures, ensuring development is safe over its lifetime and does not increase flood risk
elsewhere. Natural sustainable drainage systems should be integrated to control the rate
of surface water run-off. Proposals should be integrated as part of the multi-functional green
infrastructure network and opportunities to use natural flood management and highway
SUDs features should be explored.
11.170 The site comprises the redundant Robert Fletchers mill complex, which is brownfield land.
Given the previous use of the Robert Fletchers site as a paper mill, and its subsequent
dereliction, it is considered that the need for remediation will be high contributing to higher
viability costs in preparing the site for development.
11.171 The site is in a gateway location into the Peak District National Park and presents a strategic
and unique opportunity for Oldham and Greater Manchester to achieve complementary
tourism and leisure development to enhance the sub-region’ s visitor and destination offer.
The development of the site for leisure and tourism uses will also capture leisure spend in
the local economy due to its proximity to the RSPB reserve, Dove Stone Reservoir and the
GMCONSULT.ORG 291Places for EveryoneSaddleworth villages, and create employment opportunities. The tourism and leisure offer
should capitalise on, and complement, its location in a way that is sensitive to its unique
setting.
11.172 The site provides the potential to provide a range of high-quality family and executive homes
in an attractive and desirable rural location. It also provides an opportunity to enhance
Oldham’ s housing offer and contribute to meeting Oldham’ s housing need. Due to the scenic
location of the site, it should be an attractive location for larger and bespoke housing, providing
a distinctive offer to the borough’ s housing market.There is however also a need for affordable
homes across the Saddleworth villages as many residents who wish to remain living within
the area cannot currently afford to do so.
11.173 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy requirements. A Housing
Strategy and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council
which will inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.174 Existing access to the site will need to be improved as part of any development, which may
include its relocation. This includes the current road from the site, the existing river crossing
over Chew Brook from the site to the access road and the access arrangements onto the
A669 / A635. Any proposals will need to be agreed by the local highway authority and to
adoptable standards.
11.175 The policy seeks multi-functional green and blue infrastructure and high levels of landscaping
as part of the comprehensive development of the site. This includes the retention and
enhancement of existing public rights of way and recreation routes to improve linkages to
and from the site to Dove Stone Reservoir, Peak District National Park and the wider
countryside.
11.176 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.177 Development must follow the legal and policy requirements of protecting irreplaceable
habitats and the mitigation hierarchy of doing everything possible to avoid and then minimise
the impact on biodiversity, and only then after taking all measures compensate for losses
that cannot be avoided. Meaningful biodiversity net gain is then applied on top of this
approach.
11.178 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. As such any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and 
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
292 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.179 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.180 Heritage assets play an important role in the area’ s local historical and cultural identity and
distinctiveness. There are undesignated assets throughout the site and a number of other
heritage assets within close proximity, including Hey Top Conservation Area and Greenfield
House and New Barn Grade II Listed Buildings which lie outside of the strategic allocation
boundary. Any development would need to consider the impact on their setting, through the
completion of a further Heritage Impact Assessment and having regard to the Historic
Environment Assessment (2020) and addendum (2021). Any development proposals should
also have regard to the findings and recommendations of the Oldham Mill Strategy. Finally
reflecting the sites unique location, the Design Code should ensure new development is in
keeping with the surrounding character of the area through the use of local materials and
design.
11.181 The Greater Manchester Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment considers the flood risk
to the site and provides recommendations that will need to be considered to meet the
requirements of the Exception Test. As such, any development would need to follow the
sequential approach on site and a flood risk assessment would be required to inform any
development, including the recommendations from the Level 2 report. A comprehensive
drainage strategy, including a maintenance plan, for the whole site would be required as
part of the more detailed masterplanning stage to ensure that undue pressure and burden
is not placed on existing utilities infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated
development. Regard should be had to the SUDS guidance set out in the Greater Manchester
Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and other National Standards (such as CIRIA,
Water UK Design and Construction Guidance).
GMCONSULT.ORG 293Places for EveryoneCowlishaw
Policy JP Allocation 16
Cowlishaw
Picture 11.26 JPA 16 Cowlishaw
Development at this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan and Design Code agreed by the local
planning authority;
2. Deliver around 460 homes, providing a range of dwelling types and sizes so as to deliver
more inclusive neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including the delivery of a mix of
high-quality family housing;
3.Provide for affordable homes in line with local requirements set out in local planning policy
requirements;
4. Provide for appropriate access points to and from the site in liaison with the local highway
authority.The main points of access to the site will be Cocker Mill Lane to the southern part
of the site, with an emergency/controlled secondary access to Cowlishaw, Kings Road to
the central part of the site that lies to the north of Cowlishaw Farm and Denbigh Drive, with
access limited to the small parcel at the north only;
294 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5. Take account of and deliver any other highway improvements that may be needed to
minimise the impact of associated traffic on the local highway network and improve
accessibility to the surrounding area, including off-site highways improvements, high-quality
walking and cycling infrastructure and public transport facilities;
6. Deliver multi-functional green infrastructure (incorporating the retention and enhancement
of existing public rights of way) and high-quality landscaping within the site and around the
main development areas. This is to minimise the visual impact on the wider landscape,
mitigate its environmental impacts, and enhance linkages with the neighbouring communities
and countryside and provide opportunities for leisure and recreation.
7.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Pennines Foothills South / West Pennines;
8. Retain and enhance the hierarchy of biodiversity within the site, notably the existing
Cowlishaw Ponds SBI and the area of priority habitat to the south of Crompton Primary
School, following the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net
gain in biodiversity, integrating them as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure
network with the wider environment;
9. Provide further surveys on amphibians (including great crested newts), extended phase 1
habitat, breeding birds, badgers and bats to inform any planning application;
10. Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation
facilities, commensurate with the demand generated and local surpluses and deficiencies,
in line with local planning policy requirements. This includes the retention or relocation, if
required, and improvement of the existing play area off Kings Road, within the site;
11.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
of existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
12. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
13.Be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment
(2020) in the Plan's evidence base and any updated Heritage Impact Assessment submitted
as part of the planning application process. An up-to-date archaeological desk-based
assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation will be needed; and
14.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment and a comprehensive drainage strategy
which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.The strategy should include
details of full surface water management throughout the site as part of the proposed green
and blue infrastructure. Development should deliver any appropriate recommendations,
including mitigation measures and the incorporation of sustainable drainage systems
integrated as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure network, and be in line with
the GM Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) advice. Opportunities to use
natural flood management and highway SUDs features should be explored.
11.182 The site is currently designated as Other Protected Open Land (OPOL) in the Oldham Local
Plan.Whilst a significant proportion of Oldham’ s housing land will come from the urban area
through maximising the use of brownfield land, it is considered that the site will help to
GMCONSULT.ORG 295Places for Everyonediversify the existing housing stock in the area and boroughwide. The site has the potential
to meet local housing need in the immediate vicinity and across the borough and contribute
to and enhance the housing mix within the area through adding to the type and range of
housing available.
11.183 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy. A Housing Strategy
and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council which will
inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.184 The site is in a sustainable and accessible location, on the edge of a large area of open land
and in a successful and attractive neighbourhood, and connected to neighbouring communities
in Low Crompton, Cowlishaw, Royton and nearby town centres, including Shaw, where there
is a Metrolink stop. Any development would be required to enhance links to and from the
site to the bus network, to encourage sustainable modes of travel and maximise the site’ s
accessibility, developing the  existing recreation routes and Public Right of Way network.
11.185 The development will need to provide for suitable access to the site, in liaison with the local
highway authority. As stated in the policy the main access points to the site will be Cocker
Mill Lane (supported by an emergency/controlled secondary access to Cowlishaw), Kings
Road and Denbigh Drive. The access at Denbigh Drive is constrained and will be limited to
provide access to the small parcel in the northern section of the site only.
11.186 Cowlishaw Ponds SBI is made up of three pond areas and there is an additional priority
habitat to the south of Crompton Primary School. Any development will need to retain and
enhance these, incorporating them as a key feature within the green infrastructure network
and landscaping proposals for the site.
11.187 Biodiversity net gain could be applied to Green Infrastructure, deciduous woodland, lowland
fen and protected species.
11.188 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.189 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and takes account of the increased demand it may place on
existing provision. As such, any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and 
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.190 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
296 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.191 There are heritage assets in the surrounding area. Any development would need to consider
the impact on their setting, through the completion of a further Heritage Impact Assessment
and having regard to the Historic Environment Assessment (2020).
11.192 A flood risk assessment will be required to inform development. A comprehensive drainage
strategy for the whole site should be prepared as part of the more detailed masterplanning
stage, to ensure that undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing utilities
infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated development. Regard should be had
to the GM SFRA SUDs guidance. Proposals should apply greenfield run off rates, be
supported by a maintenance plan and the use of highway SUD’ s features.
Land South of Coal Pit Lane (Ashton Road)
Policy JP Allocation 17
Land South of Coal Pit Lane (Ashton Road)
Picture 11.27 JPA 17 Land South of Coal Pit Lane (Ashton Road)
Development on this site will be required to:
1. Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan and design code agreed by the local
planning authority;
GMCONSULT.ORG 297Places for Everyone2. Deliver around 175 homes, providing a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver more
inclusive neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including the delivery of high-quality family
housing;
3. Provide for affordable homes, in line with local planning policy requirements;
4. Provide for appropriate access points to and from the site in liaison with the local highway
authority. As part of this, provision should be made to safeguard a route from the north
western edge of the site through to Coal Pit Lane, linked to the internal infrastructure of the
site;
5. Take account of and deliver any other highway improvements that may be needed to
minimise the impact of associated traffic on the surrounding areas and roads, including
off-site highways improvements, high-quality walking and cycling infrastructure and public
transport facilities such as waiting facilities at bus stops near the site;
6. Deliver multi-functional green infrastructure (incorporating the retention and enhancement
of existing public rights of way) and high-quality landscaping within the site so as to minimise
the visual impact on the wider landscape, mitigate its environmental impacts, enhance
linkages with the neighbouring communities and countryside and provide opportunities for
leisure and recreation;
7.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Incised Urban Fringe Valleys;
8. Retain and enhance the hierarchy of biodiversity within the site, notably areas of priority
habitats, following the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful and measurable net
gain in biodiversity, integrating them as part of the multi-functional green infrastructure
network;
9. Provide further surveys on amphibians, extended phase 1 habitats, badgers and bats to
inform any planning application;
10.Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities
commensurate with the demand generated and local surpluses and deficiencies, in line
with local planning policy requirements;
11.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt;
12. Contribute towards green infrastructure enhancement opportunities in the surrounding
Green Belt, as identified in the Identification of Opportunities to Enhance the Beneficial Use
of the Green Belt assessment;
13.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through expansion
of existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities, in liaison with the local
education authority;
14. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
15. Conserve and enhance heritage assets and their setting in accordance with the findings
and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020) and addendum
(2021). An up-to-date Heritage Impact Assessment will be required for any planning
applications;
298 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone16. Take into consideration the findings of the Greater Manchester Historic Environment
Assessment Screening Exercise, and provide an up-to-date archaeological desk-based
assessment to determine if any future evaluation and mitigation will be needed;
17.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment and a comprehensive drainage strategy,
which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.The strategy should include
details of full surface water management throughout the site as part of the proposed green
and blue infrastructure. Development should deliver any appropriate recommendations,
including mitigation measures and the incorporation of sustainable drainage systems as
part of the multi-functional green infrastructure network, and be in line with the GM Level 1
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) advice. Opportunities to use natural flood
management and highway SUDs features should be explored; and
18.Incorporate necessary remediation measures in areas which are affected by contamination
and have been previously worked for landfill purposes.
11.193 The site is currently designated Green Belt. The red line boundary incorporates the existing
saved Oldham UDP allocation at Danisher Lane, to ensure it forms part of the comprehensive
development of the site.The saved UDP allocation is not included in the residential capacity
set out in the policy, as it has already been identified as part of Oldham’ s base line housing
land supply. Whilst a significant proportion of Oldham’ s housing land will come from the
urban area through maximising the use of brownfield land, it is considered that this site will
help to diversify the existing housing stock in the area and the borough as a whole. The site
has the potential to meet local housing need in the immediate vicinity and across the borough,
and contribute to and enhance the housing mix within the area, through adding to the type
and range of housing available.
11.194 Affordable housing will be provided as part of any development of the site, including a range
of tenures, house sizes and types, in order to meet the needs of residents as appropriate.
Affordable housing will be delivered in line with local planning policy. A Housing Strategy
and Local Housing Needs Assessment has been prepared by Oldham Council which will
inform the Local Plan affordable housing policy.
11.195 The site is well positioned in a sustainable and accessible location and has good connectivity
to the wider strategic highway network. The site has good access to public transport and a
range of local services, with access to a number of bus routes along Ashton Road between
Tameside and Oldham.TfGM have also identified the A627/A671 corridor between Rochdale
– Oldham – Ashton within the first tranche of the ‘Streets for All’  corridor studies to improve
connectivity on Greater Manchester’ s Key Route Network. These corridors have been
identified on the basis of their potential to support a range of GM agendas, around delivering
modal shift (particularly to public transport, walking and cycling), improving air quality and
regenerating local centres. Any development would therefore be required to enhance links
to and from the site to the bus network, to encourage sustainable modes of travel and
maximise the site's accessibility, developing the existing recreation routes and Public Right
of Way network.
GMCONSULT.ORG 299Places for Everyone11.196 The development will need to provide for suitable access to the site, in liaison with the local
highway authority. Potential access points to the site may be from Coal Pit Lane and Ashton
Road. As part of bringing this site forward consideration should be given as to how movement
and connectivity along Coal Pit Lane can be enhanced to improve highway safety, for vehicles,
pedestrians and cyclists. As such, provision should be made to safeguard a route from the
north western edge of the site through to Coal Pit Lane, with appropriate links through the
site to an appropriate access onto Ashton Road.
11.197 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. As such any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.198 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.199 The allocation provides opportunities to secure net gains for nature. This should be applied
to green infrastructure and priority habitats.
11.200 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.201 There are also heritage assets close to the proposed strategic allocation. Any development
would need to consider the impact on their setting, through the completion of a further
Heritage Impact Assessment.
11.202 A flood risk assessment will be required to inform any development. A comprehensive
drainage strategy should be prepared, for the site as a whole, as part of the more detailed
masterplanning stage, to ensure that undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing
utilities infrastructure through piecemeal and uncoordinated development. Regard should
be had to the GM SFRA SUDs guidance. Proposals should apply greenfield run off rates
and be supported by a maintenance plan.
11.203 There are a number of historic landfill sites within the allocation. Necessary remediation
measures in areas affected by contamination and previously worked for landfill purposes
should be undertaken.
300 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneSouth of Rosary Road
Policy JP Allocation 18
South of Rosary Road
Picture 11.28 JPA 18 South of Rosary Road
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 60 homes, providing a range of dwelling types and sizes to deliver more
inclusive neighbourhoods and meet local needs, including the delivery of high-quality family
housing;
2. Provide for appropriate access points to and from the site in liaison with the local highway
authority.The main point of access to the site will be through the neighbouring former Centre
for Professional Development site and onto Rosary Road, with the potential for a secondary
emergency only access from St Cuthbert’ s Fold;
3. Take account of and deliver any other highway improvements that may be needed to
minimise the impact of associated traffic on the local highway network and improve
accessibility to the surrounding areas, including off-site highway improvements, high-quality
walking and cycling infrastructure and public transport facilities;
GMCONSULT.ORG 301Places for Everyone4. Deliver multi-functional green infrastructure (incorporating the retention and enhancement
of existing public rights of way) and high quality landscaping within the site so as to minimise
the visual impact on the wider landscape, mitigate its environmental impacts, and enhance
linkages with the neighbouring communities and countryside and provide opportunities for
leisure and recreation;
5.Have regard to the recommendations of the Greater Manchester Landscape Character and
Sensitivity Assessment for the Incised Urban Fringe Valleys;
6. Retain and enhance the hierarchy of biodiversity within the site, notably Bankfield Clough
SBI and the area of priority habitat, following the mitigation hierarchy and deliver a meaningful
and measurable net gain in biodiversity, integrating the delivery of functional ecological
networks into multi-functional green infrastructure to enable free movement of species of
principal importance. Planning proposals should incorporate a suitable buffer between
development plots and the SBI to protect its important features;
7. Provide further surveys on extended phase 1 habitats and bats, to inform any planning
application;
8.Have regard to the findings of the Stage 2 Greater Manchester Green Belt Study, including
mitigation measures to mitigate harm to the Green Belt;
9. Contribute towards green infrastructure enhancement opportunities in the surrounding
Green Belt as identified in the Identification of Opportunities to Enhance the Beneficial Use
of the Green Belt assessment;
10.Provide for new and/or the improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities
commensurate with the demand generated and local surpluses and deficiencies, in line
with local planning policy requirements;
11.Contribute to additional school places to meet the increased demand that will be placed on
existing primary and secondary school provision within the area, either through an expansion
of existing facilities or through the provision of new school facilities in liaison with the local
education authority;
12. Contribute to appropriate health and community facilities to meet the increased demand
that will be placed on existing provision;
13. Conserve and enhance heritage assets and their setting in accordance with the findings
and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020). An up-to-date
Heritage Impact Assessment will be required for any planning applications. Enhancements
between the development and Bank Top Farmhouse (Grade II) should include additional
tree planting and native hedgerows to improve the interface between the farmhouse and
any new development;
14.Be informed by an appropriate flood risk assessment and a comprehensive drainage strategy
which includes a full investigation of the surface water hierarchy.The strategy should include
details of full surface water management throughout the site as part of the proposed green
and blue infrastructure. Development should deliver any appropriate recommendations,
including mitigation measures and the incorporation of sustainable drainage systems as
part of the multi-functional green infrastructure network and be in line with the GM Level 1
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) advice. Opportunities to use natural flood
management and highway SUDs features should be explored; and
15.Ensure that appropriate access is maintained for United Utilities to their on-site infrastructure.
302 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.204 The land south of Rosary Road is within the Green Belt. Whilst a significant proportion of
Oldham’ s housing land will come from the urban area through maximising the use of
brownfield land, it is considered that the site will help to diversify the existing housing stock
in the area and boroughwide. The site has the potential to meet local housing need in the
immediate vicinity and across the borough and contribute to and enhance the housing mix
within the surrounding area through adding to the type and range of housing available,
informed by Oldham Council's Housing Strategy and Local Housing Needs Assessment.
11.205 The site is well positioned in a sustainable and accessible location that has good connectivity
to the wider highway network. The site has good access to public transport and a range of
local services with access to bus routes along Ashton Road between Tameside and Oldham.
TfGM have also identified the A627/A671 corridor between Rochdale – Oldham – Ashton
within the first tranche of the ‘Streets for All’  corridor studies to improve connectivity on
Greater Manchester’ s Key Route Network.These corridors have been identified due to their
potential to support a range of GM agendas, around delivering modal shift (particularly to
public transport, walking and cycling), improving air quality and regenerating local centres.
Any development would therefore be required to enhance links to and from the site to the
bus network, to encourage sustainable modes of travels and maximise the sites accessibility,
developing on the existing recreation routes and Public Right of Way network.
11.206 The development will need to provide for suitable access to the site, in liaison with the local
highway authority. The main point of access to the site is through the neighbouring former
Centre of Professional Development site, which along with the former Marland Fold School,
is identified as a potential housing site in Oldham’ s current Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment. Integration of the allocation with the neighbouring development sites will
therefore be important. Any development will also be required to minimise and mitigate the
impact of associated traffic on the local highway network, including the neighbouring Fitton
Hill housing estate.
11.207 It is important to ensure that any development proposed does not place undue pressure on
existing social infrastructure and that any development takes account of the increased
demand it may place on existing provision. Any development would need to provide:
a. new and/or improvement of existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
b.additional school places through the expansion of existing facilities or provision of new
school facilities; and 
c. provide for appropriate health and community facilities.
11.208 These would need to be provided in line with local planning policy requirements and in liaison
with the local authority.
11.209 Bankfield Clough SBI and an area of priority habitat fall within the site along the eastern
boundary. This area should form part of the wider landscaping and green infrastructure
network for the site and be retained and enhanced as part of the biodiversity hierarchy within
the site.
GMCONSULT.ORG 303Places for Everyone11.210 Development should have regard to the ecosystem services opportunity mapping, in the
improvement and enhancement of Green Infrastructure.
11.211 There are assets of historical significance close to the site, including Bank Top Farmhouse.
Whilst outside the boundary any development proposal would need to consider the impact
on their setting, through the completion of a Heritage Impact Assessment. Furthermore, it
is considered that additional tree planting and native hedgerows would help to enhance the
interface between the existing farmhouse and any development, as well as the green wedge
that will sit in between.
11.212 A flood risk assessment will be required. A comprehensive drainage strategy for the whole
site should be prepared as part of the more detailed masterplanning stage, to ensure that
undue pressure and burden is not placed on existing utilities infrastructure through piecemeal
and uncoordinated development. Regard should be had to the GM Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment (SFRA) SUDs guidance. Proposals should apply greenfield run off rates, be
supported by a maintenance plan and make use of highway SUD’ s features.
304 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Rochdale
Picture 11.29 Rochdale District Overview
GMCONSULT.ORG 305Places for EveryoneBamford / Norden
Policy JP Allocation 19
Bamford / Norden
Picture 11.30 JPA 19 Bamford / Norden
Development at this site will be required to:
1.Deliver around 450 new homes predominantly in the western and southern parts of the site,
with a focus on larger, higher value family housing to balance out the current offer within
the borough and reflect the grain and density of the surrounding residential areas;
2.Retain and significantly enhance the existing recreational facilities as part of an integrated
green and blue infrastructure network on the site. The improvement of the facilities will
create a high quality recreational and sports ‘hub’ serving the local area and the borough
as a whole;
3. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
4. Define the archaeological potential of the development site through the completion of
archaeological evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trial trenching for
areas specified in the Bamford/Norden Historic Environment Assessment 2020. The
306 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonemasterplan must detail where significant archaeology must be preserved in situ and
demonstrate how the development has responded sympathetically to this;
5. Provide access to the site from suitable points along Norden Road;
6.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
7. Contribute to the potential extension of the proposed bus rapid transit services between
Heywood and Manchester;
8. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
9.Take account of any visual impact from Ashworth Valley to the west given the high landscape
and recreational value of that area and ensure there are high quality links/routes to the
wider countryside;
10.Ensure that the design of the scheme preserves or enhances the setting of the listed Bamford
United Reform Church immediately to the south of the site. Proposals should be informed
by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020) in
the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated assessment submitted as part of the planning
application process;
11.Provide contributions to ensure that there are sufficient school places to accommodate the
new housing either through an expansion of existing schools or the provision of new school
facilities; and
12. Retain and enhance public rights of way across and around the site.
11.213 Norden and Bamford are well-established residential areas to the west of Rochdale town
centre and there is a strong market demand for housing within the area. It is one of the most
significant areas of larger, higher value housing within the sub-region and is considered to
be a desirable and aspirational place to live.This development offers an excellent opportunity
to expand on this area to deliver a type of housing which is in short supply across the borough
and the conurbation as a whole. The provision of such housing is important to ensure that
a good range of housing is available across the plan area to support economic growth.
11.214 The area does contain a number of sporting recreational facilities in the form of playing
pitches, a cricket ground and tennis courts. The Council’ s 2018 Playing Pitch Strategy
identified the playing pitches as a key club site supporting clubs with a large number of junior
teams. Any proposal should seek to ensure that these pitches and the other sporting facilities
are retained and significantly enhanced as part of a high quality, integrated development.
The improvements to the playing pitches should include, but not be limited to, the following:
Underground pitch drainage;
A replacement pavilion incorporating necessary changing facilities and community
space; and 
The provision of a 'red path' around the pitches to accommodate a range of walking
and running activities.
GMCONSULT.ORG 307Places for Everyone11.215 There is a proposal, linked to the development at Northern Gateway, to provide a bus rapid
transit service linking Heywood and Manchester city centre. There is potential to extend
some of these services to Norden which could serve this development and the wider western
part of the town.This proposal should provide a financial contribution to support the delivery
of this route extension.
11.216 There is an opportunity to deliver improvements to the local highway network in the area to
improve the flow of traffic and ensure that the proposed development does not have an
adverse impact on local roads. The development will be expected to contribute to identified
mitigations.
11.217 The site is also relatively close to Ashworth Valley to the west. This river valley is of high
landscape value and provides some attractive recreational routes. It is important that any
development does not have a negative impact on this natural asset and where practical
historic field boundaries as identified in the Bamford/Norden Heritage Assessment should
be retained and incorporated in to the masterplan. Similarly, the existing footpath network
should also be maintained.This could be addressed through a high quality boundary treatment
on the western edge of the opportunity area. To ensure any development does not impact
upon the setting of the Bamford United Reform Church, a Grade II listed building, the tree
line along Jowkin Lane should be retained to provide screening.
11.218 As with a lot of areas within the borough there is limited capacity in relation to primary school
places.Therefore any proposal would need to address this through a contribution to expand
existing schools in the area.
11.219 The layout of development will also need to take account of the location of electricity pylons
that cross the site. This could be linked to a high quality network of green infrastructure and
landscaping within the scheme.
308 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneCastleton Sidings
Policy JP Allocation 20
Castleton Sidings
Picture 11.31 JPA 20 Castleton Sidings
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 125 high quality homes including higher value family housing;
2. Built development will be limited to the eastern half of the site to minimise encroachment
of built development into the Green Belt with the western part of the site being redeveloped
as an area of open space or nature conservation area and retained within the Green Belt;
3. The north east of the site will accommodate a temporary rail halt and associated parking
to facilitate the extension of the East Lancashire Railway (ELR) from Heywood to Castleton,
and potentially a tram-train trial project if progressed in this location;
4. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
5. Provision should be made within the scheme for appropriate access by Network Rail and
ELR to undertake any maintenance and improvements relating to the extended ELR when
required;
GMCONSULT.ORG 309Places for Everyone6.Address the risk of surface water flooding that affects part of the site through an appropriate
sustainable drainage strategy (SuDS);
7. Provide good quality pedestrian and cycling routes through the site to facilitate safe and
convenient links to the centre of Castleton and the Castleton Bee Network scheme, the
nearby railway station, and westwards to employment locations around Heywood;
8. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
9.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
10.Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of 50
dwellings or more;
11. Incorporate high quality landscaping, multi-functional green and blue infrastructure and
acoustic attenuation to mitigate the potential visual and noise impact on the railway side of
the land and provide appropriate boundary treatment in relation to the retained Green Belt;
and
12.Provide contributions to ensure that there are sufficient school places to accommodate the
new housing either through an expansion of existing schools or the provision of new school
facilities.
11.220 The site offers the opportunity to deliver high quality housing on previously-developed land
in a sustainable and accessible location. The western part of the site is within the Green
Belt but the eastern part of the site closest to Castleton is within the urban area and is
available and deliverable. Overall the site is well placed to utilise existing community facilities
and social infrastructure.
11.221 The development of the site is important to facilitate the extension of the East Lancashire
Railway (ELR) from Heywood to Castleton. The delivery of this extension is identified in the
ELR 2020 Development Strategy and will assist in the wider regeneration of Castleton local
centre. It also offers further potential connectivity given that it provides a convenient link
between the heritage line to mainline passenger services at Castleton station.The first stage
of this requires a temporary halt and parking in the north east part of the site. The halt will
only be required until the legal procedures to extend the line under the Manchester Road
Bridge to provide a connection with the Calder Valley main line are in place. Once the halt
is not required the land will revert to a residential allocation. In the longer term, there could
also be potential for a tram-train trial project between Rochdale, Castleton and Heywood.
The feasibility of tram-train technology in Greater Manchester is currently being studied by
TfGM.
11.222 Given the shape of the site it is not appropriate that all of it is developed as this would have
a significant impact on the Green Belt between Castleton and Heywood.The redevelopment
of the site as a whole does offer the opportunity to create a high quality area of open space
or an area for nature conservation on the western part of the site. In addition to this, the
proximity of the site to the railway line means that any proposal will need to incorporate a
good quality, sensitive and well-designed acoustic attenuation and landscape buffer to
mitigate against visual and noise impacts and improve amenity for new residents.
310 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneFurthermore, given the proximity of the site to the adjacent Heritage Assets, specifically: St
Martins Church, Castleton South Conservation Area, Lock 52, Towpath Bridge and the
United Reform Church, new development will respond positively to preserve and enhance
their setting, retain key views to and from the assets and ensure the new development avoids
being overly dominant.
11.223 A designated National and European site is located close to the site. Therefore any impact
from the new development and any associated traffic generated will need to be taken into
account. As such, a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment will be required for
planning applications involving 50 or more residential units.
11.224 The operational needs of the mainline railway line, ELR extension and a potential tram-train
trial project will also need to be taken fully into account in the design and layout of any
scheme. In particular this would require appropriate access to be facilitated through any
detailed proposal on the site.
Crimble Mill
Policy JP Allocation 21
Crimble Mill
Picture 11.32 JPA 21 Crimble Mill
GMCONSULT.ORG 311Places for EveryoneDevelopment at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 250 new homes, including higher value family housing, within an attractive
riverside setting, including the provision of new homes within the converted Grade II* Listed
Crimble Mill;
2. Protect and enhance the character and significance of the mill complex in order to secure
the long term future of these nationally significant Listed Buildings.This will include detailed
masterplanning to be informed by the Crimble Mill Historic Environment Assessment 2020 ;
3.Define the archaeological potential of the development site to the south of the mill complex
and river through the completion of archaeological evaluation in the form of geophysics,
field walking and trial trenching for areas specified in the Historic Environment Assessment
(2020). The masterplan must detail where significant archaeology will be preserved in situ;
4. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
5.The detailed layout of any scheme should respect the setting of the Listed mill complex and
have regard to the adjacent Queens Park, the River Roch and the wider river valley setting,
including the incorporation of high quality green and blue infrastructure;
6. Provide appropriate access on to the A58 to the south of the site along with secondary
access onto Mutual Street;
7.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
8.Any proposal needs to take into account the risk of flooding, particularly in respect of those
parts of the site that are identified as being within Flood Zone 3.This includes ensuring that
the mill building can be accessed from the north;
9.Retain and enhance existing rights of way and general access through and around the site.
This should include:
1. New and improved access to the adjacent Queens Park;
2. Enhancing walking and cycling routes to encourage sustainable access to Heywood
town centre; and 
3. Creation of a route adjacent to the River Roch to support the wider Roch Valley Way 
10. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
and
11. Any proposal should provide some land adjacent to the existing school to the south of the
site, to allow for the expansion of the school to accommodate the additional demand for
places. Financial contributions will also be required to ensure provision of primary and
secondary schools places to serve the development.
11.225 The proposal provides an opportunity to deliver a sustainable urban extension to the north
east of Heywood whilst safeguarding and preserving a heritage asset. The sustainable
attributes of the site would be enhanced by the creation of new and improved pedestrian
and cycle access. The site is adjacent to Queens Park, an award winning Victorian park
which includes a range of recreation and leisure facilities. Any proposal should create high
312 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonequality physical and visual links to the park. The site also has the potential to deliver
convenient access to Heywood town centre to the south west of the site as well as
destinations further afield via the Roch Valley Way.
11.226 The site will deliver high quality homes in an attractive location which will also secure the
future of a Grade II* Listed Building. Crimble Mill dates back to the mid-18th Century as a
fulling mill. It is a rare surviving example of a textile mill that illustrates the transition from
water to steam power on a rural site. It is likely to be the last, large-scale water powered
rural mill to survive in Greater Manchester. The property is on Historic England’ s Heritage
at Risk Register at Category A (Immediate risk of further rapid deterioration or loss of fabric:
no solution agreed).The condition is recorded as “Very Bad”. Building condition and recording
surveys must be agreed and completed to document the premises prior to any development
or demolition taking place.
11.227 The proposal will be required to demonstrate how it would support the retention and
enhancement of the mill complex. This would need to be agreed by the local planning
authority prior to commencement of any development with a clear timetable secured via a
legal agreement or planning condition as part of any planning permission. The expectation
would be that this would be the first phase of any development given the condition of the
listed mill building. The design and layout of any scheme should respond to its rural setting
and location adjacent to the River Roch and have full regard to the Listed mill and its
semi-rural surroundings. Key views to and from the listed mill complex from the development
site, historic field boundaries and areas of woodland which contribute to the rural character
of the site should also be retained. Where opportunities for interpretation are present these
should be included in the masterplan.
11.228 Parts of the site adjacent to the River Roch are at risk from flooding and this includes part
of the mill complex itself. Any proposal would need to demonstrate how it has addressed
the issue of flooding within the scheme. Any proposed mitigation would need to consider
the effects of the development downstream from the site. The development will also need
to ensure that the mill site can be accessed from the north via Crimble Lane and onto Bury
and Rochdale Old Road.
11.229 The site is adjacent to All Souls C of E Primary School.The development will place significant
demand on school places within the area and local schools are already at or near to capacity.
Any proposal should therefore provide some land adjacent to the school to allow for future
expansion including associated outdoor playing space. This would provide new places in a
location convenient for the residents of the new development.
GMCONSULT.ORG 313Places for EveryoneLand North of Smithy Bridge
Policy JP Allocation 22
Land North of Smithy Bridge
Picture 11.33 JPA 22 Land North of Smithy Bridge
Development at this site will be required to:
1.Deliver around 300 new homes, including higher value family housing, to meet needs within
the local area and to attract and retain higher income households, taking advantage of its
attractive setting next to Hollingworth Lake and the Rochdale Canal;
2. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
3.Deliver a landscape-led development which maximises its Pennine fringe setting and takes
account of views from and into the site, including the incorporation of high quality green
and blue infrastructure;
4.Incorporate a design and layout which complements the existing housing to the west of the
site and the proposed new housing on the former Akzo Nobel site to the north;
314 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5.Create high quality, safe and convenient walking and cycling routes through the site providing
improved linkages to key local destinations including Littleborough Town Centre, Hollingworth
Lake, Rochdale Canal and the two railway stations – Smithy Bridge and Littleborough;
6. Define the archaeological potential of the development site through the completion of
archaeological evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trial trenching for
areas specified in the Land North of Smithy Bridge Historic Environment Assessment 2020.
The masterplan must detail where significant archaeology must be preserved in situ and
demonstrate how the development has responded sympathetically to this;
7. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
8.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
9.Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of 50
dwellings or more;
10.Facilitate the delivery of a new primary school and associated outdoor playing space at the
southern end of the site and contribute to additional primary and secondary places to meet
demand arising from the new development; and
11. Deliver the provision of replacement visitor car parking to replace the existing spaces lost
on the car park at the southern end of the site.
11.230 This site provides an excellent opportunity to deliver a high quality housing scheme and
associated facilities which maximises the potential of this sustainable location. Any proposal
should take advantage of its setting close to Hollingworth Lake and build on the existing and
proposed residential offer within the area.
11.231 The site is within walking distance of both Littleborough and Smithy Bridge rail stations and
adjacent to Smithy Bridge which is an attractive and popular residential area which also
includes Hollingworth Lake Country Park. The site is also relatively close to Littleborough
town centre which contains a range of local services and facilities. Access between these
destinations can be significantly improved through the creation of new routes within this
development and the adjoining housing site to the north.
11.232 Designated National and European sites are located immediately adjacent to the site and
in the wider landscape area. Therefore any impact from the new development and any
associated traffic generated will need to be taken into account. As such, a project specific
Habitats Regulation Assessment will be required for planning applications involving 50 or
more residential units.
11.233 The Land North of Smithy Bridge Historic Environment Assessment 2020 identifies heritage
assets which may be impacted upon through the development of this site. The masterplan
must seek to protect and enhance such assets where possible, otherwise their harm must
be robustly justified and mitigated.
GMCONSULT.ORG 315Places for Everyone11.234 There is a local issue in terms of primary school places and this can only be resolved through
the provision of a new school. This area provides an excellent location for a new facility
given that it lies between Littleborough and Smithy Bridge and therefore can serve both
areas sustainably. It also provides an attractive location for a school which can provide
access to open areas and activities, thus promoting healthy lifestyles.
11.235 The southern end of the site is currently occupied by a car park which accommodates visitors
to the lake. This will need to be replaced by an equivalent facility in order that the parking
needs of visitors to the lake are met and to avoid displacing car parking on to nearby roads
and streets. The delivery of appropriate parking will need to be linked to the overall delivery
of the wider proposal.
Newhey Quarry
Policy JP Allocation 23
Newhey Quarry
Picture 11.34 JPA 23 Newhey Quarry
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 250 new homes, including higher value family housing;
316 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone2. Deliver a mix of housing density, with the potential for higher density development in the
south west part of the site closest to the village centre and the Metrolink stop.The northern
and eastern parts of the site could include larger, higher value housing to diversify housing
choice in the local area;
3. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
4.Create a unique, high quality development including attractive and interesting open spaces
and landscaping by carrying out any necessary re-profiling of the quarry face, incorporating
water features and safeguarding and enhancing biodiversity;
5.Ensure that the re-profiled quarry face, which is to be retained in the Green Belt, takes the
opportunity to incorporate biodiversity and attractive visual features to enhance the quality
of the development;
6. Ensure that the design of the scheme preserves and enhances the setting of the listed St
Thomas Church immediately to the west of the site, provides a buffer zone to the east of
Bradley Farmhouse and avoids the use of Bradley Lane for vehicular access;
7.Provide publicly available car parking to serve the Metrolink stop in Newhey and the residents
on Huddersfield Road to alleviate on street parking issues;
8. Retain and enhance existing rights of way and create a network of safe and attractive
pedestrian and cycling routes linking the development to the centre of Newhey, the nearby
Metrolink stop and the existing cycle / walking network;
9. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
10.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
11. Provide safe and appropriate access onto Huddersfield Road; and
12.Provide contributions to ensure that there are sufficient school places to accommodate the
new housing either through an expansion of existing schools or the provision of new school
facilities.
11.236 Newhey Quarry has been disused for a number of years but does have existing permission
for mineral extraction. This allocation provides an opportunity to deliver a high quality
development incorporating a range of house types in an attractive and spectacular setting.
The setting of this site will be the key driver in terms of any detailed designs and layout for
the site. Given the opportunity that exists to create something exceptional, a ‘traditional’
suburban housing development would not be considered acceptable for this site.
11.237 The site is in a sustainable location with easy access to the centre of Newhey and the
Metrolink stop. Presently the Metrolink stop at Newhey is well used and has no dedicated
parking.The development of this site will be required to deliver publicly available car parking.
The size, location and design of any parking would need to be agreed between the Council,
TfGM and the developer. In addition to parking to serve the Metrolink stop, the development
should also provide parking for residents on Huddersfield Road. This would be to deal with
existing issues as well as taking account of any impact accessing the development may
have on existing on-street parking e.g. to ensure necessary visibility along Huddersfield
Road.
GMCONSULT.ORG 317Places for Everyone11.238 Given the location of the site and the nature of the surrounding area, it will be important for
any layout to incorporate a high quality green and blue infrastructure network and attractive
open spaces and maximise opportunities presented by the quarry face, even where re-profiling
of the quarry face is necessary. This should reflect and utilise the features within the site to
create attractive and usable spaces for new and existing residents. The re-profiled quarry
face is to be retained within the Green Belt along with the south east corner of the site.These
retained areas of Green Belt provide opportunities for enhancement of retained Green Belt
in accordance with NPPF as well as providing opportunities to safeguard habitats and deliver
biodiversity net gain within the site. Although the site is generally well screened from a
number of points, the impact on the wider landscape should be taken fully into account in
terms of the choice of materials and landscaping.
Roch Valley
Policy JP Allocation 24
Roch Valley
Picture 11.35 JPA 24 Roch Valley
Development at this site will be required to:
318 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone1.Deliver around 200 homes, including higher value family homes, on the northern half of the
site adjacent to existing residential areas to be accessed primarily from Smithy Bridge Road
to the east;
2. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
3.Safeguard the land between the developed part of the site and the River Roch to contribute
to measures that deliver flood alleviation benefits for the River Roch catchment between
Littleborough and Rochdale town centre.This should be accompanied by appropriate water
management in the site itself, including sustainable drainage infrastructure (SuDS);
4. Have regard to the river valley setting in terms of the design and layout, particularly in
relation to the materials uses, the incorporation of green and blue infrastructure and the
landscaping along the boundary of the site;
5.Protect and enhance archaeological features and where appropriate carry out archaeological
evaluation for areas specified in the Roch Valley Historic Environment Assessment 2020
to understand where especially significant archaeology must be preserved in situ. Proposals
should be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic Environment
Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated assessment submitted
as part of the planning application ;
6.Maintain and enhance pedestrian and cycle routes through the valley both to promote active
lifestyles and provide sustainable routes to local centres, services and public transport,
notably Smithy Bridge railway station to the south and the bus corridor on the A58 to the
north;
7. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
8.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
9. The layout of the scheme should be designed in a way to deliver the eastern section of a
proposed residential relief road between Smithy Bridge Road and Albert Royds Street.
This proposed new road will need to incorporate attractive, high quality pedestrian and cycle
routes; and 
10.Provide contributions to ensure that there are sufficient school places to accommodate the
new housing either through an expansion of existing schools or the provision of new school
facilities.
11.239 This site is located within the wider Roch Valley between Rochdale and Littleborough which
is outside the current defined urban area but is not within the Green Belt, being currently
designated as Protected Open Land. This land is adjacent to well established areas of
housing and is within an attractive setting. Some development has recently gained planning
permission and the opportunity exists for more, relatively small scale, proposals which respect
the river valley location and setting.
11.240 The Roch Valley Historic Environment Assessment identified the sensitivities that need to
be taken in to account in relation to the masterplan and any subsequent planning applications
for this site.
GMCONSULT.ORG 319Places for Everyone11.241 The area has good access to the A58 bus corridor and there are local services and facilities
along this route. The development will need to provide good walking and cycling routes to
the Calder Valley Railway line station at Smithy Bridge which offers good access to the city
centre and other areas.
11.242 Although none of the land proposed for development would be at risk from flooding the land
to the north of the River Roch has been identified by the Environment Agency and the Council
as a location where flood water storage capacity should be safeguarded to enhance measures
that deliver flood alleviation benefits for the River Roch catchment between Littleborough
and Rochdale town centre. Any development should take account of this proposal and,
where possible, include measures that will contribute to the ability of this location to mitigate
against flood risk in the wider Roch Valley.
11.243 The river valley setting of the site means that the impact of any development must be taken
into account in terms of any design and layout. There are some long distance views into the
site from across the valley and therefore it is important that the impact of any scheme is
minimised as much as possible through the use of appropriate materials and high quality
landscaping.
11.244 There are proposals to deliver a residential relief road linking Smithy Bridge Road and Albert
Royds Street. This route would improve traffic flow on the local route network and reduce
congestion at a number of junctions in the area. This site provides an opportunity to deliver
the eastern section of this road as part of a high quality residential layout. Any new road will
include attractive, high quality pedestrian and cycle routes to promote sustainable modes
of transport from, to and through the site.
320 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneTrows Farm
Policy JP Allocation 25
Trows Farm
Picture 11.36 JPA 25 Trows Farm
Development at this site will be required to:
1. Deliver around 550 new homes incorporating a good mix of house types including higher
value family housing;
2. Achieve excellent design and sustainability through masterplanning and the use of design
codes for the whole site to ensure comprehensive development;
3. Provide access to the site primarily via Cowm Top Lane to the north;
4. Provide safe and attractive walking and cycling routes to the local centre of Castleton and
the railway station;
5. Provide appropriate access to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and cycle storage;
6. Use the topography and contours within the site to deliver a well-designed scheme which
incorporates good quality green and blue infrastructure having regard to existing biodiversity
and greenspace corridors;
GMCONSULT.ORG 321Places for Everyone7.Carry out a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of 50
dwellings or more;
8. Define the archaeological potential of the development site through the completion
of archaeological evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trial trenching for
areas specified in the Trows Farm Historic Environment Assessment 2020.The masterplan
must detail where significant archaeology must be preserved in situ and demonstrate how
the development has responded sympathetically to this;
9. Ensure that development provides a positive visual impact given its prominent position
adjacent to the M62 and A627(M) motorways;
10.Provide financial contributions to mitigate impacts on the highway network identified through
a transport assessment;
11.Incorporate appropriate noise and air quality mitigation along the M62 and A627(M) motorway
corridors; and
12.Provide contributions to ensure that there are sufficient school places to accommodate the
new housing either through an expansion of existing schools or the provision of new school
facilities.
11.245 The site is available and deliverable for residential development and provides an excellent
opportunity to widen housing choice in a sustainable location. The wider area around
Castleton has a number of existing housing opportunities and this site complements these
and offers the potential to regenerate Castleton in the longer term. Castleton offers a number
of local services and has excellent transport links.
11.246 Rail journeys into the city centre from Castleton station take only fifteen minutes and this is
complemented by a quality bus corridor along Manchester Road. High-quality walking and
cycling connections to Castleton station and Manchester Road should therefore be provided
as part of the development. The site also has good access to the motorway network.
11.247 The topography of the site does not affect its deliverability and provides an opportunity to
deliver a visually interesting scheme using the topography within the site. Where possible,
the masterplan should incorporate the retention of historic field boundaries as highlighted
in the Trows Farm Historic Environment Assessment 2020. This will help retain the rural
character of the site and will contribute to the green infrastructure offer within the site.
11.248 There is new employment development to the north of the site at Crown Business Park but
the site is large enough to achieve adequate separation between the two uses.
11.249 It is considered that by 2040 this development may lead to traffic increases on the M62
motorway because of its size and relative proximity to the motorway. The M62 passes close
to designated National and European sites known to be susceptible to traffic pollution,
particularly nitrate deposition. As such, a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment
will be required for planning applications involving 50 or more residential units.
322 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.250 There is a local issue in terms of primary school places and this can only be resolved through
the provision of a new school in the area. Therefore this development will be expected to
contribute to the provision of a new school to ensure that the demand for new school places
created by the development can be met.
GMCONSULT.ORG 323Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Salford
Picture 11.37 Salford District Overview
324 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneLand at Hazelhurst Farm
Policy JP Allocation 26
Land at Hazelhurst Farm
Picture 11.38 JPA 26 Land at Hazelhurst Farm
Land at Hazelhurst to the east of the M60 and south of the A580 East Lancashire Road will be
developed for around 400 dwellings.
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Be in accordance with a masterplan/framework or Supplementary Planning Document
(SPD) that has been developed in consultation with the local community and other
stakeholders, and is considered acceptable by the city council, or in the case of an SPD
adopted by the city council;
2. Provide an affordable housing scheme equivalent to at least 50% of the dwellings on the
site (with an indicative affordable housing tenure split of 37.5% social rented, 37.5%
affordable rented and 25% shared ownership), with some of this directed towards off-site
provision;
GMCONSULT.ORG 325Places for Everyone3. Be designed to encourage the use of nearby public transport services, in particular the
Leigh-Salford-Manchester bus rapid transit service, with high quality pedestrian and cycling
routes and off-site pedestrian crossings that connect all parts of the site to nearby bus stops;
4. Incorporate attractive public rights of way through the site which connect into the wider
pedestrian and cycling network providing access to local facilities;
5. Ensure that vehicular access to the site does not have an unacceptable impact on the
quality of existing residential areas;
6. Protect the quality of watercourses through and around the site;
7. Respond to the site’ s location, characteristics and surroundings to take opportunities to
incorporate green infrastructure that can most effectively benefit the site and the wider area;
8. Protect and enhance the Worsley Woods Site of Biological Importance to the west of the
site;
9. Retain mature woodland, hedgerows, swamp and water bodies as important landscape
features within the site, supporting an overall increase in its nature conservation value;
10. Support the objectives for the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area and
avoid harm to protected species;
11.Incorporate sustainable drainage systems to mitigate the surface water flooding on the site,
while ensuring that there is no adverse impact on the potential for flooding off-site;
12. Provide a buffer for the overhead power lines that run across the site, in accordance with
National Grid requirements;
13. Provide mitigation to address noise pollution from nearby roads;
14.Include new allotment plots to meet the local standard unless suitable alternative provision
can be made in the local area; and
15. Set aside land to accommodate additional primary school provision, unless it can be
demonstrated that sufficient additional school places will be provided off-site within the local
area to meet the likely demand generated by the new housing.
11.251 The site benefits from close proximity to stops for the Leigh-Salford-Manchester bus
rapid transit service, providing good public transport access to the employment and leisure
opportunities in the City Centre. It is important to the sustainable development of the site
that it is designed to maximise the use of those services, and this is likely to require some
off-site improvements to pedestrian routes to the stops as well as influencing the on-site
layout. The landscape features within and around the site are important to the character of
the wider area, and their retention will help to differentiate its development and ensure a
high quality residential environment.The woods to the west of the site are already designated
for their nature conservation importance, and the development should secure further
improvements. A desk-based assessment of the site’ s archaeological interest will be required.
326 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneEast of Boothstown
Policy JP Allocation 27
East of Boothstown
Picture 11.39 JPA 27 East of Boothstown
The area between the existing settlement of Boothstown and the RHS Garden Bridgewater site,
between Leigh Road and the Bridgewater Canal, will be developed for around 300 dwellings.
The site will be developed at a low density and to an exceptional quality, primarily targeting the
top end of the housing market with the intention of attracting and retaining highly skilled workers
within Greater Manchester.
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Be in accordance with a masterplan/framework or Supplementary Planning Document
(SPD) that has been developed in consultation with the local community and other
stakeholders, and is considered acceptable by the city council, or in the case of an SPD
adopted by the city council;
2. Provide an affordable housing scheme equivalent to at least 50% of the dwellings on the
site (with an indicative affordable housing tenure split of 37.5% social rented, 37.5%
GMCONSULT.ORG 327Places for Everyoneaffordable rented and 25% shared ownership), with some of this directed towards off-site
provision;
3.Retain Alder Wood and the other areas of mature deciduous woodland and protected trees;
4. Take opportunities to enhance the ecological value of Shaw Brook, including naturalising
where practicable and retaining significant open land around it, and utilise the brook as a
central landscape feature running through the site;
5.Incorporate a landscaped buffer along the eastern boundary of the site facing RHS Garden
Bridgewater;
6. Provide a detailed drainage and flood risk management strategy which addresses the
outcomes of the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, ensuring that development does not
increase flood risk elsewhere;
7. Incorporate high quality sustainable drainage systems as part of the green infrastructure
for the site and accommodate sufficient space for any necessary flood storage, particularly
in the south of the site;
8. Protect the quality of watercourses through and around the site;
9. Support the objectives for the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area and
avoid harm to protected species;
10.Ensure good quality access by walking and cycling for all residents to services and facilities
in Boothstown and the local area, bus services on the surrounding road network, the
Bridgewater Canal and Chat Moss to the south, including through the provision of a high
quality network of pedestrian and cycle routes throughout the site; off-site pedestrian
crossings and a footpath adjacent to the site on the south side of Leigh Road;
11. Secure further improvements to the path on the north side of the Bridgewater Canal to
provide a high quality walking and cycling route to RHS Garden Bridgewater, Worsley Village
and Boothsbank Park;
12. Include a new neighbourhood equipped area of play;
13. Retain or replace existing playing fields;
14.Include new allotment plots to meet the local standard unless suitable alternative provision
can be made in the local area;
15.Provide an easement for the significant utilities infrastructure running through and near the
site;
16. Take its primary access from Occupation Road;
17. Incorporate mitigation to address noise pollution from nearby roads;
18.Conserve and enhance the setting of nearby heritage assets and, informed by the findings
and recommendations of the Heritage Assessment (2019) in the Plan's evidence base and
any Heritage Impact Assessment submitted as part of the planning application process;
and
19. Employ methods throughout the construction process that will ensure the potential for
archaeology is investigated and any finds safeguarded and properly recorded.
11.252 This site to the east of Boothstown offers one of a small number of opportunities within
Greater Manchester to deliver very high value housing in an extremely attractive environment,
benefiting not only from an established premium housing market but also a location
328 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneimmediately next to the new RHS Garden Bridgewater which is due to open in 2021. It is
essential that the development of the site fully maximises the opportunities presented by
this location, and delivers the highest quality living environment. A lower density of
development than would normally be required under Policy JP-H 4 'Density of New Housing'
will be acceptable on this site.
11.253 Water vole and bird surveys will be required prior to any development, as will a desk-based
archaeological assessment of the whole site and an historic building assessment of
Boothsbank Farm. The priority for any off-site nature conservation enhancements required
to deliver a minimum 10% net gain in biodiversity from the development of the site is likely
to be the restoration of lowland raised bog and complementary habitats in Chat Moss to the
south.
North of Irlam Station
Policy JP Allocation 28
North of Irlam Station
Picture 11.40 JPA 28 North of Irlam Station
GMCONSULT.ORG 329Places for EveryoneLand North of Irlam Station, between New Moss Road and Astley Road, will be developed to
provide a high quality extension to the Irlam and Cadishead neighbourhood focused around
Irlam Station.The site has capacity for around 800 dwellings and associated social and community
uses.
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Be in accordance with a masterplan/framework or Supplementary Planning Document
(SPD) that has been developed in consultation with the local community and other
stakeholders, and is considered acceptable by the city council, or in the case of an SPD
adopted by the city council. Central to the masterplan shall be the consideration of
opportunities to restore habitats, strengthen ecological networks, and manage the carbon
and hydrological implications of development, having regard to the presence of peat on this
site;
2. Be supported by a robust delivery strategy, which is prepared in partnership with key
stakeholders and secures the effective delivery of the full masterplan, including transport,
green and social infrastructure, affordable housing and planning obligation contributions;
3. Be provided in the form of houses with densities increasing towards the most accessible
parts of the site around Irlam Station, and include accommodation specifically targeted at
older people;
4. Provide an affordable housing scheme equivalent to at least 25% of the dwellings, and
substantially more if other funding becomes available to allow for this (with an indicative
affordable housing tenure split of 37.5% social rented, 37.5% affordable rented and 25%
shared ownership);
5. Minimise the loss of the carbon storage function of the peat and undertake a hydrological
assessment in order to avoid any adverse impacts on the hydrology of Chat Moss, whilst
ensuring that there is no potential for future problems of land stability or subsidence;
6.Incorporate a high quality network of public routes through the site, connected into the wider
pedestrian and cycling network that provides access to local facilities, public transport
services, New Moss Wood and Chat Moss;
7. Minimise impact on local highways and provide contributions to support the improvement
of affected local junctions;
8.Include a new direct pedestrian and cycle route to Irlam Station from the west and enhance
cycle parking and car parking facilities at the station;
9. Ensure that vehicular access to the site does not have an unacceptable impact on the
quality of existing residential areas;
10.Integrate high levels of green infrastructure throughout the site, including retaining landscape
features such as mature trees and hedgerows, so as to minimise the visual impact on the
wider landscape, achieve a minimum 10% net gain in biodiversity, mitigate the environmental
impacts of development and provide an attractive backdrop to walking and cycling routes;
11. Support the objectives for the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area and
avoid harm to protected species;
330 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone12.Be supported by breeding and winter bird surveys to understand and minimise any adverse
impact on bird species in this area. Surveys of potential compensation areas should also
be undertaken to demonstrate that displacement into the wider landscape is possible;
13. Be supported by a project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment for any planning
applications involving 50 or more dwellings;
14.Incorporate measures to mimic natural drainage through the use of green sustainable urban
drainage to control the rate of surface water run-off;
15. Protect the quality of watercourses through and around the site;
16. Include a new neighbourhood park incorporating an equipped area for play;
17. Include new allotment plots to meet the local standard;
18. Incorporate appropriate mitigation including tree planting to address issues of noise
generated by the  M62 motorway and the rail line;
19. Set aside land to provide additional school provision, unless it can be demonstrated that
sufficient additional school places will be provided off-site within the local area to meet the
likely demand generated by the new housing; and
20. Employ methods throughout the construction process that will ensure the potential for
archaeology is investigated and any finds safeguarded and properly recorded.
11.254 The site has been identified as being appropriate for development due to its location next
to Irlam rail station, with services that provide easy access to the huge range of employment
and leisure opportunities in the City Centre and Trafford Park. It also benefits from Northbank
Industrial Park just to the south and bus routes to Port Salford and Eccles to the east.
11.255 Higher density houses will be appropriate in the most accessible parts of the site immediately
around Irlam Station, in accordance with Policy JP-H 4 'Density of New Housing' , helping
to maximise the number of people within easy walking distance of the station.
11.256 The additional population will help to support existing shops and services in Irlam and
Cadishead, such as the nearby Lower Irlam and Cadishead local centres, but the site could
potentially accommodate small scale facilities to serve local needs if identified as appropriate
through the masterplanning process. It is anticipated that the site’ s location and the dwelling
types provided will be attractive to families with a resulting demand for additional school
places which may, at least in part, need to be accommodated within the site.
11.257 The site is currently in multiple ownerships, and will deliver a range of complementary uses
alongside residential (such as education, public open space and green infrastructure) and
will require infrastructure enhancements. To ensure the allocation is deliverable, it will be
essential that a delivery strategy manages different interests effectively and equitably to
secure delivery of the overall masterplan. This is to avoid a situation in which initial phases
do not make adequate provision to support subsequent phases, and in particular the
community uses these will include.
GMCONSULT.ORG 331Places for Everyone11.258 It will be important that the design and layout of the site effectively integrates development
into the existing area and promotes community cohesion. In particular, publicly accessible
recreation space, facilities, and routes through the site onto Chat Moss should be positioned
so as to be accessible to both new and existing residents.
11.259 Most of the site has significant depths of peat across it, meaning that there will be high costs
associated with development on it. The peat on the site has been degraded due to decades
of drainage and agricultural activity. Nevertheless, it still performs an important carbon
storage function, and should be retained wherever possible. However, this will have to be
balanced against the need to ensure that there is no risk of subsidence for development on
the site or for surrounding infrastructure such as the M62 motorway. The priority for any
off-site nature conservation enhancements required to deliver a minimum 10% net gain in
biodiversity from the development of the site is likely to be the enhancement of New Moss
Wood, and the restoration of lowland raised bog and complementary habitats in Chat Moss
to the north. Much of the site is grade 1 agricultural land, but the benefits of delivering
additional housing in this accessible location are considered to outweigh the loss of the
land’s farming potential. Wider ecological surveys, including water vole, brown hare and
birds, will be required prior to any development.
11.260 For any planning applications within the boundary of the allocation involving 50 or more
dwellings, a project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment will be required given that
such developments may lead to traffic increases on the M62 motorway because of their size
and relative proximity to the motorway.The M62 passes close to designated European sites
known to be susceptible to traffic pollution, particularly nitrate deposition.
11.261 The depths of peat heighten the potential for archaeological finds. There will be a need to
undertake a detailed archaeological desk-based assessment, including aerial photograph
analysis, field walking, historic building assessment, and coring/evaluation trenching of the
peatlands, leading to further investigations and recording in advance of and during the
construction process.
332 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePort Salford Extension
Policy JP Allocation 29
Port Salford Extension
Picture 11.41 JPA 29 Port Salford Extension
A major expansion of Port Salford accommodating around 320,000 sqm of employment floorspace
will be delivered to the north and west of Barton Aerodrome, taking advantage of the new port
facilities, rail link and highway improvements that will have been completed as part of the early
phases of Port Salford. This will provide one of the most well-connected and market-attractive
industrial and warehousing locations in the country, with a strong focus on logistics activities
but also incorporating high quality manufacturing floorspace.
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Be in accordance with a masterplan/framework or Supplementary Planning Document
(SPD) that has been developed in consultation with the local community and other
stakeholders, and is considered acceptable by the city council, or in the case of an SPD
adopted by the city council;
GMCONSULT.ORG 333Places for Everyone2. Involve high levels of community engagement, including through regular liaison meetings
convened by the landowner and/or developers;
3. Not be commenced until the rail link, highway improvements, canal berths and container
terminal associated with the permitted Port Salford scheme to the south of the A57 have
been completed and are operational and there is a clear commitment to the ongoing
maintenance and full operation of this transport infrastructure;
4. Be designed to form part of an integrated facility with the Port Salford site to the south of
the A57 and associated infrastructure, encouraging and enabling all occupiers to utilise the
rail and water connections for freight movement;
5. Deliver necessary highway improvements of a strategic and local nature to cater for the
additional traffic created by the expansion of Port Salford in a way that is compatible with
any proposals for the enhancement of the wider motorway network and ensures the safe
and efficient operation of the local road network;
6.Incorporate suitable HGV parking provision to cater for the area’ s anticipated use, including
as appropriate stop over provision, and amenity facilities to serve the needs of HGV drivers;
7.Provide high quality walking and cycling routes from across the site to the bus stops on the
A57 and the wider pedestrian and cycling network including Port Salford Greenway;
8.Maximise links to existing public transport services and support new routes and enhanced
services as appropriate, including accommodating a potential extension of the Trafford Park
Metrolink line to serve Port Salford;
9. Protect the full functioning and operational safety of Barton Aerodrome;
10.Conserve and where appropriate enhance, the significance of surrounding designated and
non-designated heritage assets, including by:
i. Designing and landscaping the development to minimise any adverse impacts on the
setting of Barton Aerodrome and the listed buildings within it;
ii. Where harm to Barton Aerodrome and any heritage asset within it is justified,
opportunities shall be sought to better reveal the significance of the heritage asset,
securing repairs to them, improving public access to them and/or providing publicly
accessible information about them; and
iii. Being informed by the findings and recommendations of the Heritage Assessment
(2019) in the Plan’ s evidence base and any Heritage Impact Assessment submitted
as part of the planning application process.
334 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11. Justify and provide full compensation for the loss of the golf course in accordance with
paragraph 97 of the NPPF (February 2019) or any subsequent revision of national planning
policy;
12. Incorporate high levels of landscaping, including the retention or replacement of existing
woodland, hedgerows and ponds where practicable, so as to minimise the visual impact
on the wider landscape (including on the remaining Green Belt separating the site from
Irlam), achieve a minimum 10% net gain in biodiversity and mitigate the environmental
impacts of development including noise;
13. Support the objectives for the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area and
avoid harm to protected species;
14.Be supported by breeding and winter bird surveys to understand and minimise any adverse
impact on bird species in this area. Surveys of potential compensation areas should also
be undertaken to demonstrate that displacement is possible into the wider landscape;
15. Protect and enhance surrounding habitats, including the Foxhill Glen Site of Biological
Importance;
16. Be supported by a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for any planning
applications involving a floorspace of 1,000 sqm and above;
17.Mitigate the risk of surface water and groundwater flood risk, incorporating green sustainable
drainage systems as part of the landscaping of the site;
18.Minimise the loss of the carbon storage function of the peat and avoid any adverse impacts
on the hydrology of surrounding areas of peat/mossland, whilst ensuring that there is no
potential for future problems of land stability or subsidence;
19. Protect the quality of watercourses through and around the site;
20.Protect the amenity of remaining residential properties within or on the edge of the allocation,
including through the provision of appropriate landscaped buffers;
21. Provide an appropriate buffer to the Barton Moss Secure Care Centre on Barton Moss
Road, to protect the privacy and amenity of residents and staff;
22. Implement an agreed strategy for dealing with its local air quality impacts;
23. Give positive consideration to the incorporation of renewable and low carbon energy
infrastructure, including the potential for solar panels on buildings; and
24. Employ methods throughout the construction process that will ensure the potential for
archaeology is investigated and any finds safeguarded and properly recorded.
GMCONSULT.ORG 335Places for Everyone11.262 The combination of excellent water, rail and road access, including direct shipping links to
the post-panamax facility at the Port of Liverpool, will make Port Salford one of the most
attractive locations in the country for industrial and warehousing development. An initial
phase of development to the south of the A57 will provide around 150,000 sqm of primarily
warehousing floorspace in total. Enabling its expansion to the north of the A57 to provide
an additional 320,000 sqm of floorspace will help to significantly boost the competitiveness
of Greater Manchester, offering the type of site that can compete with locations internationally
for investment. The transport connections mean that the location is particularly attractive for
logistics activities, but high quality manufacturing could also be provided in order to diversify
the employment and investment opportunities in this part of Greater Manchester. Much of
the site is grade 1 agricultural land, but the unique economic opportunity provided by the
location is considered to outweigh the loss of the land’ s farming potential.
11.263 One of the key attributes of Port Salford is its potential to remove freight from roads and
move it more sustainably by rail and water, and it will be vital that any development of the
site takes advantage of this by utilising the infrastructure delivered as part of the permitted
scheme. Nevertheless, the expansion of Port Salford will generate significant additional
traffic and highway improvements to cater for these demands should be delivered as part
of the site’ s development. The ongoing North West Quadrant Study, commissioned by
Highways England, is investigating the options for broader motorway network improvements
in this area, and it will be important to coordinate the development of Port Salford with any
resulting proposals.
11.264 The retention of the Green Belt to the west and east of the site will help to prevent the
coalescence of Irlam and Eccles. It will be important to make positive use of this Green Belt,
including by expanding the facilities at Brookhouse Playing Fields to the east, and there may
be opportunities to retain/reconfigure the former golf course to the west of the site. Even
with the retention of part of the Green Belt, the scale of the development is likely to have a
significant visual impact, and it will be very important for it to be integrated into the landscape
as far as possible, particularly through the provision of high quality green infrastructure.
11.265 Barton Aerodrome (City Airport and Heliport) to the south of the site is an important facility
for Greater Manchester, as well as being a significant heritage asset. The expansion of Port
Salford will need to be designed so that it does not adversely impact on its successful
functioning, taking into account any safeguarding requirements for flight paths, and ensure
that any harm to the setting of the heritage assets is minimised. In particular, careful
consideration will need to be given to the siting and orientation of units, the choice and colour
of materials, and the landscaping scheme adopted.
11.266 The priority for any off-site nature conservation enhancements required to deliver a minimum
10% net gain in biodiversity from the development of the site is likely to include the
enhancement of Foxhill Glen Site of Biological Importance, ecological enhancements to
remaining areas of Green Belt to the site’ s south western and north eastern boundaries and
the restoration of lowland raised bog and complementary habitats in Chat Moss to the north.
Wider ecological surveys, including water vole, brown hare, great crested newts and birds,
336 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyonewill be required prior to any development. For any planning applications within the boundary
of the allocation involving a floorspace of over 1,000 sqm, a project specific Habitats
Regulations Assessment will be required given that such developments may lead to traffic
increases on the M62 motorway because of their size and relative proximity to the motorway.
The M62 passes close to designated European sites known to be susceptible to traffic
pollution, particularly nitrate deposition.
11.267 The depths of peat heighten the potential for archaeological finds. There will be a need to
undertake a detailed archaeological desk-based assessment, including aerial photograph
analysis, field walking, historic building assessment, and coring/evaluation trenching of the
peatlands, leading to further investigations and recording in advance of and during the
construction process.
GMCONSULT.ORG 337Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Tameside
Picture 11.42 Tameside District Overview
338 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAshton Moss West
Policy JP Allocation 30
Ashton Moss West
Picture 11.43 JPA 30 Ashton Moss West
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Deliver around 160,000 square metres of employment floorspace, primarily within the E(g)(ii)
- Research and Development, E(g)(iii) - Light and Industrial and B2 - General Industrial use
classes;
2. Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan, phasing strategy and design code
approved by the Local Planning Authority for the whole site, developed through engagement
with the local community, Council and other appropriate stakeholders;
3. Be informed by a detailed earthworks and remediation strategy;
4. Be informed by an assessment of archaeology;
GMCONSULT.ORG 339Places for Everyone5. Take an integrated and co-ordinated approach to infrastructure to support the scale of the
whole development;
6. Ensure that architecture is innovative and creative, while respecting and integrating into
the surrounding landscape, creating a high quality and contemporary employment location;
7. Ensure the character of, and interface between, new and existing development, including
the setting of neighbouring heritage assets and surrounding residential dwellings and
gardens, are sensitively designed and acknowledged by development proposals;
8. Provide developer contributions towards transport and other infrastructure as deemed
appropriate;
9.Ensure employment, education and training opportunities are available for residents within
the local area both through construction phases and upon completion;
10. Provide access into the site from the A6140 Lord Sheldon Way;
11. Ensure highways are designed to accommodate access to the rail line to the northern
boundary and land is set aside in that location to potentially accommodate provision for a
future rail station;
12. Ensure proposals create a safe, walkable and green development;
13.Ensure active travel is promoted to be the most attractive form of local transport through a
clear network and hierarchy of legible and attractive streets, footpaths and cycle ways;
14.Protect and enhance key landscape and ecological features, including trees, watercourses
and ponds;
15. Deliver a high quality public realm that incorporates street tree planting;
16. Incorporate and enhance as attractive and desirable routes existing public rights of way
and the active travel route along the site's western edge;
17. Be designed to enhance connectivity to existing communities in the locality alongside key
assets such as: schools, cycle and walking routes, public transport services and Daisy Nook
Country Park; and
18.Set aside land for a range of public open spaces, such as: natural space and amenity space,
in accordance with the Council's most up to date Open Space Review.
11.268 Having previously been identified as part of a potential World EXPO site, Ashton Moss West
represents a major opportunity for Tameside and the east of Greater Manchester to deliver
approximately 160,000 square metres of high quality employment floorspace. This should
340 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneprimarily fall within the E(g)(ii) - Research and Development, E(g)(iii) - Light and Industrial
and B2 - General Industrial use classes and be aimed at delivering facilities suitable for
identified areas of economic strength and key growth sectors within Tameside and Greater
Manchester: life sciences; health technologies, advanced manufacturing and materials
science/fabrication.
11.269 The site’ s urban fringe setting with proximity to existing employment, leisure and retail
opportunities, excellent transport connections with close proximity to rail, Metrolink and
motorway, as well as a dark fibre network and surrounding green and blue infrastructure set
the framework for a unique opportunity and logical sustainable extension to the existing
Ashton Moss employment area.
11.270 Additionally, Tameside’ s existing manufacturing and engineering base is currently constrained
by the supply of sites available, curtailing potential growth and stifling regeneration and churn
within the borough’ s industrial spaces. The site is therefore critical to provide expansion
opportunities for existing businesses operational within Tameside as well as providing the
facilities required to compete for inward investment.
11.271 To deliver a high quality development it will be important to have a clear and comprehensive
masterplan, phasing strategy and design code; which should carefully consider matters of
character, including orientation, materials and soft landscaping in respect of the setting of
neighbouring heritage assets(129) and surrounding residential properties.
11.272 This should be accompanied by an integrated approach to delivering infrastructure, including
for example: a site wide drainage strategy, green, blue and grey infrastructure (including
utilities provision), high speed broadband connectivity through fibre to the premises and
electric vehicle charging infrastructure, either by providing charging points or through installing
appropriate ducting to allow for future provision.
11.273 A site wide drainage strategy will need to incorporate sustainable drainage systems with the
aim of achieving greenfield run-off rates as a means of combating surface water flood risk
and contributing towards climate change resilience. Furthermore, the site overlaps with the
current Air Quality Management Area along the M60 corridor to the east and Lord Sheldon
Way to the south will need to be considered in the masterplanning process. This could take
the form of appropriate buffering as part of the green infrastructure network across the site.
11.274 One of the principle challenges to developing Ashton Moss West is the volume of placed
material, alongside other geotechnical considerations. Contamination testing, gas monitoring,
and ground investigation and analysis will therefore be required to produce an earthworks
assessment and remediation strategy prior to development taking place.
11.275 A programme of archaeological assessment should also inform the masterplanning approach
to the site, allowing for archaeological evaluation to determine the extent and condition of
potential remains. This will help to establish where significant archaeology should be
129 Historic Environment Assessment, GMSF Land Allocations, Tameside, Ashton Moss West, University of Salford
GMCONSULT.ORG 341Places for Everyonepreserved in situ through sympathetic planning or where the archaeology can be removed,
but first of all recorded, and opportunities that may exist to create public interpretation
information relating to the sites historical past.
11.276 Architectural design solutions should deliver an innovative and creative development that
is also resilient to climate change, using, where possible, zero-carbon development and
energy-positive technology (i.e. producing more energy than is consumed), thus creating a
high quality and contemporary employment development that also benefits from access to
a range of sustainable modes of transport.
11.277 Development of the site has the potential to create a range of educational, training and
employment opportunities for local residents during the construction phases and upon
completion. Given the proximity of this site to areas of high deprivation in Ashton-under-Lyne,
Droylsden and east Manchester the proposed development will help to bring about long term
benefits to these communities by providing locally accessible employment.
11.278 To enhance and optimise the excellent transport connectivity of the site further, there is the
potential opportunity to deliver a new rail station on the Manchester to Leeds line that will
service the employment allocation and the Droylsden and Audenshaw areas. Provision
should therefore be included in the site’ s masterplan for the safeguarding of land along the
northern boundary of the allocation to accommodate a potential new rail station, access and
car parking.
11.279 It is important that existing landscape and ecological features alongside other green
infrastructure, habitats and assets of biological importance are protected, managed and
enhanced as part of the comprehensive masterplan of the site, taking into account guidance
in the Landscape Character Assessment.(130)
11.280 The development will seek to minimise the number of trips made by private car to and from
the site by connecting with adjacent residential areas, employment locations, leisure uses
and centres, via a network of safe walking and cycling routes and public open spaces. Priority
should be given to cycle and pedestrian routes that provide direct access to the existing and
proposed cycle and pedestrian network, together with opportunities for linking access to
public transport.
11.281 The existing active travel route to the site’ s western edge should be retained and enhanced
and could form part of a landscape buffer to existing residential properties. In addition,
consideration should be given to a number of existing informal routes and public rights of
way to the site’ s northern edge that could also benefit from improved connectivity and
enhancement, including access to Metrolink.
130 Greater Manchester Landscape
Character Assessment https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1727/g reater-manchester-landscape-char acter-and-sensitivity-repor t.pdf
342 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.282 While the site is in a sustainable and accessible location, being well served by public transport
and with convenient access to junction 23 of the M60, new vehicular access will be required
into the site off the A6140 Lord Sheldon Way, integrating with the existing and proposed
pedestrian and cycle network.
11.283 Alongside the intention that the development will ensure active travel becomes the most
attractive form of local transport, it will also contribute towards active and healthy communities
through on site open space provision, in accordance with the Council’ s most up to date Open
Space Review, and through the provision of safe and accessible connections to neighbouring
public open spaces, including Daisy Nook Country Park.
Godley Green Garden Village
Policy JP Allocation 31
Godley Green Garden Village
Picture 11.44 JPA 31 Godley Green Garden Village
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Construct around 2,350 new homes;
GMCONSULT.ORG 343Places for Everyone2. Deliver homes across a range of types and tenures in accordance with the Council's most
up to date Housing Needs Assessment;
3. Ensure Garden City principles are enshrined throughout;
4. Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan, phasing strategy and design code
approved by the Local Planning Authority for the whole site, developed through engagement
with the local community, Council and other appropriate stakeholders;
5. Be informed by an assessment of archaeology;
6. Take an integrated and co-ordinated approach to infrastructure to support the scale of the
whole development;
7. Ensure that architecture is innovative and creative, while respecting and integrating into
the surrounding landscape, creating aspirational and desirable communities in which to
live;
8. Ensure the character of, and interface between, new and existing development including
the setting of heritage assets and dwellings and gardens, particularly those within the site,
are sensitively designed and acknowledged by development proposals;
9.Establish two connected villages, each with their own distinct identity and served by a local
hub offering flexible workspace opportunities and a range of community, retail, cultural and
leisure uses, separated by Godley Brook as a central landscape feature;
10.Deliver higher density residential development around Hattersley train station and the village
hubs;
11.Provide developer contributions towards education, health, transport and other infrastructure
as deemed appropriate;
12.Ensure employment, education and training opportunities are available for residents within
the local area, both through construction phases and upon completion;
13.Set aside land to accommodate additional education provision, unless it can be demonstrated
that sufficient additional school places will be accommodated off site within the local area
to meet the likely demand generated;
14. Provide access into the site from the A560 Mottram Old Road including improved cycling
and pedestrian facilities along the site's frontage;
15. Ensure highways are designed to accommodate bus routing and provision of services are
sought within the early phases of development;
344 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone16. Provide, in the early phase of development, a pedestrian, cycle, equine (multi-user and
accessible to all) bridge connecting to Hattersley and be designed and located to encourage
use of public transport services at Hattersley train station;
17. Ensure neighbourhoods are green, walkable and safe places;
18. Ensure active travel is promoted through a clear network and hierarchy of legible and
attractive streets, footpaths and cycle ways;
19. Incorporate and enhance as attractive and desirable routes, existing public rights of way
and the Trans Pennine Trail;
20. Be designed to enhance connectivity to existing communities in the locality, alongside key
assets such as Hyde town centre, schools, cycle and walking routes, public transport services
and Werneth Low Country Park;
21. Protect and enhance the designated Sites of Biological Importance of Werneth Brook and
Brookfold Wood;
22.Protect and enhance key landscape and ecological features, including protected trees and
woodlands, areas of Ancient Woodland, other mature trees, hedgerows, cloughs,
watercourses and ponds;
23. Deliver a high quality public realm that incorporates street tree planting; and
24. Set aside land for a range of public open spaces, such as: parks and gardens, natural
space, amenity space, play provision and allotments, in accordance with the Council’ s most
up to date Open Space Review.
11.284 Godley Green presents a significant opportunity to realise the ambitious vision of delivering
a new large-scale settlement of around 2,350 new homes in the south of the borough,
adjacent to the residential neighbourhoods of Godley and Hattersley. The site’ s semi-rural
setting, together with an existing network of green and blue infrastructure set the framework
for an attractive, high quality and accessible settlement that will be enshrined in Garden City
principles(131)and is a logical sustainable extension to the existing urban area.
11.285 The site is in close proximity to both rail and motorway connections, with Hattersley train
station located adjacent and Godley train station to the north. There is potential to enhance
the existing sustainable travel opportunities, through the provision of tram-train services
along the Glossop line and new bridge access to Hattersley is required, connecting to the
surrounding community. The ongoing regeneration in Hattersley will be reinforced by the
development at Godley Green, providing positive outcomes and opportunities in an area of
deprivation.
131 https://www .tcpa.org.uk/understanding-garden-villages
GMCONSULT.ORG 345Places for Everyone11.286 The new homes will assist in meeting the full range of housing needs and aspirations through
a diversity of housing opportunities. There is potential to deliver innovative and creative
development that is energy efficient and resilient to climate change using, where possible,
zero-carbon and energy-positive technology (i.e. producing more energy than is consumed).
11.287 Older persons housing and plots for custom and self-build will also feature as important
elements of the housing mix in the Garden Village and some should be affordable to those
on lower and middle incomes seeking this type of opportunity.
11.288 To deliver a high quality development it will be essential to have a clear and comprehensive
masterplan, phasing strategy and design code, which should carefully consider matters of
character, appearance and setting, including for example: orientation, materials, building
heights, densities, boundary treatments, soft landscaping and enhanced screening. Such
considerations will be particularly important in respect to historic buildings of local significance
and existing residential properties.
11.289 This should be accompanied by an integrated approach to delivering infrastructure. This
should include for example: a site wide drainage strategy, green, blue and grey infrastructure
(including utilities provision), high speed broadband connectivity through fibre to the premises
and electric  vehicle charging infrastructure, either by providing charging points or through
installing appropriate ducting to allow for future provision.
11.290 In addition, the site wide drainage strategy will need to incorporate sustainable drainage
systems with the aim of achieving greenfield run-off rates as a means of combatting surface
water flood risk and contributing towards climate change resilience.
11.291 The Historic Environment Assessment(132) has identified a number of non-designated built
heritage assets within the site as having a degree of local heritage significance. In recognition
of this, built heritage in the form of historic routes, field boundaries, hedgerows, farmsteads,
the agricultural hamlet at Greenside and villas within their existing residential plots along
Green Lane should be retained where possible and could be incorporated into the masterplan
to help create a sense of place and link with the site’ s past.
11.292 A programme of archaeological assessment should inform the masterplanning approach to
the site, allowing for archaeological evaluation to determine the extent and condition of
potential remains, in particular around Greenside, east of Brookfold Wood, Green Lane and
north of Brookfold. This will help to establish where significant archaeology should be
preserved in situ through sympathetic planning or where the archaeology can be removed
but first of all recorded. There may also be the opportunity to involve the community in such
activities through excavation projects, for example at Dove House Farm.
132 Historic Environment Assessment, GMSF Land Allocations, Tameside, Godley Green, University of Salford
346 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.293 Building for a Healthy Life(133), as the Government endorsed industry standard for
well-designed homes and neighbourhoods, should be used alongside Garden City principles
to guide the masterplanning and development of Godley Green as an attractive, functional
and sustainable settlement with the aim of achieving Building for a Healthy Life commendation.
11.294 Due to the site’ s semi-rural location, topography and landscape character; architectural and
landscape design solutions must be innovative and creative; taking into account guidance
in the Landscape Character Assessment.(134)This could include integration into the
surrounding landscape, particularly along development edges, and the interface between
new and existing development along Green Lane and the historic hamlet of Greenside on
Mottram Old Road, particularly where the rural landscape and views contribute to the
significance of farmsteads and where buffer zones could retain a sense of openness.
11.295 Godley Brook as a key landscape feature, which runs south-north through the centre of the
site, will effectively divide Godley Green into two smaller villages, each served by a local
hub offering a range of community and retail facilities in which residents can meet most of
their day-to-day needs, although it is not envisaged that convenience retail floor space should
exceed 500 sqm gross external area within each local hub.
11.296 As part of the hubs, there may be potential to develop a hotel or elderly care facilities which
would take advantage of the co-location with the proposed retail and community facilities
and in particular the proximity to Hattersley train station.
11.297 Flexible workspace could be delivered within the site close to Hattersley train station, providing
employment opportunities for residents. With the proximity of two railway stations, public
transport, motorway connectivity and active travel network, it is envisaged that a wide range
of employment opportunities located around Hyde, Tameside and across the city region will
be accessible to Garden Village residents.
11.298 Although the site is within a sustainable and accessible location, new access and linkages
into the site off the A560 Mottram Old Road together with the existing and proposed pedestrian
and cycle network will be necessary. Fibre to the premises will also enable opportunities for
home working as a sustainable alternative to traditional commuting.
11.299 It is also important that landscape, habitat and ecological features such as: Werneth Brook
and Brookfold Wood Sites of Biological Importance (Ancient Woodland); protected trees and
woodlands, hedgerows; together with the array of ponds and watercourses and other green
infrastructure, are protected and managed as part of the comprehensive masterplan of the
site to maintain and enhance their conservation status and prevent habitat fragmentation.
133 Building for a Healthy Life - A Design Toolkit for neighbourhoods, streets, homes and public
spaces https://www .udg.org.uk/pub lications/other manuals/b uilding-health y-life
134 Greater Manchester Landscape Character
Assessment https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1727/g reater-manchester-landscape-char acter-and-sensitivity-repor t.pdf
GMCONSULT.ORG 347Places for Everyone11.300 Open space and recreation areas comprise an essential element of both Garden City and
Building for a Healthy Life principles, contributing to the creation of healthy and active
communities. Sport England’ s Active Design(135) and other age friendly design
principles(136) should be incorporated as far as possible in the masterplanning of the site to
encourage active lifestyle behaviour and play at all ages.
South of Hyde
Policy JP Allocation 32
South of Hyde
Picture 11.45 JPA 32 South of Hyde
Development of this site will be required to:
1. Construct around 440 new homes;
2. Deliver homes across a range of types and tenures in accordance with the Council’ s most
up to date Housing Needs Assessment;
135 Sport England – Active Design https://www .spor tengland.org/ho w-we-can-help/f acilities-and-planning/design-and-cost-guidance/activ e-design
136 For example the WHO’ s Age-friendly Cities Framework  https://e xtranet.who .int/agefr iendlyw orld/age-fr iendly-cities-fr amework/
348 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone3. Ensure Garden City principles are enshrined throughout;
4. Be in accordance with a comprehensive masterplan, phasing strategy and design code
approved by the Local Planning Authority for the whole site, developed through engagement
with the local community, Council and other appropriate stakeholders;
5. Take an integrated and co-ordinated approach to infrastructure to support the scale of the
whole development;
6. Ensure that architecture is innovative and creative, while respecting and integrating into
the surrounding landscape, creating aspirational and desirable communities in which to
live;
7. Ensure the character of, and interface between, new and existing development including
the setting of heritage assets and dwellings and gardens, particularly those within the site
are sensitively designed and acknowledged by development proposals;
8. Ensure that development edges successfully integrate into the adjoining landscape;
9. Deliver lower density residential development as the site elevation increases toward its
eastern most extent at Lord Derby Road;
10.Sustain and enhance both designated and non-designated heritage assets and their settings
including the Grade II* listed Apethorn Farmhouse and Grade II Pole Bank Hall;
11. Proposals should be informed by the findings and recommendations of the Historic
Environment Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence base and any updated Historic
Impact Assessment(s) submitted as part of the planning application process ;
12. Deliver the sensitive restoration and long term future use of the Grade II* listed Apethorn
Farmhouse and complex within an early phase of development together with its removal
from the Heritage at Risk Register ;
13.Provide developer contributions towards education, health, transport and other infrastructure
as deemed appropriate;
14.Ensure employment, education and training opportunities are available for residents within
the local area through the construction phases;
15. Provide access to each east and west parcel from the A560 Stockport Road;
16. Ensure neighbourhoods are green, walkable and safe places;
17.Ensure active travel is promoted to be the most attractive form of local transport through a
clear network and hierarchy of legible and attractive streets, footpaths and cycle ways;
GMCONSULT.ORG 349Places for Everyone18. Incorporate and enhance as attractive and desirable routes, existing public rights of way,
including the Cown Edge Way;
19. Be designed to enhance connectivity to existing communities in the locality, alongside key
assets such as Hyde town centre, schools, cycle and walking routes, public transport
services, the Peak Forrest Canal, Trans Pennine Trail and Werneth Low Country Park;
20. Protect and enhance the designated Pole Bank Site of Biological Importance;
21. Protect and enhance key landscape and ecological features including protected trees and
woodlands, areas of Ancient Woodland, other mature trees, hedgerows, cloughs,
watercourses and ponds;
22. Deliver a high quality public realm that incorporates street tree planting; and
23. Set aside land for a range of public open spaces such as; natural space, amenity space,
play provision and allotments in accordance with the Council’ s most up to date Open Space
Review.
11.301 The two parcels that make up the south of Hyde allocation represent an opportunity to deliver
housing in advance of the larger more complex sites contained in Places for Everyone due
to their smaller scale.The sites’  semi-rural setting, opportunity to secure the future of a grade
II* listed building together with an existing network of green infrastructure, set the framework
for an attractive, high quality and accessible neighbourhood that enshrines Garden City
principles and is a logical, sustainable, extension to the suburb of Gee Cross.
11.302 Apethorn Fold is a small group of historic agricultural buildings, straddling Apethorn Lane
to the north of the allocation. The Grade II* listed Apethorn Farmhouse is considered to be
a rare surviving example in Tameside of a medieval cruck framed open hall house, which
once comprised domestic accommodation to the north and shippon used to house animals
to the south, separated by a cross passage. The farmhouse which dates back to the C.15
and altered during the C.17-C.19 owes its survival in part to its timber truss construction.(137)
The farmhouse is currently unoccupied and has been identified on Historic England’ s Heritage
at Risk Register, where its current condition has been recorded as very bad.
11.303 Development of the site is therefore expected to secure the restoration and long term future
reuse of the Apethorn Farmhouse and complex. A Heritage Impact Assessment will be
required to support the masterplanning of the site and any subsequent planning applications,
demonstrating how the proposal will support the retention, enhancement and long term future
use of Apethorn Farmhouse and complex and ensure the proposed new development has
a positive impact on the heritage asset’ s conservation and setting.
137 Historic Environment Assessment, GMSF Land Allocations, Tameside, South of Hyde, University of Salford
350 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.304 It is expected that full restoration of the farm complex, including those features which are
considered to be curtilage listed, will commence in the early phase of development and this
be set out in the masterplan and phasing strategy. It is noted that this should include the
curtilage listed building to the north side of Apethorn Lane which will remain within the Green
Belt. In doing so, condition surveys, an archaeological presence on site and watching brief
are all likely to be needed.
11.305 The new homes will assist in meeting the full range of housing needs and aspirations through
a diversity of housing opportunities. There is potential to deliver innovative and creative
development that is energy efficient and resilient to climate change using, where possible,
zero-carbon and energy-positive technology (i.e. producing more energy than is consumed).
11.306 Older persons housing and plots for custom and self-build could also feature as elements
of the housing mix and some should be affordable to those on lower and middle incomes
seeking this type of opportunity.
11.307 To deliver a high quality development it will be important to have a clear and comprehensive
masterplan, phasing strategy and design code, which should carefully consider matters of
character, appearance and setting.This includes for example: orientation, materials, building
heights, densities, boundary treatments, soft landscaping and enhanced screening. Such
considerations will be particularly important in respect to heritage assets and existing
residential properties.
11.308 This masterplanning should be accompanied by an integrated approach to delivering
infrastructure. This should include for example: a site wide drainage strategy, green, blue
and grey infrastructure (including utilities provision), high speed broadband connectivity
through fibre to the premises and electric vehicle charging infrastructure, either by providing
charging points or through installing appropriate ducting to allow for future provision.
11.309 Taking into account the findings of the most recent strategic flood risk assessment, the site
wide drainage strategy will need to incorporate sustainable drainage systems with the aim
of achieving greenfield run-off rates as a means of combatting surface water flood risk and
contributing towards climate change resilience.
11.310 A number of buildings and features have been identified within the site as having heritage
significance. In recognition of this, built heritage, in the form of heritage assets, historic
routes, field boundaries, hedgerows and woodland should be retained where possible and
could be incorporated into the masterplan to help create a sense of place and link with the
site’s past.
11.311 A programme of archaeological assessments should inform the masterplanning approach,
allowing for archaeological evaluation to determine the extent and condition of potential
remains particularly around heritage assets. This will help to establish where significant
archaeology should be preserved in situ through sympathetic planning or where it can be
removed but first of all recorded.
GMCONSULT.ORG 351Places for Everyone11.312 Due to the sites’  semi-rural location, topography and landscape character; architectural and
landscape design solutions must be innovative and creative; taking into account guidance
in the Landscape Character Assessment.(138)This could include: integrating into the
surrounding landscape, particularly along development edges, at the interface between new
and existing development and as the site ascends in elevation toward Lord Derby Road.
This is also particularly relevant where the rural landscape and views contribute to the
significance of heritage assets  and where buffer zones could retain a sense of openness.
11.313 Building for a Healthy Life(139) as the Government endorsed industry standard for
well-designed homes and neighbourhoods should be used to guide the masterplanning and
development, alongside Garden City principles, as an attractive, functional and sustainable
settlement with the aim of achieving Building for a Healthy Life commendation.
11.314 Neighbourhoods will be linked via safe walking and cycling routes and public open spaces,
all of which will respect and integrate into the surrounding landscape. Cycle and pedestrian
routes within the development area should provide direct connection to the existing and
proposed cycle and pedestrian network, Woodley Railway Station and Hyde town centre
where possible.
11.315 Development of this site has the potential to create education, training and employment
opportunities during the construction phase for local residents, thus bringing about benefits
to these communities by providing locally accessible employment.
11.316 Although the site is in a sustainable and accessible location, being well served by a high
frequency bus service between Ashton-under-Lyne and Stockport, with convenient access
to the Marple rail line at Woodley and the highway network; new access and linkages into
the site off the A560 Stockport Road together with the existing and proposed pedestrian and
cycle network will be necessary.
11.317 The GM Rail Prospectus articulates the future vision for rail with longer trains and more
frequent services, and TfGM has committed in Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan to
explore the options for delivering a Metro/tram-train service on the Marple line with the
potential to deliver greatly increased capacity and connectivity. Therefore, enhancing
pedestrian and cycle connectivity between the site and the nearby Woodley station will be
critical in improving a move away from private car use.
11.318 It is also important that landscape, habitat and ecological features such as: Pole Bank Site
of Biological Importance (Ancient Woodland); protected trees and woodlands; hedgerows;
together with the array of watercourses and other green infrastructure are protected and
managed as part of the comprehensive masterplan of the sites to maintain and enhance
their conservation status and prevent habitat fragmentation.
138 Greater Manchester Landscape Character
Assessment https://www .greater manchester-ca.go v.uk/media/1727/g reater-manchester-landscape-char acter-and-sensitivity-repor t.pdf
139 Building for a Healthy Life - A Design Toolkit for neighbourhoods, streets, homes and public
spaces https://www .udg.org.uk/pub lications/other manuals/b uilding-health y-life
352 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.319 Open space and recreation areas comprise an essential element of both Garden City and
Building for a Healthy Life principles, contributing to the creation of healthy and active
communities. Sport England’ s Active Design(140) and age friendly design principles(141) should
be incorporated as far as possible in the masterplanning of the site to encourage active
lifestyle behaviour and play at all ages.
140 Sport England – Active Design https://www .spor tengland.org/ho w-we-can-help/f acilities-and-planning/design-and-cost-guidance/activ e-design
141 For example the WHO’ s Age-friendly Cities Framework  https://e xtranet.who .int/agefr iendlyw orld/age-fr iendly-cities-fr amework/
GMCONSULT.ORG 353Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Trafford
Picture 11.46 Trafford District Overview
354 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneNew Carrington
Policy JP Allocation 33
New Carrington
Picture 11.47 JPA 33 New Carrington
GMCONSULT.ORG 355Places for EveryonePicture 11.48 New Carrington Allocation Policy Plan
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a masterplan or Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) that has
been approved by the Local Planning Authority, to ensure the site is planned and delivered
in a coordinated and comprehensive manner;
Residential De velopment
2.Deliver around 5,000 units, of which 4,300 will be delivered in the plan period at Carrington
/ Partington and Sale West, in the following distinct character areas, as set out on the
Allocation Policy Plan:
Carrington Village – approximately 600 units
Sale West – approximately 1,450 units
East Partington – approximately 2,600 units
Warburton Lane – approximately 420 units
356 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone3. Deliver high quality residential units which are accessible, integrated with the existing
community and well designed to create a genuine sense of place;
4.Demonstrate how the constraints on land to the west of Warburton Lane can be addressed.
Planning applications will need to demonstrate how the site will:
i.Integrate into and reflect the character of the historic landscape; avoiding areas of the
highest heritage significance;
ii.Integrate successfully into Partington and the wider New Carrington allocation, both in
terms of physical linkages and the ability to understand the wider area as a distinct
place.
Development proposals which do not address these constraints will not be accepted;
5. Deliver a range of house types, sizes, layouts and tenures through a place-led approach
based on each of the Character Areas in the New Carrington Masterplan / SPD and the
Trafford Local Plan;
6. Deliver residential development at the following average densities, recognising the distinct
characteristics of each area:
Carrington Village – average 35 dph
Sale West – average 40 dph
East Partington – average 35 dph, increasing to an average of 40 dph in areas close to
the existing Partington urban area. Higher density development at an average of 55
dph will be appropriate close to the local centre;
Warburton Lane – average 25 dph
7. Provide a minimum of 15% affordable housing across the New Carrington allocation. In
determining appropriate affordable housing provision regard should be had to the distinct
Character Areas within the New Carrington site which each reflect different housing markets.
The New Carrington Masterplan / SPD and the Trafford Local Plan will provide additional
guidance on appropriate affordable housing contributions for each of the Character Areas;
8.Make specific provision for self-build/custom-build plots, subject to local demand as set out
in the Council’ s self-build register;
Emplo yment de velopment
GMCONSULT.ORG 357Places for Everyone9. Deliver around 350,000 sqm (gross) of employment opportunities for industry and
warehousing as set out on the Allocation Policy Plan;
10.Create legible streets and spaces within the employment area with attractive buildings that
respond positively to the landscape and provide accessible linkages to residential areas
and local / neighbourhood centres;
11. Create employment and training opportunities for local people in particular through the
construction phase, to be set out in a Local Labour Agreement in accordance with Local
Plan policies;
Deliv ery and phasing
12.Coordinate the phasing of development with the delivery of infrastructure on the site, ensuring
sustainable growth at this location;
13.Make a proportionate contribution, by means of an equalisation mechanism, to infrastructure
delivery. Detailed requirements will be set out in the masterplan/SPD;
Transpor t, Integ ration and Accessibility
14. Deliver accessible streets which prioritise cycling, walking and public transport over the
private car;
15. Deliver a network of safe cycling and walking routes through the allocation, utilising the
Carrington rides, improving the Trans Pennine Trail and creating new/enhancing existing
Public Rights of Way and bridleways;
16. Deliver connected neighbourhoods which successfully link with existing communities at
Carrington, Partington and Sale West, overcoming barriers such as the Red Brook to
successfully integrate development;
17. Utilise the route of the disused railway line through the site as a strategic sustainable
transport corridor providing links from New Carrington to the wider area as part of the
Carrington Greenway scheme which includes reinstatement of the Cadishead viaduct for
pedestrians and cyclists, as well as contributing to future improved east/west public transport
linkages;
18. Deliver bus priority infrastructure within the site and, where appropriate, on bus routes
linking to the site;
19.Deliver and directly contribute to the Carrington Relief Road to provide an alternative route
to the A6144 and a strategic link through Carrington, incorporating provision for pedestrians,
cyclists and bus priority measures. Other highway links to access development parcels will
also be required, including:
i. Southern link – connecting the A6144 Warburton Lane and the A6144 Manchester
Road (via either Moss Lane or Broadway), crossing the Red Brook and providing a
local route around the Partington urban area 
358 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneii.Eastern link – connecting development parcels in the East Partington area to Isherwood
Road, crossing the rail line and linking through the employment parcels 
iii.Sale West link – from the Carrington Relief Road and extending south through the Sale
West development parcel and linking to Firs Way.
20. Make the necessary improvements to the Strategic, Primary and Local Road Networks
including the following key new / upgraded junctions to enable the proposed level of
development and mitigate the impact of increased vehicle numbers:
i. Carrington Spur widening on the approach to M60, J8 (approx. 500m)
ii. Carrington Relief Road widening between Isherwood Road and the Carrington Spur
iii. Upgrades to the Flixton Road junction
iv. Upgrades to the Carrington Relief Road / Banky Lane / Carrington Spur junction
v. Upgrade Isherwood Road
Comm unity F acilities
21. Provide a new local centre with convenience shopping facilities and services in the region
of 2,500 sqm of retail floorspace, within the East Partington development area at a scale
to serve the needs of the proposed communities and improve the sustainability of the wider
Partington and Carrington area;
22. Provide new Neighbourhood Centres at Carrington Village and Sale West to provide local
services and community facilities;
23.Provide and contribute to the provision of additional primary and secondary school places.
Extensions will be required to primary and secondary schools in Partington and Sale West;
24. Provide and contribute to new health facilities to support the new community;
Green Belt
25. Provide a significant green corridor through the site which remains in the Green Belt and
provides an area of protected, high quality, accessible green infrastructure;
26. Create defensible Green Belt boundaries utilising, where appropriate, existing landscape
features;
27. Mitigate any impact and improve the environmental quality and accessibility of remaining
Green Belt land;
Green Infr astructure
28.Provide significant areas of open and accessible green space throughout the allocation as
part of the wider strategic green infrastructure network. These will provide important
GMCONSULT.ORG 359Places for Everyonemulti-functional recreational spaces and active travel routes, linking different areas within
and beyond the site;
29. Retain, create and enhance wildlife corridors and stepping stone habitats within the
development areas to support nature recovery networks, provide ecosystem services and
accessible green infrastructure;
30. Provide a range of types and sizes of open space within the allocation boundary in
accordance with the Council’ s open space  and outdoor sports policies, including local open
space; natural and semi-natural greenspace; equipped and informal play and youth provision;
outdoor sports facilities and allotments, ensuring arrangements for their long term
maintenance;
31.Protect the green spaces at Sale West identified on the Allocation Policy Plan and promote
their use as an accessible green infrastructure area. These areas are protected from
development and proposals will need to demonstrate how they will deliver improved Green
Infrastructure and access (including new/improved public rights of way) to these parcels to
mitigate the impact of development;
Natur al En vironment
32. Protect and enhance natural environment assets within the site and the surrounding area,
including Brookheys Covert Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), local Sites of Biological
Importance (SBIs) and local nature conservation sites and features including woodland and
hedgerows both within and adjacent to the allocation;
33. Achieve enhanced delivery of ecosystem services through the restoration and creation of
areas of wetland within the site, commensurate with the identified high potential of the area
in this regard and the role of the allocation site in the context of the Local Nature Recovery
Network for Greater Manchester;
34. Deliver a clear and measurable net gain in biodiversity, including provision for long-term
management of habitats and geological features which may include SUDs systems of high
biodiversity value created as part of the overall flood risk and drainage strategy;
35. Protect and enhance the habitats and corridors along Sinderland Brook, the River Mersey
and the Manchester Ship Canal as part of the catchment-based approach for the Upper
Mersey to improve the existing water quality and seek to achieve ‘good’  status as required
under the North West River Basin Management Plan (2019);
36.Provide a project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment for planning applications of over
50 residential units or 1,000 sqm employment floorspace;
Landscape
37.Retain important landscape views and features such as the rides, hedgerows and tree belts
and use these features to develop a distinct sense of place at Carrington;
38. Conserve and enhance local landscape character, including the setting of the Dunham
Massey estate and Warburton Deer Park;
39. Provide appropriate landscape buffers across the site, including a substantial landscape
buffer along the southern boundary of the Warburton Lane development parcels to mitigate
the impact on the rural landscape to the south of the allocation area;
360 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneDesign
40. Ensure new development is place-led, creative and contextual in its response, respecting
the local character and positive local design features of the area;
41. Be in accordance with the Council’ s adopted Design Guide embracing strategic design
principles, including creating connected communities, redefining streets, delivering inclusive
characterful design and responding to heritage;
42.Respect the urban/rural fringe setting in the design of the development, in terms of its height,
scale and siting, and demonstrate high standards of design;
Histor ic En vironment
43. Conserve and enhance the historic environment in line with the findings and
recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence
base and any updated HIA submitted as part of the planning application process;
44.Positively conserve archaeological features and, where appropriate, carry out archaeological
evaluation in the form of geophysics, field walking and trial trenching for areas specified in
the New Carrington Historic Environment Assessment 2020 to establish where especially
significant archaeology should be preserved in situ;
Utilities , Environmental Protection and Climate Change
45. Mitigate the impacts of climate change and utilise the most energy and water efficient
technologies to achieve zero carbon by 2028;
46. Explore and deliver the most appropriate solutions to providing decentralised, low carbon
heat and energy as part of new residential and employment development. This will include
exploring the potential for the development of district heat, cooling and energy networks,
energy centres, the implementation of renewable and low carbon heat and energy
technologies in design and the co-location of potential heat and energy customers and
suppliers;
47. Ensure new development maximises on-site renewable energy measures in line with the
energy hierarchy, for example via solar PV and other low carbon technologies, linked to
the provision of and supply to electric vehicle charging infrastructure;
48.Make provision for necessary infrastructure such as utilities, full fibre broadband and electric
vehicle charging points in accordance with relevant Places for Everyone or Local Plan
policies;
49.Mitigate flood risk and surface water management issues, both within and beyond the site,
including provision of SUDS through the design and layout of development and in accordance
with a flood risk, foul and surface water management strategy. The allocation-wide
drainage strategy should be prepared after having fully assessed site topography, flood
risk, existing water features and naturally occurring flow paths to identify where water will
naturally accumulate. The strategy will demonstrate how each phase interacts with other
phases of development and further detail will be set out in the Masterplan / SPD;
50. Incorporate on-site measures to deal with surface water and control the rate of surface
water run off. Planning applications will be expected to apply the full surface water hierarchy
GMCONSULT.ORG 361Places for Everyoneand ensure water is managed close to where it falls by mimicking the natural drainage
solution;
51. Demonstrate that development proposals will not adversely affect existing water supply
infrastructure that passes through the site. This will include consideration of any changes
in ground levels and management of the construction process;
52.Address land contamination issues by undertaking appropriate site investigations to identify
the level of contamination and deliver effective remediation to ensure there are no
unacceptable risks to human health and the water environment;
53. Incorporate appropriate noise and air quality mitigation particularly along major transport
corridors, including HS2, and in relation to existing and new businesses, facilities and
employment uses, including existing operational wastewater treatment works;
54. Improvements to the existing Partington and Altrincham wastewater treatment works will
be supported where they are needed to respond to future foul and surface water infrastructure
requirements.
11.320 The New Carrington allocation will deliver a new community that links to the existing
Carrington, Partington and Sale West areas and provides improved transport, social and
green infrastructure. New development will create a distinct, attractive place which capitalises
on the industrial history and prominent landscape features on the site.
11.321 The successful development of the site will require a coordinated approach between all
landowners and developers. Trafford Council is therefore committed to working with
stakeholders to bring forward a detailed Masterplan / SPD which provides a framework for
the sustainable delivery of a new community at Carrington, Partington and Sale West. The
delivery strategy must ensure that a mechanism is put in place to secure proportionate
contributions from all developers within the New Carrington allocation and deliver the wide
ranging infrastructure required.
11.322 A high level Masterplan has been prepared for the New Carrington site which has assessed
the existing site constraints and determined the overall residential and employment
development quantum, as well as identifying green infrastructure areas and opportunities.
The Masterplan identifies four distinct residential character areas across the allocation:
Carrington Village, Sale West, Partington East and Warburton Lane.
Residential de velopment
11.323 The New Carrington site will deliver around 4,300 homes in the plan period and up to 5,000
new homes in total. High quality design will be essential to ensuring the successful integration
of development with existing communities and in delivering a positive step change in the
local area.
11.324 Some areas of the site have particularly high sensitivity and will require additional work to
be undertaken in advance of any planning application to ensure that any impacts can be
suitably addressed. The land to the west of Warburton Lane was previously designated as
safeguarded land in the Trafford Core Strategy and is a particularly sensitive parcel. The
362 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneNew Carrington Historic Environment Assessment 2020 identified that the area has potentially
significant heritage value and it is therefore necessary to take a cautious approach to the
development potential of this area in advance of the necessary investigative works being
undertaken. The site is also located on the periphery of the Carrington allocation and any
future planning application will therefore need to demonstrate how the site can be integrated
with Partington to the north and the wider New Carrington development area. Such measures
will need to include pedestrian / cycle crossings over the Red Brook linking to Oak Road,
providing well lit, safe access to Partington. The high level phasing of the New Carrington
site has taken a cautious approach and development of this parcel is not expected to come
forward within the Places for Everyone plan period, recognising the significant issues which
development in this area will need to overcome.
11.325 The site will primarily deliver family housing at a medium density to meet the identified need
and reflect the existing residential communities around the site. Slightly higher densities of
40 dph are appropriate close to the existing Partington and Sale West communities, which
reflects and builds on existing suburban development to create a sustainable urban extension.
A lower density of 25 dph is appropriate on the land at Warburton Lane to reflect the rural
character of this area and the need to avoid assets of heritage significance. Higher density
development (up to 55 dph) will be appropriate in and close to the local or neighbourhood
centres. Development should be innovatively designed across the site to deliver the specified
density whilst acknowledging the local landscape character and site characteristics.
11.326 Trafford has an acute affordable housing need and this site offers an opportunity to deliver
affordable housing on a greenfield site. A minimum of 15% affordable housing contribution
is required across the whole allocation, however, regard will be given to the distinct Character
Areas identified within the New Carrington allocation: Carrington Village, East Partington,
Sale West and Warburton Lane in determining an appropriate contribution. Further guidance
will also be provided in the Carrington Masterplan / SPD and the Trafford Local Plan.
Emplo yment de velopment 
11.327 Employment development will be located in the north western area of New Carrington, largely
on existing brownfield land. This is the most appropriate use in this area considering the
existing COMAH zone constraints.The employment land will make an important contribution
to Greater Manchester’ s overall employment land needs and provide a strategic employment
location in  the south of Greater Manchester. Careful consideration should be given to the
design of the employment development to ensure that it is well connected and integrated
with the surrounding residential development.
11.328 The site is close to deprived communities in Partington, Carrington and Sale West and it will
also be accessible by bus and tram to other deprived areas in Trafford. Therefore targets
for the training and employment of local people could, therefore, be agreed between the
developers, the local colleges and the Local Authority to ensure local people, particularly
from these more deprived communities, benefit from training and new jobs as a result of the
development.
GMCONSULT.ORG 363Places for EveryoneDeliv ery and phasing
11.329 Development of the New Carrington site will need to be phased alongside the necessary
infrastructure to ensure a successful, sustainable development. A high level, indicative
phasing plan has been developed which recognises the distinctive character areas and
demonstrates the deliverability of the site. A more detailed development and infrastructure
phasing plan will be required as part of the Masterplan / SPD. It is expected that multiple
residential sites will be delivered alongside each other throughout the plan period in order
to maximise the delivery rate and cater for the distinct market areas.
11.330 All development will be expected to make a proportionate contribution to necessary
infrastructure, including transport, social and green infrastructure. Further details on supporting
infrastructure requirements will be set out in the Masterplan / SPD together with information
on trigger points for when infrastructure including road improvements, new schools and link
roads will be required linked to the development trajectory.
Transpor t, integ ration and accessibility 
11.331 A significantly improved active travel and public transport network is central to the success
of the New Carrington allocation. Development will be designed to support walking and
cycling, encouraging sustainable short journeys and promoting healthier lifestyles. The
development should have regard to the Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040 refresh,
providing improved links to the city centre, enhancing sustainable travel links to/from New
Carrington and Flixton Station, as well as contributing to east-west links to Altrincham and
Salford through the use of the disused rail route. This route will deliver the Carrington
Greenway  providing an important active travel link to Irlam Station, as well as a potential
future public transport corridor.
11.332 Public transport from the New Carrington area is currently unattractive in relation to the
private car and it will therefore be essential for the development to provide genuinely attractive
alternatives. This will require significant investment in bus priority measures (potentially
including bus gates, dedicated bus lanes or busways and priority and signalised junctions)
to minimise any delay from congestion on key roads.
11.333 The New Carrington Transport Locality Assessment provides a high level assessment of
current highways infrastructure and identifies key transport interventions which will be required
to mitigate the impact of the New Carrington allocation. The Carrington Relief Road, a new
strategic link through the site, is integral to delivering the development at New Carrington,
providing increased capacity and access to the development parcels. Development proposals
within the New Carrington allocation will need to make a proportionate contribution to the
Carrington Relief Road, as well as other highways infrastructure across the site.
11.334 The New Carrington Transport Locality Assessment also identified key highway junctions
which will require intervention to mitigate the impact of development, as well as other link
roads which will be required to access development parcels within the site. The detailed
design of these interventions will be determined by Transport Assessments to fully understand
the impact of the development and to identify appropriate solutions.
364 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone11.335 These transport infrastructure improvements will enhance the attractiveness of New Carrington
as an employment and residential location and also promote modal shift from car travel to
sustainable travel modes.
Comm unity f acilities
11.336 A new local centre, located in the east Partington character area, will be a hub for community
infrastructure and will service the needs of the new community. Smaller neighbourhood
centres will also provide local community hubs at Sale West and Carrington Village. The
large number of new residents will also help to support existing shops and services in the
surrounding area, such as the Partington Local Centre.
11.337 The site will be an attractive location for families and this will generate an additional demand
for school places. The development will need to provide new facilities for primary and
secondary education. Development will also be required to provide new and improved health
facilities to support the new community.
Green Belt
11.338 The development will require the removal of some land from the Green Belt; but a significant
area of Green Belt will remain within the allocation through the middle of the site which will
prevent the merging of Carrington/Partington and Sale West. This green wedge will also
provide an attractive setting for the development and will be an important green resource.
It will include features which characterise the landscape such as the existing woodlands,
hedgerows and rides. The wedge will be protected as a green infrastructure corridor,
connecting Sinderland Brook to the Mersey Valley in the north.
Green Infr astructure
11.339 The New Carrington site has been identified as a Green Infrastructure Opportunity Area and
has the potential to deliver significant improvements to the green infrastructure network.The
development will enhance existing green infrastructure characteristics across the site and
other open spaces. Enhancements to the mature tree belt along the existing Sale West
boundary (which forms part of Dainewell Wood) will contribute to the green setting of the
Sale West extension as well as improved access and green infrastructure enhancement to
the green spaces identified at Sale West which are protected from development. Improved
access within and through these parcels will be a priority and should include enhancement
of the Trans Pennine Trail. Where green spaces remain in the allocation area that is to be
removed from the Green Belt, the highest level of protection will be applied in accordance
with the Trafford Local Plan.
Natur al En vironment
11.340 The development will need to have regard to existing ecological features and should seek
to enhance these as part of the development.This includes the habitats and green corridors
along Sinderland Brook and Red Brook.
GMCONSULT.ORG 365Places for Everyone11.341 Parts of the allocation also support organic soils (peat) which, when taken together with a
low-lying topography and existing nature conservation interest, makes the area particularly
suitable for restoration to important wetland habitats. Much of the area which is suitable for
wetland restoration is within the identified Green Belt gap and it will therefore be protected
from development; other locations across the site will also be considered in relation to their
wetlands potential.The Carrington area is included in the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature
Improvement Area and has been identified as a potentially important part of a developing
Wetlands Ecological Network. In addition, the conservation of organic soils will help to reduce
carbon emissions.
11.342 A project specific Habitats Regulation Assessment will be required for all development
proposals of over 50 units / 1,000 sqm floorspace, as the site has the potential to result in
increased traffic on the M62 motorway by 2040. Whilst it is recognised that New Carrington
does not have direct connectivity to the M62 a precautionary approach has been taken
considering the scale of this allocation.The M62 passes close to designated European sites
known to be susceptible to traffic pollution, particularly nitrate deposition.
Landscape
11.343 Much of the Carrington / Partington area is currently undeveloped and open, development
proposals will therefore be required to consider the landscape setting of the site and enhance
the transition from the urban edge to the open countryside, having regard to views/vistas
into and out of the site, as well as sensitive receptors through the retention of existing natural
features and the introduction of additional tree planting and vegetation to soften new
development. Areas of the site, such as Warburton Deer Park and Carrington Moss, have
particularly high landscape sensitivity and therefore development proposals in these areas
will need to demonstrate how any landscape impact can be appropriately mitigated.
Design
11.344 The New Carrington development will need to set a new high quality design standard for
this area and development should draw upon the guidance in the Council’ s adopted Design
Guide. Specific parameters for the development of the site will be set out in the Masterplan
/ SPD.
11.345 The development will reduce the isolation of existing communities at Carrington, Partington
and Sale West, and to fully achieve this, it will be essential for development to be carefully
integrated with the existing communities. Issues such as design and linkages through the
site should be carefully considered.
Histor ic En vironment
11.346 The New Carrington Historic Environment Assessment considered the characterisation of
the site in respect of the known archaeological, built heritage and historic landscape within
the allocation. It assessed the potential for the development to affect designated and
non-designated heritage assets and this has been taken into account in considering an
appropriate development quantum for the site. The area of highest archaeological potential
366 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyoneis land to the south of Partington and to the west of Warburton Lane, which has been identified
as a potentially significant medieval deer park. Other areas of the Carrington site which are
of potentially high value include areas of peat where assessments to establish the depth
and condition of any remaining peat will be required. For the areas of highest archaeological
value, work will need to be undertaken in advance of any planning application to understand
the heritage significance of these areas. A suitable mitigation strategy should be developed
which also identifies opportunities to enhance the heritage assets.
11.347 The Historic Environment Assessment also identified the designated and non-designated
built heritage assets, their settings and important views that enhance the historic character
and identity of the area. The Assessment makes recommendations for mitigation, and
identifies opportunities for enhancement. Further archaeological investigation and a Heritage
Impact Assessment will be required as part of future planning applications.
Utilities , Environmental Protection and Climate Change
11.348 A high quality, coordinated drainage strategy will be required for New Carrington which is
integrated with the green and blue environment and which is a key component of the new
high quality design standard for the area. Landowners / developers will be expected to work
together in the interest of sustainable drainage and if pumping stations are identified as
necessary, the strategy will demonstrate how the number of pumping stations is minimised
so to avoid a proliferation of pumping stations between phases. Where necessary, the
strategy must be updated and agreed with the local planning authority to reflect any changing
circumstances between each phase of development.
11.349 Opportunities will also be explored to maximise the potential of the Sinderland Brook in terms
of urban flood management. The brook currently has a rating of ‘moderate’  under the EU
Water Framework Directive, and the development should seek opportunities to improve this
to ‘good’.
11.350 The allocation includes the former Shell Carrington industrial estate and other industrial land
uses. Prioritising development across these areas provides an opportunity to bring previously
developed land back into beneficial use. However in doing so new development will need
to ensure that any contamination risks are appropriately remediated and do not give rise to
the pollution of any watercourse or groundwater and/or present risks to human health. The
area is particularly sensitive for the water environment given its location above a Principal
Aquifer and nearby surface waters (including the River Mersey and Sinderland Brook).
11.351 Noise mitigation such as woodland buffers and landscape bunds will ensure major transport
corridors and employment uses are not seen to be bad neighbours to development.
GMCONSULT.ORG 367Places for EveryoneStrategic Allocations in Wigan
Picture 11.49 Wigan District Overview
368 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneM6 Junction 25
Policy JP Allocation 34
M6 Junction 25
Picture 11.50 JPA 34 M6 Junction 25
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a masterplan that is agreed with the Council and is effectively informed
by detailed site investigations and other constraints;
2. Deliver around 140,000 sqm of high quality B2 and B8 employment floorspace;
3. Provide good quality road access from the M6 motorway and the A49, whilst making sure
that it has no significantly adverse effect on the motorway or other surrounding roads;
4. Ensure that the employment development is accessible by walking and cycling from
Winstanley, Hawkley and Bryn, and from bus services in those areas, including on the A49
through the provision of a safe pedestrian crossing;
GMCONSULT.ORG 369Places for Everyone5. Incorporate high quality landscaping within the site and along sensitive site boundaries to
minimise its visual impact on the wider area, including the A49 road frontage, the remaining
Green Belt to the north, and around each building within the site;
6. Incorporate a landscaped green infrastructure corridor, with walking and cycling links,
connecting the A49 to the remaining area of Green Belt to the north, and ensure suitable
diversions to public rights of way as necessary, with good links to the footbridge over the
M6 motorway;
7. Provide an internal road connection with Wheatlea Industrial Estate;
8. Provide easements for the significant utilities infrastructure running through the site;
9. Allow for the provision of an all-ways junction at M6 Junction 25 and the ability for more
direct access from the motorway once provided, subject to agreement by Highways England.
11.352 The M6 Junction 25 site presents a major opportunity to provide a high quality location for
substantial employment development in the M6 corridor. A masterplanning process will guide
the future delivery of this major development scheme.
11.353 The M6 is a major business asset. It is the UK’ s most important strategic route for freight
movement between the north and south of the country, and Wigan is the only district in
Greater Manchester which has direct access to it.The site is large, relatively unconstrained,
directly accessible to the motorway and has a long visible frontage along it.These attributes
make the site highly attractive to the market, including key growth sectors such as logistics
and advanced manufacturing which are growing rapidly in the North West, primarily due to
its strong global connections including Manchester Airport and the new deep water port at
Liverpool 2.
11.354 There is a significant demand and requirement for large scale logistics development within
the M6 Corridor.Y et, despite its strategic location, Wigan currently does not have the sites
to attract this demand. This site has the scale, prominence and motorway connectivity to
satisfy this demand and deliver new jobs and investment for the local economy.
11.355 Junction 25 is the main gateway into Wigan from the south and an all-ways junction would
enhance the economic profile of the borough whilst taking full advantage of its strategic
location, which will have sub-regional benefits. The site also has the potential to provide a
connection to the adjacent established Wheatlea Industrial Estate, so that it also has improved
access to the M6.
11.356 Land to the south of the Winstanley residential area has been retained within the Green Belt
and will provide a robust green infrastructure corridor. In addition to safeguarding residential
amenity, this green corridor will open up the site for wider public access, including suitable
diversions to public rights of way as necessary, with good links to the footbridge over the
370 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneM6 motorway. It will also provide enhanced walking and cycling opportunities for local
residents to the Wigan Flashes to the east, which are a major environmental and recreation
resource in the borough. A safe crossing of the A49 Warrington road will need to be provided.
11.357 It is important that provision is made for this employment site to be safely and conveniently
accessed from nearby residential areas by walking, cycling and bus services, to enable local
people to take advantage of the job opportunities that it will provide and to reduce car
dependency in the area.
11.358 In order to make the site attractive to potential occupiers and to minimise any adverse visual
impacts, high quality landscaping is required within the site and along sensitive site
boundaries, including the A49 road frontage and the remaining Green Belt to the north. The
development must also provide easements for the significant utilities infrastructure that runs
through the site.
North of Mosley Common
Policy JP Allocation 35
North of Mosley Common
Picture 11.51 JPA 35 North of Mosley Common
GMCONSULT.ORG 371Places for EveryoneDevelopment of this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a masterplan that is agreed by the Council, and is effectively informed
by detailed site investigations, an archaeological assessment, the presence of priority
habitats and other constraints;
2.Deliver around 1,100 new homes with higher densities close to existing and new bus stops
on the Leigh-Salford-Manchester (LSM) Guided Busway as applicable;
3. Provide an additional stop on the busway and/or new/improved pedestrian and cycle links
to existing busway stops, and contribute proportionally and meaningfully to increasing
passenger capacity on the busway at peak times, subject to full detailed busway service
analysis with Transport for Greater Manchester;
4. Ensure that good quality road access is provided into the site, including from Mort Lane,
Bridgewater Road and Silk Mill Street, with at least two choices of connection into and out
of the site for residents to the north of the guided busway and for residents to the south of
the guided busway, with exceptions only where a small extension of an existing cul-de-sac
is appropriate;
5. Deliver necessary highway capacity improvements to mitigate the impact of the full
development, including at the junction of the A577 Mosley Common Road and the A580
East Lancashire Road, B5232 Bridgewater Road and B5232 Newearth Road, and A5082
Armitage Avenue and the A6, as applicable;
6.Ensure safe and convenient access for pedestrians and cyclists to services and amenities
in Tyldesley, Mosley Common and Ellenbrook, and to bus services on the surrounding road
network and busway, through the retention and enhancement of existing public rights of
way and the creation of new footpaths, including links across the guided busway corridor,
where appropriate;
7.Provide new community and health facilities on-site, potentially as part of a new local centre,
or an equivalent financial contribution as appropriate, to meet additional demand generated
by the development;
8. Provide new primary education facilities on-site, as a new school and/or as an expansion
to St John’ s Mosley Common Primary School, unless it is determined by the council that it
is not needed; and provide a financial contribution to meet the demand generated by
secondary school pupils;
9. Protect and enhance the environs of Honksford Brook through the creation of a green
infrastructure corridor, including safeguarding land for a flood storage area to mitigate the
risk of flooding downstream;
372 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone10.Provide a robust landscaped boundary with open countryside in the Green Belt to the north;
and
11.Provide necessary easements for the gas pipeline that crosses the western part of the site.
11.359 Mosley Common and Tyldesley are located close to Salford and Manchester and offer an
attractive location to help meet the city region’ s housing needs to the west of the conurbation.
11.360 The site forms a logical eastern extension to Tyldesley and maintains a substantial Green
Belt gap with Walkden to the north east. It is a relatively flat and unconstrained site with
capacity for around 1,100 homes in a sustainable location.
11.361 This site significantly benefits from the LSM Guided Busway which crosses the site providing
direct and sustainable rapid public transport access to employment, leisure and retail services
within Manchester City Centre and other places along its route. The busway opened in April
2016 and has strong patronage, with extra services added in 2017 to meet demand. There
is an opportunity to create a new stop within the site to serve the development and increase
the frequency of the service. Higher residential densities are appropriate and could be
achieved close to any new stops and also the existing stop on Sale Lane to the west of the
site. Provision will need to be made for pedestrian/cycle links from the development to
busway stops.
11.362 The site is also well connected to the highway network with direct access to the A577 to the
west and a short distance to the A580 to the south, which is the main non-motorway route
between Manchester and Liverpool. However, the A577/A580 junction is regularly congested
at peak times, therefore the development will be required to contribute significantly towards
the delivery of highway capacity improvements at this junction and other junctions as
applicable. Good quality road access will need to be provided into the site from the local
highway network.
11.363 Walkden railway station is located within 2km of the northeast of the site and a number of
bus routes, in addition to the guided services, connect the site to the wider area. Both Walkden
Town Centre in Salford and Tyldesley local centre are within 2km of the site and provide a
range of retail and community facilities, with additional facilities available locally in Mosley
Common and Ellenbrook. Safe and convenient routes for pedestrians and cyclists will need
to be provided from the development to enable residents to access these services
and facilities. They will benefit the development and complement associated community
facilities provided on the site, which could be developed as part of a new local centre.
Alternatively financial contributions could be required, if appropriate, to meet additional
demand generated by the development in a location off-site.
GMCONSULT.ORG 373Places for Everyone11.364 In terms of educational provision, new primary education facilities will be required on-site,
as a new school and/or as an expansion to St John’ s Mosley Common Primary School which
lies adjacent to the site, unless it is determined by the Council that this provision is not
needed. A financial contribution will be required to meet the demand generated by secondary
pupils.
11.365 Honksford Brook, which is classed as a main river, crosses the site and should be regarded
as a priority green infrastructure asset. As such the habitat corridor should be protected and
enhanced. Given its size, the site has potential to create significant volumes of runoff if
infiltration is not possible. This will be mitigated through the safeguarding of land as flood
storage areas within the allocation and through the provision of sustainable drainage systems
as appropriate.
11.366 In order to ensure that a co-ordinated approach is taken to the delivery of this site, a
masterplan will need to be prepared and agreed by the Council. The design and layout will
need to be informed by relevant site investigations, an archaeological assessment, the
presence of priority habitats and other constraints and opportunities provided by the site. A
robust landscaped boundary will need to be provided to the north of the site to limit its impact
on the adjacent open countryside in the Green Belt. The development will also be required
to provide easements for the gas pipeline that crosses the western part of the site.
374 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePocket Nook
Policy JP Allocation 36
Pocket Nook
Picture 11.52 JPA 36 Pocket Nook
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a masterplan that is agreed with the Council and is effectively informed
by an archaeological assessment and other constraints;
2.Safeguard a north-south corridor towards the west of the site allocation for the construction
of High Speed 2 Rail;
3. Deliver around 600 homes; including around 75 homes to the west of the proposed HS2
route on land accessed from Rowan Avenue;
4. Deliver around 15,000 sqm of employment floorspace on land to the west of the proposed
HS2 route accessed from Newton Road;
GMCONSULT.ORG 375Places for Everyone5. Deliver or contribute effectively to the delivery of a new road through the site from A579
Atherleigh Way to A572 Newton Road (via Enterprise Way), including a new bridge over
the HS2 rail line as necessary, that is of a design quality to accommodate bus services,
safeguarding the route for future construction where applicable;
6. Ensure safe and convenient access for pedestrians and cyclists within the site and to
services in Lowton, including Lowton High School, employment sites, neighbouring housing
areas and green spaces within and adjacent to the site;
7.Protect and enhance the environs of Carr Brook through the creation of a green infrastructure
corridor;
8. Ensure that groundwater resources are not jeopardised through the construction process
or uses thereafter; and
9. Ensure that the heritage setting of the Grade II Listed Fair House Farmhouse on Pocket
Nook Lane is retained or enhanced. Proposals should be informed by the findings and
recommendations of the Historic Environment Assessment (2020) in the Plan’ s evidence
base and any updated assessment(s) submitted as part of the planning application process.
11.367 Within the East Lancashire Road Corridor, the Pocket Nook strategic area provides an
opportunity for a substantial housing and employment development. The principle of
development on this site is established in the adopted Wigan Local Plan Core Strategy,
which identifies the site within a broad location for new development.
11.368 Lowton is a popular residential area with excellent road connections into both the Manchester
and Liverpool City Regions via the A580 and is also in close proximity to the M6.
11.369 There is potential to enhance sustainable travel opportunities by foot, cycle and public
transport in the Lowton and Golborne area for employment and other services in Leigh and
the city centre, consequently reducing car dependency in this area; and, with possible
connections to LSM Guided Busway services. It is also important that safe and convenient
pedestrian access is provided to green spaces within and adjacent to the site.
11.370 The proposed alignment of HS2 runs parallel to the route of a dismantled railway which runs
north-south through the west of the site. HS2 will result in the demolition of existing business
units to the north of the site on Enterprise Way which will need to be relocated.  A buffer
zone of 60 metres either side of the route needs to be kept free from development to enable
access and for servicing.
11.371 The site will be principally served from a new junction on the A579 Atherleigh Way, close to
its junction with the A580. The development will deliver a new road from Atherleigh Way to
the east through the site to Newton Road in the west, and will need to bridge the proposed
376 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneHS2 route.The new road will connect into Newton Road on land close to its existing junction
with Enterprise Way. The road will serve both new housing and employment development
and will be able to accommodate bus services.
11.372 A small parcel of residential development on the western edge of the site is accessible from
Rowan Avenue.
11.373 Carr Brook, which is classed as a main river, crosses the site and should be regarded as a
priority green infrastructure asset. As such the habitat corridor should be protected and
enhanced.
11.374 Three Groundwater Source Protection Zones have been identified either within or immediately
adjacent to the northern boundary of the site.The design of new development should ensure
that there are no adverse impacts to groundwater resources or groundwater quality and
ensure compliance with the Environment Agency approach to groundwater protection.
11.375 Fair House Farmhouse on Pocket Nook Lane is a Grade II Listed Building. The building is
important in many respects, not least as an example of timber-framing in an area where little
remains. In order that its heritage setting is retained or enhanced consideration needs to be
given at a detailed stage to the treatment of the northern portion of the site to ensure that
any development harmonises with the wider setting of the Listed Building and it does not
harm its heritage value and significance.
11.376 To ensure that a co-ordinated approach is taken to the delivery of this site, a masterplan will
need to be prepared and agreed by the Council. The design and layout, including
infrastructure provision, will need to be informed by an archaeological assessment and other
constraints and opportunities provided by the site.
GMCONSULT.ORG 377Places for EveryoneWest of Gibfield
Policy JP Allocation 37
West of Gibfield
Picture 11.53 JPA 37 West of Gibfield
Development of this site will be required to:
1.Be in accordance with a masterplan that is agreed by the Council, and is effectively informed
by detailed site investigations, an archaeological assessment and other constraints;
2. Deliver around 500 new homes;
3. Deliver around 45,500 sqm of employment floorspace in the south east of the allocation,
as a logical extension to the existing Gibfield Park Industrial Area;
4. Ensure good quality road access is provided into the site, including through an extension
of Gibfield Park Way northwards. A route for the continuation of Gibfield Park Way further
northwards to the rail line should be safeguarded, to connect into potential future road
infrastructure to be provided in Bolton;
378 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone5.Provide highway improvement measures at the junction of the A577 and Gibfield Park Way,
and make effective contributions towards highway improvement measures including at Platt
Lane and/or Chequerbent roundabout / Junction 5 of the M61 in Bolton, necessary to mitigate
the development;
6. Ensure convenient and safe access for pedestrians and cyclists to local bus services and
to Daisy Hill and Hag Fold rail stations, and contribute appropriately to improved passenger
facilities at those rail stations, as applicable;
7. Provide a high quality, landscaped corridor along Gibfield Park Way, through the planting
of street trees and other strategic landscaping;
8. Provide a substantive accessible green infrastructure corridor and country park on land
remaining in the Green Belt within the allocation, and ensure ongoing arrangement for its
maintenance, agreed with the Council;
9. Make appropriate provision for great crested newts sufficient to mitigate the development;
10. Provide easements for the significant utilities infrastructure running through the site; and
11. Safeguard the amenity of existing and future homes from the employment development,
through appropriate screening and landscaping.
11.377 The West of Gibfield area provides an opportunity for a substantial housing and employment
development to the west of Atherton. The employment development will extend the existing
Gibfield Park Industrial Area and is considered suitable for E(g), B2 and/or B8 employment
floorspace. The development will include new green infrastructure serving Atherton and
Daisy Hill, Westhoughton.
11.378 The M61 corridor is a strategic opportunity for Greater Manchester but while Atherton, Hindley
and Leigh are close to the M61, existing routes to the motorway are constrained and not
conducive to attracting economic development. Improved road infrastructure between Gibfield
Park Way and Junction 5 of the M61, via the Chequerbent junction on the A6, will be
transformative for the area. The development is therefore required to extend Gibfield Park
Way northwards as far as possible within the allocation and safeguard sufficient land to allow
for a potential future extension to the A6 and M61 in Bolton.
11.379 Highway improvement measures will be needed to mitigate the impact of the development,
notably at the junction of the A577 and Gibfield Park Way and between the site and the A6
and Junction 5 of the M61 in Bolton. The development will be required to make an effective
contribution to the provision of these measures.
GMCONSULT.ORG 379Places for Everyone11.380 There is also a need for strategic improvements to services along the Atherton railway line
between Wigan and Manchester, via Daisy Hill station, specifically to increase capacity at
peak times, and increase service frequencies and extent. The increased use of the existing
rail line could include its conversion to tram-train use, enabling greater frequency of services.
This development is required to ensure good access to Daisy Hill and Hag Fold stations for
pedestrians and cyclists and contribute appropriately to passenger improvements at those
stations.
11.381 The green infrastructure requirement will need to be delivered in advance and alongside the
housing development and should provide effectively for a country park with wildlife habitats
and recreational space. Appropriate provision should be made to mitigate the impact of the
development on great crested newts that are present in the area.The ongoing maintenance
of the country park will need to be agreed with the Council.
11.382 In order to make the site attractive to potential occupiers and to safeguard the amenity of
existing and future residents, high quality landscaping is required within the site and along
sensitive site boundaries, including the provision of appropriate screening from the
employment development. Street trees and other strategic landscaping will be required along
Gibfield Park Way, which is the key route through the site.
11.383 To ensure that a co-ordinated approach is taken to the delivery of this site, a masterplan will
need to be prepared and agreed by the Council. The design and layout will need to be
informed by site investigations, an archaeological assessment and other constraints and
opportunities provided by the site.The development will be also required to provide easements
for the significant utilities infrastructure that runs through the site.
380 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 381Places for Everyone12.1 The Greater Manchester Strategy (GMS) sets out a clear vision for Greater Manchester.
This Plan has a vital role in delivering this vision but many of the necessary actions lie outside
its scope and will be taken forward through other strategies, plans and programmes. Delivering
these ambitions is a challenge but our history demonstrates that we are able to rise to this
challenge. The level of growth proposed will require substantial amounts of investment from
both the public and the private sector. It is therefore important that this Plan is supported by
sources of funding and delivery mechanisms that are both timely and appropriate.
12.2 There are a number of adopted or emerging strategies and plans which relate to different
infrastructure provision or influence the policy direction within this Plan, for instance the
Infrastructure Strategy, Housing Strategy, Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040
refresh, Estates Strategy, Health and Social Care Strategic Plan, 5 year Environment Plan
and the Natural Capital Investment Plan. Please see each of these strategies for their own
methods of delivery.
Implementation
12.3 In implementing the policies and proposals within this Plan, Local Authorities, the Mayor and
GMCA will all have important roles, and should make best of all appropriate delivery
mechanisms available, including:
Working in partnership with other delivery agencies and organisations such as Homes
England, the Environment Agency, Sport England, Highways England, Transport for
Greater Manchester and utilities companies to ensure that essential infrastructure is
provided.
Working in partnership with landowners, developers and other private sector
organisations to secure deliverable development proposals and investment.
Establishing Mayoral Development Corporations, and preparation of Local Plans, Local
Development Orders, Supplementary Planning Documents, Masterplans and other
frameworks to provide context and support for site and area-specific delivery.
Support for Neighbourhood Planning and other local and community-led initiatives.
Application of the Development Management process and other relevant regulatory
functions.
Use of compulsory purchase powers to assist with site assembly.
Proactive use of publicly owned land holdings to assist in land assembly and the delivery
of development.
Use of Government grants, other sources of funding and prudential borrowing.
Use of Section 106 agreements to secure affordable housing and other types of planning
obligations.
Use of tariff-based systems such as the Strategic Infrastructure Tariff and Community
Infrastructure Levy for infrastructure delivery, where appropriate and in with the most
current statutory regulations.
Use of other sources of funding such as the lottery fund and other initiatives as they
arise.
GMCONSULT.ORG 383Places for Everyone12.4 We will work in a collaborative way with infrastructure providers, national government,
regulators and others involved in infrastructure planning and funding, to ensure the effective
development and implementation of the infrastructure needed to support the delivery of the
vision and objectives set out in this Framework.
Policy JP-D 1
Infrastructure Implementation
To make this happen we will:
1. Take a long term, strategic, holistic and integrated approach to place shaping, supported
by devolved resources and powers. Utilising the spatial locations set out in this Plan a
place-based approach will be undertaken to overcome barriers, achieving prosperity and
opportunity;
2.Promote collaboration and synchronisation of investment plans between ourselves and the
main infrastructure providers: Clinical Commissioning Groups, the NHS, Highways England,
Network Rail, Transport for Greater Manchester, United Utilities, the Environment Agency,
National Grid, Cadent, United Utilities and digital/telecommunication providers;
3. Work directly with the infrastructure providers and regulators (including Ofcom, Ofwat and
Ofgem) to ensure that future investment plans are consistent with this Plan;
4.Establish a new long-term funding mechanism for transport and site specific infrastructure
to ensure timely delivery and capture of developer contributions;
5. Encourage early dialogue between developers and infrastructure providers to identify the
infrastructure needs arising from new development and ensuring that these are addressed
through building design, utility networks and connections in time to serve the proposed
development;
6. Require applicants to prepare an infrastructure phasing and delivery strategy for strategic
sites, and major sites where build out will be delivered by different developers or in phases.
This strategy must outline what needs to be provided by when and who will fund and deliver
it;
7.Ensure that development does not lead to capacity or reliability problems in the surrounding
area by requiring applicants to demonstrate that there will be adequate utility infrastructure
capacity, from first occupation until development completion. As a minimum, applicants
should identify and plan for:
Minimising the demand for energy, water and utility services by requiring sustainable
building design and the incorporation of demand management measures within all new
development and conversions where practicable;
Electricity supply to serve the construction phase and the intended use for the site,
and identify, in conjunction with electricity providers the estimated load capacity of the
building and the substations and routes for supply;
Reasonable gas and water supply, considering the need to conserve natural resources;
384 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneThe provision of multiple-ducting to support full fibre digital connections from different
providers;
Heating and cooling demand and the viability of its provision via decentralised energy
networks. Designs must incorporate access to existing networks where feasible and
viable; and
Where potential capacity problems are identified and no improvements are programmed
by the relevant infrastructure provider, we will require the developer to contribute to
and/or facilitate necessary improvements.
8.Work with infrastructure providers to minimise disruption to highways and businesses during
major infrastructure upgrades and pipe subway construction; and
9. Promote the provision and use of shared routing, trenching and programming particularly
in areas where there is extreme pipe and cable congestion under the streets to reduce
disruption.
12.5 We have strong links with the various infrastructure providers that service the conurbation,
including United Utilities, Environment Agency, Electricity North West, Cadent (gas)
digital/telecommunication providers.The continuation of this co-operative working relationship
is key to ensuring delivery of this policy. Developers, landowners and building occupants
also have a role to play in demand management, early engagement with utility providers
and co-operative working to avoid disruption.
Infrastructure Strategy
12.6 The quality, distribution and resilience of infrastructure will be an important factor in
determining whether the GMS and consequently this Plan, is successfully implemented and
delivered. Infrastructure is essential to support the delivery of the vision and objectives of
this Plan.
12.7 The capacity of the utility network to accommodate increased demand is considered generally
robust. However, population, economic growth and changes in technology will increase
demand, both for new and for existing infrastructure. Combined with a backlog of capital
investment, historically low levels of investment compared to other countries and continually
growing and changing expectations for infrastructure requirements over the next thirty years
will be substantial. This is why we are working with the Government through the Local
Industrial Strategy to ensure that the right powers and funding are in place to ensure the
timely delivery of the right infrastructure in the right place at the right time.
12.8 An Infrastructure Framework for Greater Manchester(142) has been produced. It frames the
key issues and priorities which need to be addressed and sets out:
The key trends affecting Greater Manchester's Infrastructure to 2040
142 greater-manchester-infr astructure-fr amework-2040.pdf (g reater manchester-ca.go v.uk)
GMCONSULT.ORG 385Places for EveryoneHow these trends will affect each infrastructure network
The eleven challenges that will have to be overcome through a series responses
12.9 The Greater Manchester Strategic Infrastructure Board will consider and respond to the
issues and challenges raised by the Infrastructure Framework. It includes representatives
from United Utilities, Electricity North West, Cadent, Environment Agency, Transport for
Greater Manchester as well as GMCA officers and Chief Resilience Officer.
Delivering New Infrastructure
12.10 To achieve our ambitions, investment in transport infrastructure is required, as is the need
to invest in enabling infrastructure, such as social infrastructure, green infrastructure, water,
waste water, energy and digital connectivity.
12.11 The “Greater Manchester Transport Strategy 2040”  (refreshed in 2020) describes our
ambitions for transport in more detail. It outlines how significant investment in sustainable
modes of transport, in particular, will be essential to achieving this more sustainable vision
for the future. The Strategy is supported by Our Five Y ear Transport Delivery Plan, updated
annually, to set out the immediate and longer term programme for transport interventions
needed to support sustainable growth. The Greater Manchester Cycling and Walking
Infrastructure Proposal sets out a vision for Greater Manchester to become the first city
region in the UK to have a fully joined up walking and cycling network.(143)To support the
delivery of the proposal, a broad range of improvement measures will be required, varying
from route to route, including the provision of easy crossing points, innovative approaches
to junction design, and the creation of fully segregated cycleways. The availability of future
funding, particularly from central government, will be a key determinant of the extent to which
the necessary improvements to our connectivity and transport infrastructure can be achieved.
New development will also have a significant role in supporting the delivery of new and
improved transport infrastructure and services.
12.12 There is a growing need for social infrastructure across the Plan area, in particular to support
education and health provision. Central government provides the majority of the capital
funding through the basic need grant and Department for Education (DfE) free school
programme to create school places and to carry out capital maintenance and repair work to
existing school buildings, supplemented by capital contributions from individual local
authorities. Since 2013, Public Health has been the responsibility of local authorities, which
allows for a more joined-up approach to the delivery of public health policies and facilities. In
April 2016, Greater Manchester became the first region in the country to take control of its
combined health and social care budgets. As part of this, a key aim is to better integrate
health and social care services including wider community health services. Local Authorities
work with Clinical Commissioning Groups and NHS England to determine what investment
is required by monitoring housing and population growth. Contributions secured through
Section 106 agreements can be used to support the provision of new social infrastructure
facilities, particularly in Strategic Allocations where there is limited existing infrastructure.
143 Mayor of Greater Manchester, Greater Manchester Combined Authority and Transport for Greater Manchester (2018): Greater Manchester's
cycling and walking infrastructure proposal
386 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for Everyone12.13 The city’ s green infrastructure provides a wide range of benefits and services that generate
significant economic value in a cost-effective way. However, provision of green infrastructure
has traditionally been the responsibility of public authorities and various public or third-sector
land-management bodies. In an attempt to address the problem of not properly valuing the
services and benefits of green infrastructure, the Government has committed to including
natural capital accounts in the UK Environmental Accounts by 2020. This re-framing of our
understanding of the economic value of green infrastructure should mean that developers
are more willing to integrate green infrastructure into developments rather than considering
the provision of green space as simply a condition of planning. A Natural Capital Investment
Plan for Greater Manchester is being prepared which will promote investment and delivery
of opportunities to protect and enhance our natural capital.This Plan will help to ensure that
the economic benefits of green infrastructure can be understood alongside other key indicators
of economic performance.
12.14 Investment in energy, fresh water and waste water infrastructure is usually funded by providers
through user charges to the consumer and connections charges to developers. Spend on
new assets and operating costs are agreed through negotiations between the provider and
regulator.These plans are then set out at the beginning of the regulatory price-control period
in the provider’ s business plan. Capital expenditure is funded through user charges, so
utilities companies typically borrow to fund the upfront costs of investment. The scale of
growth in some parts of the Plan area may require significant capital investment in water
and energy infrastructure, so investment ahead of demand will be required to ensure the
utilities are available when sites are developed. In collaboration with the GMCA we
are working with providers to ensure the investment is secured to support development at
the right time.
12.15 New digital connectivity infrastructure is typically paid for upfront through finance or private
equity investment backed by user charges and connections charges to developers. In general,
decisions on where to invest in infrastructure are determined on a demand-led basis. The
fast changing nature of digital technology and increasing dependence on faster broadband
means that investment ahead of demand should be supported. In collaboration with the
GMCA we are working with providers to ensure the investment is secured to support
development at the right time.
Funding
12.16 There is a significant gap between the public-sector funding required to deliver and support
our growth, and the amount currently committed to fund it. In some areas of the city region,
major development projects are not being progressed because of the uncertainty around
funding. Developments will need to deliver, or help to enable the delivery of, infrastructure
required to support sustainable communities, through planning conditions, and developer
contributions secured in a variety of ways. These methods include: Section 106 planning
obligations, the Community Infrastructure Levy, agreements made under Section 278 of the
Highways Act 1990 (as amended), or the potential introduction of a Strategic Infrastructure
Tariff.
GMCONSULT.ORG 387Places for Everyone12.17 Planning obligations made under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
(as amended), are a mechanism used to make development acceptable in planning terms
through securing the provision of affordable housing or the delivery of infrastructure, or
requiring development to be used in a particular way. Planning obligations must be used in
accordance with national guidance and legislation, and are subject to statutory and policy
tests to ensure that they are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning
terms, directly related to the development, and fairly and reasonably related in scale and
kind to the development. A local planning authority should set out policies which indicate
the level of contributions required. Site-specific legal contracts taking account of these policies
are then made on a site by site basis, securing financial sums to pay for infrastructure
provision, or through ‘in-kind’  contributions. Examples of in-kind contributions include:
provision of land to accommodate new facilities provided by other organisations, construction
and fit-out of new facilities, or provision of ‘shell and core’  space at peppercorn rent; however
any direct delivery must not contravene state aid or public procurement rules.
12.18 The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) is a locally-determined, non-negotiable,
pounds-per-square metre development charge designed to help finance the delivery of
infrastructure, and was introduced as a mechanism by the Government in April 2010. In
contrast to Section 106, which require developer contributions for infrastructure to mitigate
a specific development, CIL is intended to address the cumulative impact of developments
across an area.Variations in charging rates are permitted between areas within the planning
authority, as well as by different types of development, which must be set out in a published
charging schedule. Local authorities are able to determine their CIL charges according to
local considerations, although these are subject to two rounds of public consultation and
review by an Independent Examiner. Across the Plan area, only one Local Authority has
progressed work sufficiently to implement a CIL charging schedule, adopted in Trafford in
July 2014.
12.19 In August 2020 the Government published its White Paper ‘Planning  For The Future’. The
White Paper was accompanied by a consultation document, ‘Changes to the current planning
system’. Together, these documents propose radical reforms to the planning system – long
and short term. Key changes include zoning of land in local plans into three types of area –
Growth, Renewal and Protection and replacing the current system of planning obligations
and CIL with a single development levy to fund local infrastructure. However, these proposals
are still subject to potential change following the public consultation in 2020. It is also noted
that primary legislation may be required to bring forward the proposals.
12.20 Across the Plan area we have a range of locally based priorities to be fulfilled through
developer contributions. Some boroughs have supplementary planning documents setting
out these priorities and the likely scale of contributions that different types of development
are likely to require.
388 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy JP-D 2
Developer Contributions
We will require developers to provide, or contribute towards, the provision of mitigation measures
to make the development acceptable in planning terms.These will be secured through the most
appropriate mechanism, including, but not limited to, planning conditions, legal contracts, or CIL
(or any subsequently adopted planning gain regime).
Applicants should take account of policies in development plans and other relevant documents
when developing proposals and acquiring land. It is expected that viability assessments should
only be undertaken where there are clear circumstances creating barriers to delivery. If an
applicant wishes to make the case that viability should be considered, they should provide clear
evidence at the planning application submission stage, demonstrating the specific issues that
would create barriers to delivery in a transparent manner and reflecting national guidance.
Where it is accepted that viability should be considered as part of the determination of an
application, the Local Planning Authority should determine the weight to be given to a viability
assessment alongside other material considerations.
Monitoring
12.21 Monitoring is a key component of any development plan document and therefore is key to
the success of this Plan. To be effective plans need to be kept up-to-date and monitored.
We need to regularly monitor performance to assess whether we are achieving our strategic
objectives and whether our policies remain relevant, or whether they need to be updated.
12.22 This plan is based on a number of projections, forecasts and research available at this point
in time. While these provide a sound basis for the plan’ s overall strategy and policies, it is
important to understand that circumstances can change and that the plan is flexible to this
change. It is therefore important to establish indicators that can be robustly monitored, to
gain an understanding of any significant changes that could give rise to reconsideration of
the content of the strategy or policies and to update the associated evidence base where
required.
12.23 The table below sets out the proposed monitoring framework for this Plan. It focuses on the
key priorities of the plan.
GMCONSULT.ORG 389Places for EveryonePlaces for Everyone Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Outcome/Indicators KPI / Target 
Baseline at 2020 unless
otherwise stated
Strategy
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 Total employment and housing
growthSignificant growth in
employment and housing in the
Core Growth Area
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 Total employment and housing
growthSignificant increase in growth
employment and housing in
north of conurbation
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 Total employment and housing
growthSustain the competitiveness of
the employment and housing
offer in our part of the south of
conurbation
3, 5, 10 % increase in GVA per job Improve productivity 
3, 5, 10 Proportion of our residents in
employmentIncreased number of jobs 
1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9 % increase in residential
development in main town
centresSecure main town centres as
local economic drivers
% vacancy rate in main town
centres
Sustainable & Resilient
2, 5, 7, 8, 10 % of new development meeting
the net zero carbon standardReduce carbon emissions from
new development
2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9 % of development on brownfield
landPrioritise brownfield land for
development
2, 8 % of homes at risk of flooding No increase in number of
homes and commercial
premises at risk of flooding % of commercial premises at
risk of flooding
2, 5, 7, 8, 10 Number of EV charging points Improve air quality
390 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePlaces for Everyone Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Outcome/Indicators KPI / Target 
Baseline at 2020 unless
otherwise stated
% of development within 800m
of transport hubs
Number of controlled parking
zones around schools and early
years’  settings
Jobs
4, 5 Number of local labour
agreementsImprove access to jobs
3, 5 Deliver 3.3 mill sqm by 2037 Increase overall employment
land
Homes
1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10 Deliver approx. 8,700 annually
by 2025 Deliver net increase of new
homes
Deliver approx. 10,300 annually
by 2030 
Deliver approx. 11,200 annually
by 2037
1, 2, 5, 10 Deliver our share of 50,000
additional affordable homes by
2037Increase no of additional
affordable homes
Number of additional affordable
homes Number of people
removed from the waiting list
1, 2, 5, 10 % new homes meeting NDSS Increase the number of homes
meeting NDSS
1, 2, 5, 10 % new homes meeting A&A
standardIncrease the number of new
homes meeting A&A standard
GMCONSULT.ORG 391Places for EveryonePlaces for Everyone Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Outcome/Indicators KPI / Target 
Baseline at 2020 unless
otherwise stated
Greener
2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 Number of developments
delivering a 10% gain in
biodiversityEnhance the green
infrastructure network
2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 Number of trees planted
annuallyIncrease tree planting
2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 Number of hectares of new
green infrastructureIncrease access to green
infrastructure
People
2 Increase % of new buildings
consistent with National Design
GuideHigh design quality
2, 4 Increase % of buildings on the
“at risk register”  with a strategy
for their repair and re-useConserve, sustain and enhance
our historic environment and
heritage assets 
2, 4 Number of new cultural facilities Improve the cultural offer 
2, 9 Increased numbers of school
placesProvision of additional school
places to support new
development
3, 5 Workforce is ready to benefit
from new employment
opportunitiesIncrease the % of working age
population with Higher Level
(4+) qualification(s) and reduce
the % of working age population
with sub Level 2 qualification(s)
Connected
2, 5, 6, 7, 10 % of daily trips made by public
transport, walking and cyclingIncreased proportion of daily
trips by modes other than the
car
% of development within 800m
of transport hubs
392 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePlaces for Everyone Strategic
ObjectivePolicy Outcome/Indicators KPI / Target 
Baseline at 2020 unless
otherwise stated
2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Number of premises with full
fibre connectivityDigital connectivity
Number of locations with free,
secure, high speed public wi-fi
connections
2, 6, 7 Number of EV charging points Increasing EV charging
infrastructure
Delivering the Plan
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Delivery of necessary new
infrastructureEnsuring the right infrastructure
is delivered at the right time 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Developer contributions for the
delivery of infrastructureSecure appropriate S106
contributions
Developer contributions for the
delivery of affordable housing
Table 12.1 Places for Everyone Monitoring Framework
GMCONSULT.ORG 393Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 394Places for EveryoneReplaced District Local Plan Policies
A.1 Regulation 8(5) of the Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations
2012 explains that ‘where a Local Plan contains a policy that is intended to supersede another
policy in the adopted development plan, it must state that fact and identify the superseded
policy. ’
A.2 Upon adoption of this Plan a number of policies in district local plans will be partially replaced
by policies in this Plan (see tables below). Any part of the policy which is not replaced will
be retained and will remain part of the respective statutory development plan.
Bolton Council 
Replaced by
PFE policy/policiesPolicy
JP-P6 H1 Healthy Bolton
JP-P5 A1 Achieving Bolton
JP-J2, JP-J3 and JP-J4 P1 Employment land
JP-S7 P3.1 Waste hierarchy
JP-C1 P5.1 Accessibility by different
types of transport
JP-C3 P5.2 Accessibility by public
transport
JP-C6 P5.3 Freight movement
JP-C7 P5.4 Servicing arrangements
JP-C4 P5.6 Transport needs of people
with disabilities
JP-C7 P5.7 Transport assessments and
travel plans
JP-C 7 and JP-P1 S1 Safe Bolton
JP-G1, JP-G2, JP-G3, JP-G4,
JP-G5 and JP-G7CG1.1 Green infrastructure in
rural areas
JP-G2 CG1.2 Urban Biodiversity
JP-G6 CG1.3 Open space
JP-S5 CG1.5 Flooding
JP-S2 CGH1.6 Energy requirements
JP-S2 CG1.7 Renewable energy
JP-S2 CG2 except CG2.2(c)
Sustainable development
JP-S4, JP-G1, JP-P1 and 2 CG3 Built environment
JP-H1 SC1.1 Housing requirement
JP-H4 SC1.5 Housing Density
Table A.1
GMCONSULT.ORG 399Places for EveryoneBury Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-J1 EC1 Employment Land Provision
JP-J2 and JP-J4 EC2 Existing Industrial Areas
and Premises
JP-J2 EC3 Improvement of Older
Industrial Areas and Premises
JP-J2 EC3/1 Measures to Improve
Industrial Areas
JP-J3 EC5 Offices
JP-H1 H1 Housing Land Provision
JP-H3 H2 Housing Environment and
Design
JP-H3 H4 Housing Need
JP-P1 EN1 Environment
JP-P1 EN1/1 Visual Amenity
JP-P1 EN1/3 Landscaping Provision
JP-P1 EN1/11 Public Utility
Infrastructure
JP-P2 EN2 Conservation and Listed
Buildings
JP-S2 and JP-S3 EN4 Energy Conservation
JP-S2 and JP-S3 EN4/1 Renewable Energy
JP-S2 and JP-S3 EN4/2 Energy Efficiency
JP-S5 EN5 Flood Protection and
Defence
JP-S5 EN5/1 New Development and
Flood Risk
JP-G9 EN6 Conservation of the Natural
Environment
JP-G9 EN6/5 Sites of Geological
Interest
JP-P1 EN7 Pollution Control
JP-S6 EN7/1 Atmospheric Pollution
JP-G7 EN8 Woodland and Trees
JP-G1 EN9 Landscape
JP-G1 EN9/1 Special Landscape Area
JP-G10 OL1 Green Belt
JP-G10 OL1/1 Designation of Green Belt
JP-G6 OL3 Urban Open Space
JP-G6 OL3/1 Protection of Urban Open
Space
400 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneJP-G3 OL5 River Valleys
JP-P7 RT2 New Provision for
Recreation in the Urban Area
JP-P7 RT2/3 Education Recreation
Facilities
JP-P7 RT2/4 Dual-Use of Education
Facilities
JP-G3, JP-G2 and JP-G5 RT3 Recreation In The
Countryside
JP-C1, JP-P1 and JP-C4 HT1 A Balanced Transportation
Strategy
JP-C7 HT2/6 – Replacement Car
Parking
JP-C7 HT2/10 – Development Affecting
Trunk Roads
JP-C1 and JP-C3 HT3 Public Transport
JP-C7 HT4 New Development
JP-C1, JP-C4 and JP-C5 HT6 Pedestrians and Cyclists
JP-C4 and JP-C5 HT6/2 – Pedestrian/Vehicular
Conflict
JP-C6 HT7 Freight
JP-P1 and JP-P3 CF1 Proposals for New and
Improved Community Facilities
JP-P5 CF2 Education Land and
Buildings
JP-P6 CF4 Healthcare Facilities
JP-P5 CF5 Childcare Facilities
JP-S7 MW1 Protection Of Mineral
Resources
JP-S7 MW2 Environmental
Considerations For Mineral
Workings
JP-S7 MW3 Waste Disposal Facilities
JP-S7 MW3/1 Derelict or Degraded
Land (Waste)
JP-S7 MW3/2 Waste Recycling and
Bulk Reduction
Table A.2
Manchester City Council 
Replaced by
PFE policy/policiesPolicy
JP-S1 SP1 Spatial Principles (Partially)
GMCONSULT.ORG 401Places for EveryoneJP-J3 and JP-J4 EC1 Employment and Economic
Growth in Manchester (Partially)
JP-H1 H1 Overall Housing Provision
(Partially)
JP-S1, JP-S2 and JP-S5 H2 Strategic Housing Location
(Partially)
JP-H2 H8 Affordable Housing (Partially)
JP-C1 T1 Sustainable Transport
(Partially)
JP-P2 EN3 Heritage (Partially)
JP-S2 EN4 Reducing CO2 Emissions
by Enabling Low and Zero
Carbon Development (Partially)
JP-S2 EN6 Target Framework for CO2
Reductions from Low or Zero
Carbon Energy Supplies
(Partially)
JP-S2 and JP-S4 EN8 Adaption to Climate
Change (Partially)
JP-G9 EN14 Flood Risk (Partially)
JP-G9 EN15 Biodiversity and
Geological Conservation
(Partially)
JP-S6 EN16 Air Quality (Partially)
JP-S5 EN17 Water Quality (Partially)
Table A.3
Oldham Council 
Replaced by
PFE policy/policiesPolicy
JP-H1 3 An Address of Choice
(Partially)
JP-J3 and JP-J4 4 Promoting Sustainable
Regeneration and Prosperity
(Partially)
JP-C3, JP-C4, JP-C5 and JP-C7 5 Promoting Accessibility and
Sustainable Transport Modes
(Partially)
JP-S2 18 Energy (Partially)
JP-S5 19 Flooding (Partially)
JP-P1 20 Design
JPA12 , JPA14,
JPA15, JPA16  and JP-G1022 Protecting Open Land
(Partially)
402 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneJP-D2 25 Developer Contributions
JPA14 UDP Policy B1.1.24 Royton
Moss, Moss Lane, Royton
JPA17 UDP Policy H1.2.17 Housing
Land Release Phase II
JPA15 UDP Policy OE1.8 Major
Developed Site in the Green Belt
Table A.4
Rochdale Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-J3 and JP-J4 E2 Increasing jobs and
prosperity (Partially)
JP-J1, JP-J2, JP-J3 and JP-J4 E4 Managing the release of land
to meet future employment
needs
JP-H1 C1 Delivering the right amount
of housing in the right places
(Partially)
JP-S1, JP-S2 and JP-S3 G1 Tackling and adapting to
climate change
JP-S1, JP-S2 and JP-S3 G2 Energy and new
development
JP-S1, JP-S2 and JP-S3 G3 Renewable and low carbon
energy developments (Partially)
JP-G10 G4 Protecting Green Belt land
JP-G10 G5 Managing protected open
land (Partially)
Table A.5
Salford Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-S1 ST1 Sustainable Urban
Neighbourhoods
JP-J1, JP-J3 and JP-J4 ST3 Employment Supply
JP-C1, JP-C3, JP-C4, JP-C5,
JP-C6 and JP-C7ST5 Transport Networks
JP-H4 ST12 Development Density
GMCONSULT.ORG 403Places for EveryoneJP-G1, JP-G2, JP-G3, JP-G4,
JP-G6, JP-G7, JP-G8, JP-G9
and JP-G10ST13 Natural Environment
Assets
JP-S2 ST14 Global Environment
JP-P2 ST15 Historic Environment
JP-G10 EN1 Development Affecting the
Green Belt
Table A.6
Tameside Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-H1 H1 Housing Land Provision
(Partially)
JP-H4 H7 Mixed Use and Density
(Partially)
JP-G10 OL1 Protection of the Green Belt
JP-G10 OL2 Existing Buildings in the
Green Belt
JP-G10 OL3 Major Developed Sites in
the Green Belt
JP-C5 and JP-C7 T7 Cycling (Partially)
JP-C5 and JP-C7 T8 Walking (Partially)
JP-S6 MW14 Air Quality (Partially)
JP-S5 U4 Flood Prevention (Partially)
Table A.7
Trafford Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-S5 SL1 Pomona Island (Partially)
JP-S1 and JP-S3 SL2 Trafford Wharfside
(Partially)
JP-S9, JP-S11 and JPA33 SL5 Carrington (Partially)
JP-H1 and JP-H4 L1 Land For New Homes
(Partially)
JP-H2 and JP-H3 L2 Meeting Housing Needs
(Partially)
JP-S5 and JP-S11 L3 Regeneration and Reducing
Inequalities (Partially)
JP-S14, JP-C1, JP-C3, JP -C4, JP-C5, JP-C6
and JP-C7L4 Sustainable Transport and
Accessibility (Partially)
404 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneJP-S2, JP-S3, JP-S5 and JP-S6 L5 Climate Change (Partially)
JP-S7 L6 Waste (Partially)
JP-P1 L7 Design (Partially)
JP-D1 and JP-D2 L8 Planning Obligations
(Partially)
JP-S9, JP-J1, JP-J2, JP-J3
and JP-J4W1 Economy (Partially)
JP-S9, JP-S12 and JP-P4 W2 Town Centres and Retail
(Partially)
JP-S7 W3 Minerals (Partially)
JP-P2 R1 Historic Environment
(Partially)
JP-S13, JP-G1, JP-G3, JP-G4, JP-G7, JP-G9
and JP-G10R2 Natural Environment
(Partially)
JP-S13, JP-G2, JP-G3, JP-G4, JP-G7
and JP-G9R3 Green Infrastructure
(Partially)
JP-S9, JP-S10, JP-S11, JP-G11, JP-G12,
JPA3.2 and JPA33R4 Green Belt, Countryside and
Other Protected Open Land
(Partially)
JP-G6 and JP-P7 R5 Open Space, Sport and
Recreation (Partially)
JP-P3 R6 Culture and Tourism
(Partially)
Table A.8
Wigan Council 
Replaced by PFE
policy/policiesPolicy
JP-S1 SD1 Presumption in Favour of
Sustainable Development
JP-P6 CP1 Health and Wellbeing
JP-P5 CP4 Education and Learning
JP-J1 and JP-J2 CP5 Economy and Environment
JP-H1 CP6 Housing (Clause 1 only)
JP-G10 and JP-G11 CP8 Green Belt and Safeguarded
Land
JP-G1 and JP-G2 CP9 Landscape and Green
Infrastructure
JP-G9 CP12 Wildlife Habitats and Species
JP-S2 and JP-S3 CP13 Low Carbon Development
JP-S7 CP14 Waste
JP-S2 and JP-S7 CP15 Minerals
Table A.9
GMCONSULT.ORG 405Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 406Places for EveryoneAll Additions to the Green Belt
B.1 In certain locations land which was not previously in the Green Belt has now been designated
as such because it is assessed to meet one or more of the five purposes, for example to
prevent settlements merging, and necessary to keep it permanently open. These proposed
additions to the Green Belt are shown on the index map below and identified on the Policies
Map.
Picture B.2 All Additions to the Green Belt 2021
Area Ha Site Name Green Belt
Addition IDDistrict
41.3 Ditchers Farm, Westhoughton GBA01 Bolton
24.1 Horwich Golf Club / Knowles
FarmGBA02 Bolton
5.6 Pigs Lea Brook 1 GBA03 Bury
GMCONSULT.ORG 409Places for EveryoneArea Ha Site Name Green Belt
Addition IDDistrict
3.0 North of Nuttall Park GBA04 Bury
0.6 Pigs Lea Brook 2 GBA05 Bury
3.1 Hollins Brook GBA06 Bury
3.3 Off New Road, Radcliffe GBA07 Bury
2.3 Hollins Brow GBA08 Bury
1.2 Hollybank Street, Radcliffe GBA09 Bury
13.7 Crow Lumb Wood GBA10 Bury
0.4 Nuttall West, Ramsbottom GBA11 Bury
12.5 Woolfold, Bury GBA12 Bury
1.0 Nuttall East, Ramsbottom GBA13 Bury
8.1 Chesham, Bury GBA14 Bury
9.1 Broad Hey Wood North GBA15 Bury
14.5 Lower Hinds GBA16 Bury
0.6 Land behind Denshaw Village
HallGBA17 Oldham
62.0 Land within the Roch Valley,
SmallbridgeGBA18 Rochdale
46.7 Land to west of Stakehill
Business ParkGBA19 Rochdale
17.7 Land at Firgrove Playing Fields,
RochdaleGBA20 Rochdale
9.8 Land between railway line and
Rochdale Canal, LittleboroughGBA21 Rochdale
8.1 Land north of St Andrew's
Church, DearnleyGBA22 Rochdale
4.7 Land at Townhouse Brook,
LittleboroughGBA23 Rochdale
410 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneArea Ha Site Name Green Belt
Addition IDDistrict
2.8 Land north of Shore,
LittleboroughGBA24 Rochdale
1.4 Land at Summit, Heywood GBA25 Rochdale
4.1 Land South East of Slack Brook
Open SpaceGBA26 Salford
184.5 West Salford Greenway GBA27 Salford
15.3 Part of Logistics North Country
ParkGBA28 Salford
25.2 Land West of Burgess Farm GBA29 Salford
34.1 Blackleach Country Park GBA30 Salford
7.9 Fox Platt, Mossley GBA31 Tameside
0.8 Manor Farm Close, Waterloo,
Ashton-under-LyneGBA32 Tameside
6.8 Ridge Hill Lane, Ridge Hill,
StalybridgeGBA33 Tameside
1.8 Cowbury Green, Long Row,
Carrbrook, StalybridgeGBA34 Tameside
2.1 Woodview, South View,
Carrbrook, StalybridgeGBA35 Tameside
22.3 Y ew Tree Lane, Dukinfield GBA36 Tameside
18.9 Broadbottom Road,
BroadbottomGBA37 Tameside
0.9 Ardenfield, Haughton Green,
DentonGBA38 Tameside
0.8 Cemetery Road, Denton GBA39 Tameside
4.9 Hyde Road, Mottram GBA40 Tameside
1.1 Ashworth Lane, Mottram GBA41 Tameside
GMCONSULT.ORG 411Places for EveryoneArea Ha Site Name Green Belt
Addition IDDistrict
6.9 Horses Field, Danebank,
DentonGBA42 Tameside
2.7 Midlands Farm, Moss Lane GBA43 Trafford
0.8 Land off Fir Tree Street, Ince GBA44 Wigan
3.1 Pennington FC Pitches, Howe
Bridge, AthertonGBA45 Wigan
26.1 Hope Carr Nature Reserve,
LeighGBA46 Wigan
1.8 Crow Orchard Road, Standish GBA47 Wigan
1.2 North Bradley Lane, Standish GBA48 Wigan
3.7 Coppull Lane, Wigan GBA49 Wigan
Table B.1 List of Places for Everyone Green Belt Additions
412 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Bolton
Policy Green Belt Addition 1
Ditchers Farm, Westhoughton
Picture B.3 GBA 1 Ditchers Farm, Westhoughton
GMCONSULT.ORG 413Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 2
Horwich Golf Club / Knowles Farm
Picture B.4 GBA 2 Horwich Golf Club / Knowles Farm
414 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Bury
Policy Green Belt Addition 3
Pigs Lea Brook 1
Picture B.5 GBA 3 Pigs Lea Brook 1
GMCONSULT.ORG 415Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 4
North of Nuttall Park
Picture B.6 GBA 4 North of Nuttall Park
416 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 5
Pigs Lea Brook 2
Picture B.7 GBA 5 Pigs Lea Brook 2
GMCONSULT.ORG 417Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 6
Hollins Brook
Picture B.8 GBA 6 Hollins Brook
418 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 7
Off New Road, Radcliffe
Picture B.9 GBA 7 Off New Road, Radcliffe
GMCONSULT.ORG 419Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 8
Hollins Brow
Picture B.10 GBA 8 Hollins Brow
420 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 9
Hollybank Street, Radcliffe
Picture B.11 GBA 9 Hollybank Street, Radcliffe
GMCONSULT.ORG 421Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 10
Crow Lumb Wood
Picture B.12 GBA 10 Crow Lumb Wood
422 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 11
Nuttall West, Ramsbottom
Picture B.13 GBA 11 Nuttall West, Ramsbottom
GMCONSULT.ORG 423Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 12
Woolfold, Bury
Picture B.14 GBA 12 Woolfold, Bury
424 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 13
Nuttall East, Ramsbottom
Picture B.15 GBA 13 Nuttall East, Ramsbottom
GMCONSULT.ORG 425Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 14
Chesham, Bury
Picture B.16 GBA 14 Chesham, Bury
426 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 15
Broad Hey Wood North
Picture B.17 GBA 15 Broad Hey Wood North
GMCONSULT.ORG 427Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 16
Lower Hinds
Picture B.18 GBA 16 Lower Hinds
428 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Oldham
Policy Green Belt Addition 17
Land behind Denshaw Village Hall
Picture B.19 GBA 17 Land behind Denshaw Village Hall
GMCONSULT.ORG 429Places for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Rochdale
Policy Green Belt Addition 18
Land within the Roch Valley, Smallbridge
Picture B.20 GBA 18 Land within the Roch Valley, Smallbridge
430 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 19
Land west of Stakehill Business Park
Picture B.21 GBA 19 Land to west of Stakehill Business Park
GMCONSULT.ORG 431Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 20
Land at Firgrove Playing Fields, Rochdale
Picture B.22 GBA 20 Land at Firgrove Playing Fields, Rochdale
432 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 21
Land between railway line and Rochdale Canal, Littleborough
Picture B.23 GBA 21 Land between railway line and Rochdale Canal, Littleborough
GMCONSULT.ORG 433Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 22
Land north of St Andrew's Church, Dearnley
Picture B.24 GBA 22 Land north of St Andrew's Church, Dearnley
434 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 23
Land at Townhouse Brook, Littleborough
Picture B.25 GBA 23 Land at Townhouse Brook, Littleborough
GMCONSULT.ORG 435Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 24
Land north of Shore, Littleborough
Picture B.26 GBA 24 Land north of Shore, Littleborough
436 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 25
Land at Summit, Heywood
Picture B.27 GBA 25 Land at Summit, Heywood
GMCONSULT.ORG 437Places for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Salford
Policy Green Belt Addition 26
Land South East of Slack Brook Open Space
Picture B.28 GBA 26 Land South East of Slack Brook Open Space
438 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 27
West Salford Greenway
Picture B.29 GBA 27 West Salford Greenway
GMCONSULT.ORG 439Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 28
Part of Logistics North Country Park
Picture B.30 GBA 28 Part of Logistics North Country Park
440 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 29
Land West of Burgess Farm
Picture B.31 GBA 29 Land West of Burgess Farm
GMCONSULT.ORG 441Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 30
Blackleach Country Park
Picture B.32 GBA 30 Blackleach Country Park
442 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Tameside
Policy Green Belt Addition 31
Fox Platt, Mossley
Picture B.33 GBA 31 Fox Platt, Mossley
GMCONSULT.ORG 443Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 32
Manor Farm Close, Waterloo, Ashton-under-Lyne
Picture B.34 GBA 32 Manor Farm Close, Waterloo, Ashton-under-Lyne
444 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 33
Ridge Hill Lane, Ridge Hill, Stalybridge
Picture B.35 GBA 33 Ridge Hill Lane, Ridge Hill, Stalybridge
GMCONSULT.ORG 445Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 34
Cowbury Green, Long Row, Carrbrook, Stalybridge
Picture B.36 GBA 34 Cowbury Green, Long Row, Carrbrook, Stalybridge
446 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 35
Woodview, South View, Carrbrook, Stalybridge
Picture B.37 GBA 35 Woodview, South View, Carrbrook, Stalybridge
GMCONSULT.ORG 447Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 36
Yew Tree Lane, Dukinfield
Picture B.38 GBA 36 Y ew Tree Lane, Dukinfield
448 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 37
Broadbottom Road, Broadbottom
Picture B.39 GBA 37 Broadbottom Road, Broadbottom
GMCONSULT.ORG 449Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 38
Ardenfield, Haughton Green, Denton
Picture B.40 GBA 38 Ardenfield, Haughton Green, Denton
450 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 39
Cemetery Road, Denton
Picture B.41 GBA 39 Cemetery Road, Denton
GMCONSULT.ORG 451Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 40
Hyde Road, Mottram
Picture B.42 GBA 40 Hyde Road, Mottram
452 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 41
Ashworth Lane, Mottram
Picture B.43 GBA 41 Ashworth Lane, Mottram
GMCONSULT.ORG 453Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 42
Horses Field, Danebank, Denton
Picture B.44 GBA 42 Horses Field, Danebank, Denton
454 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Trafford
Policy Green Belt Addition 43
Midlands Farm, Moss Lane
Picture B.45 GBA 43 Midlands Farm, Moss Lane
GMCONSULT.ORG 455Places for EveryoneAdditions to the Green Belt in Wigan
Policy Green Belt Addition 44
Land off Fir Tree Street, Ince
Picture B.46 GBA 44 Land off Fir Tree Street, Ince
456 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 45
Pennington FC Pitches, Howe Bridge, Atherton
Picture B.47 GBA 45 Pennington FC pitches
GMCONSULT.ORG 457Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 46
Hope Carr Nature Reserve, Leigh
Picture B.48 GBA 46 Hope Carr Nature Reserve
458 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 47
Crow Orchard Road, Standish
Picture B.49 GBA 47 Crow Orchard Road
GMCONSULT.ORG 459Places for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 48
North Bradley Lane, Standish
Picture B.50 GBA 48 North Bradley Lane
460 GMCONSULT.ORGPlaces for EveryonePolicy Green Belt Addition 49
Coppull Lane, Wigan
Picture B.51 GBA 49 Coppull Lane
GMCONSULT.ORG 461Places for EveryoneGMCONSULT.ORG 462Places for EveryonePlaces for Everyone Policies Map
Picture C.2 Places for Everyone 2021 Policies Map
GMCONSULT.ORG 465Places for Everyone