WARRINGTON 
UPDATED PROPOSED SUBMISSION VERSION       LOCAL PLAN  
2021 - 2038 
SEPTEMBER 2021 
Warrington  Local Plan 2021  to 2038 Contents 
Introduction  and Warrington  in Context 
1  Introduction  
1.1  What the Local Plan is and how it works  2
1.2  Summary  of work to date  4
1.3  Next Steps  5
2  Warrington  in Context 
2.1  Spatial Portrait  7
2.2  Challenges  and opportunities   17
Vision and Spatial Strategy 
3  Positive Planning for Warrington’s  Future 
3.1  Vision  20
3.2  Plan Objectives    23 
3.3  Spatial Strategy and Key Diagram  25
3.4  Exceptional  Circumstances  for Green Belt release  33
Strategic Planning Policies 
4   Objective  W1 
4.1  Planning for Warrington’s  New Homes  37
4.2  Planning for Warrington’s  Economic  Growth  56
4.3  Meeting Warrington’s  Retail  and Leisure Needs  63
5  Objective  W2 
5.1  Warrington’s  Green Belt  69
6  Objective  W3 
6.1  Warrington’s  Town Centre  and Surrounding  Area  75
7  Objective  W4 
7.1  Sustainable  Travel and Transport  63
7.2  Transport  safeguarding   89
7.3  Warrington’s  Utilities and Telecommunications   94
7.4  Warrington’s  Community  facilities  98
7.5  Delivering  Warrington’s  Infrastructure   101
8  Objective  W5 
8.1   Warrington’s  Places  107
8.2   Warrington’s  Historic environment  114
8.3   Warrington’s  Green Infrastructure  Network  118
8.4   Biodiversity  and Geodiversity  in Warrington   124
8.5  Open Space, Outdoor Sport and Recreation  Provision   130
8.6  Warrington’s  Quality of Place  138
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local PlanWarrington  Local Plan 2021  to 2038 Contents
9  Objective  W6 
9.1  Waste Management  in Warrington  143
9.2  Flood Risk and Water Management  in Warrington  149
9.3  Planning for Warrington’s  Minerals Resources   154
9.4  Meeting Future Aggregate  Requirements  and Provision  of Non‐Aggregates   160
9.5  Energy Minerals  163
9.6  Restoration  and Aftercare  of Mineral and Waste Sites  167
9.7  Renewable  and Local Carbon Energy Development  in Warrington   170
9.8  Environmental  and Amenity Protection  in Warrington   175
Site Allocations  
10  Main Development  Areas and Site Allocations  
10.1 Warrington  Waterfront   182
10.2  South East Warrington  Urban Extension   191
10.3 Fiddlers  Ferry  201
10.4 Peel Hall  210
10.5  Thelwall Heys  218
10.6  South East Warrington  Employment  Allocation   223
10.7  Croft  228
10.8  Culcheth  232
10.9 Hollins Green  236
10.10  Lymm  – Pool Lane/Warrington  Road  241
10.11 Lymm  – Rushgreen  Road  246
10.12 Winwick  251
Monitoring  and Review 
11  Monitoring  Framework  
11.1 Monitoring  and Review Policy  257
Glossary and Appendices  
Glossary  260
Appendix  1: Housing Trajectory  and stepped housing supply  271
Appendix  2: Monitoring  Framework   274
Appendix  3: Superseded  Core Strategy Policies  279
Appendix  4: Biodiversity  Designations   284
Appendix  5: Historic Assets  286
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local PlanList of Policies  
DEV1 Housing Delivery  
DEV2 Meeting Warrington’s Housing Needs 
DEV3 Gypsy &  Traveller and Travelling Show People  Provision 
DEV4 Economic Growth and Development 
DEV5 Retail and Leisure Needs 
GB1 Warrington’s Green Belt  
TC1 Town Centre and Surrounding Area 
INF1 Sustainable  Travel and Transport 
INF2 Transport Safeguarding 
INF3 Utilities and Telecommunica tions 
INF4 Community Facilities  
INF5 Delivering Infrastructure   
INF6 Aerodrome Safeguarding 
DC1 Warrington’s  Places  
DC2 Historic Environment  
DC3 Gree n Infrastructure 
DC4 Ecological Network  
DC5 Open Space,  Sport and Recreation Provision  
DC6 Quality of Place 
ENV1 Waste  Management  
ENV2 Flood Risk and Water Management 
ENV3 Safeguarding of Minerals Resources 
ENV4 Primary Extraction of Minerals 
ENV5 Energy M inerals 
ENV6 Restoration and Aftercare  of Mineral and Waste  Sites 
ENV7 Renewable and Low C arbon Energy Development  
ENV8 Environmental and Amenity Protection 
MD1 Warrington Waterfront  
MD2 South East Warrington Urban Extension  
MD3 Fiddlers Ferry  
MD4 Peel Hall 
MD5 Thelwall Heys 
MD6 South East Warrington Employment Area 
OS1 Croft 
OS2 Culcheth 
OS3 Hollins Green 
OS4 Lymm – Pool Lane/Warrington Road  
OS5 Lymm – Rushgree n Road 
OS6 Winwick  
M1 Monitoring and Review Policy 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local PlanINTRODUCTION  
AND WARRINGTON IN 
CONTEXT 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
11 Introduction  
1.1 What the Lo
cal Plan is and how it works  
1.1.1  Warringt
on’s Local Plan provides the statutory planning framework for the entire 
Borough for the period 2021  to 2038.  The Local Plan will be used to guide decisions 
on planning applications and  to identify  areas where investment and growth should 
be prioritised.  The Local Plan will replace the Local Plan Core Strategy (2014).  
1.1.2  The 
Plan contains a vision, a range  of objectives and an overall strategy for 
development.  It includes policies on both the scale of development and its overall 
pattern across the Borough.  The Plan allocates specific sites for development to 
meet the Borough’s development needs whilst at the same time protecting other  
areas from development or identifying them for enhancement.  It also contains 
Strategic Planning Policies which provide the basis for assessing individual planning 
applications.  
1.1.3  The 
Local Plan will provide developers,  residents and service providers with 
certainty about which sites will be developed during the plan period  and for what 
purposes.  It also details public and private sector partners that will have a role in achieving the Plan’s objectives, whilst establishing a framework for monitoring whether the objectives and associated policies are being achieved.  
1.1.4  The 
Local Plan recognises the role local communities have in preparing 
Neighbourhood Plans in order to provide more detailed local planning policies to  
meet the needs and requirements of their own areas. The Council may also prepare 
more detailed  local planning policies or Supplementary Planning Docume nts to 
provide additional guidance  where this is considered necessary to help deliver the 
overall objectives of the Local Plan.  
1.1.5  Local 
Plans are not prepared in a vacuum.  They are drawn up in accordance with 
the legislation governing plan -making and in the context of national planning policy 
with which they must be consistent.  Warrington’s Local Plan  has been prepared in 
the context of national planning policy set out principally in the National Planni ng 
Policy Framework (NPPF) (2021) and more detailed Planning Practice Guidance 
(PPG).   
1.1.6 The 
NPPF (Paragraph 15) emphasises the importance of plan -making within the 
planning system.  It is stated that succinct and up- to-date plans should provide a 
positive vision for the future of their areas and should provide a framework for 
addressing housing needs and other economic, social and environmental priorities.  
1.1.7 Local 
Plans  must  also be developed through extensive engagement with the local 
community and should have regard to other relevant local strategies and the plans 
of other public bodies, including those of neighbouring authorities.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
21.1.8 Legislation requires that plans are “sound” and one of the four tests of soundness 
set out in the NPPF is that plans are consistent with national policy.  The other tests 
of soundness are that the Plan is:  
•Positiv
ely prepared – providing a strategy which, as a minimum, seeks to meet
the area’s objectively assessed needs ;
•Justified – an appropriate strategy, taking into account the reasonable
alternatives, and based on proportionate evidence; and
•Effective – deliverable over the plan period, and based on effective joint  working
on cross -boundary strategic matters .
1.1.9 In a
ddition to national pl anning policy, the Local Plan is  also informed by other 
strategies and interrelationships  at a strategic  and a  local level. As a statutory 
consultee, the Council is consulted by, and in turn consults with, neighbouring local 
authorities in the preparation of Local Plans. In addition, councils and a number of other public sector bodies and service providers are required to cooperate proactively on strategic cross -boundary matters in the preparation of Local Plans  - 
this is both a legal requirement and re lates to the tests of soundness . The Council 
has cooperated with the relevant bodies in developing the Plan and in the preparation of the evidence base that will be used to support the Local Plan .  
1.1.1 0 Th
e Local Plan comprises the following sections : 
•Introducti
on and Warrington in Context - introduces the Local Plan, the work
undertaken to date and the next steps in its preparation. It  provides information
on the geographic, economic, environmental and social characteristics  of
Warrington and highlights the key challenges and opportunities which theBorough faces.
•Vision and Spatial Strategy - sets out the vision and objectives for Warrington’s
future development and details how they will be achieved through the Plan’s
spatial strategy.  The exceptional circumstances to  justify the release of some of
Warrington’s  Green Belt  land  to meet its development needs are also set  out in
this section.
•Strategic Planning Policies - includes all the policies for the Borough set against
the identified objectives.  These include policies for housing and employmentgrowth; the Green Belt; the Town Centre; delivery of infrastructure;  design and
character; and the environment.
•Site Allocations - identifies the main development areas  and sites in the outlying
settlements which have been allocated for development. The accompanyingallocation policies set out the infrastructure and policy req uirements for each
allocation .
•Monitoring and Review - sets out the monitoring framework  which will ensure
the Plan’s performance is assessed, reviewed and updated when necessary .
1.1.1 1 The p
olicies of the Local Plan supersede all the formerly saved policies within the 
Local Plan Core Strategy (2014 ).  A full list of superseded policies is included at 
Appendix 3 . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
31.2  Summary of work to date  
 
1.2.1  Following the High Court ruling in February  2015 which quashed the housing target 
in the adopted Local Plan Core Strategy  (2014) , the Council sought to update its 
housing policies.  It became clear that the Borough’s needs going forward could not 
be met without a full review of the adopted P lan.  
 1.2.2  In October 2016, the Council’s Executive Board agreed to commence the process of 
reviewing the existing Warrington Local Plan. The Council subsequently undertook a 6 week period of consultation on the scope of the review and the Council’s assessment of Warrington’s development needs. The Council also invited 
developers, landowners, the local community and other stakeholders to submit sites they wanted to be considered as part of the Plan review.  
 1.2.3  Following the consultation the Council undertook the work necessary to progress to 
a Preferred Development Option (PDO) for accommodating Warrington’s development needs. Consultation on the PDO was carried out between 18th July and 29
th September 2017.  
 1.2.4  Around 4,500  responses were received to the P DO con sultation. T hese were  taken 
into account in the preparation of the previous Proposed Submission Version Local 
Plan  (2019) . 
  1.2.5 Consultation on the previous Proposed Submission Version Local Plan under 
regulation 19 of The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) 
Regulations 2012 was held between April and June 2019. In total, around 3,200 responses were received, together with 2 petitions.  
 1.2.6  The vast majority of representations were made by Warrington residents and campaign  groups, together with Parish Councils, MPs, Borough Councillors and 
community groups, concerned with the scale and location of development being proposed, in particular relating to the release of Green Belt  land , and the impact of 
development on Warringto n’s infrastructure.  
  1.2.7  The Council also received a significant number of representations from developers and landowners actively promoting sites through the Local Plan process.  This 
includes those with land proposed to be allocated in the Plan and those whose land 
had not been proposed to be allocated.  A small number of additional sites were 
also submitted for the Council’s consideration.  
 1.2.8  Having reviewed the responses to the consultation, the Council concluded there was the need to undertake a dditional evidence base work.  This was primarily to 
provide a greater understanding of the infrastructure required to support the development proposed in the Plan and to demonstrate that the required infrastructure was capable of being delivered in a timely manner.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
41.2.9  In October 2020 the Council took the decision to pause work on the Local Plan. This 
was due to the economic and wider impacts of Covid 19 and the Government’s proposed amendments to the standard housing methodology.  
1.2.10  Work
 re-commenced following confirmation of changes to the Government’s 
housing methodology at the end of 2020. The Council updated its evidence base to re-establish Warrington’s future development needs and subsequently re -assessed 
the Plan’s spatial strategy and  potential allocation sites.  
1.2.11  Hav
ing undertaken this work and considered in detail the key issues raised from the 
previous consultation, the Council is proposing a number of significant changes from the previous Proposed Submission Version Local Plan  (2019).  These changes 
include : 
•a reduc
tion of the Plan’s housing requirement;
•the allo
cation of the Fiddlers Ferry site  for employment and housing , following
closure of the power station in March 2020 ;
•the remo
val of some of the previous  Green Belt  allocation sites, including Port
Warrington and the Business Hub,  the South West Urban Extension, the Phipps
Lane site in Burtonwood and the Massey Brook Lane site in Lymm; and
•the reducti
on in size of the South East Warrington Urban Extension (previous ly
known as the  Garden Suburb) .
1.2.12  The
 amount of land proposed to be removed from the Green Belt is 580 hectares, 
equating to 5% of the total amount of Green Belt land in the borough. This is 
significantly lower than the 1,210 hectares proposed to be  removed from the Green 
Belt in the previous Proposed Submission Version Local Plan which equated to 11% of the total amount of Green Belt in the borough.  
1.2.13  Giv
en the scale of changes being proposed, the Council has produced this updated 
Proposed Sub mission Version Local Plan  (2021 ) and this will be required to be 
subject to a further round of consultation prior to submission for independent examination.  
1.3 Next Step
s 
1.3.1  The
 Proposed Submission Draft Local Plan  (2021)  has been published for a six week 
period of consultation between Monday 4th October 2021 and Monday 15th 
November 2021.  
1.3.2  The 
Council will then need to review all of the representations made during the 
consultation prior to submitting the Plan for ‘Examination in Public’ to be carried 
out by an independent Inspector. It is anticipated the earliest date for the 
Examination in Public will be summer 2022 . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
5 
1.3.3  Following the Examination in Public, the Inspector will issue a report setting out their recommendations, including any required modifications to the Plan. The 
Council must carry out a final consultation on any modifications before formally adopting the Plan. It is anticipated the Local Plan will be adopted by mid -2023.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
62 Warrington in Context  
2.1 Spati
al Portrait  
2.1.1  Wa rrin
gton is the most northerly of the local authorities in the Cheshire area.   It 
shares boundaries with Halton, Cheshire West and Chester, Cheshire East and the 
four metropolitan Borough s of St Helens, Wigan, Salford and Trafford.  Warrington’s 
economic gravity covers a much larger area than the Borough and extends into the adjoining conurbations to its east and west.  
2.1.2  Th
e Borough comprises the main urban area of Warrington, surrounding by a rural 
hinterland which includes a n umber of distinct settlements. The town of Warrington 
is the largest urban area in Cheshire by some way (being over twice the population of Chester, the second largest) and is one of the largest free standing urban areas in the North West of England outside the two conurbations of Merseyside and Greater Manchester.  
2.1.3  Warrin
gton is located mid -way between the conurbations of Liverpool and 
Manchester with swift direct rail linkages with each. It sits astride most of the key communications routes in the North West – rail, road, water and air. Both the River 
Mersey and the Manchester Ship Canal run through the heart of the Town . 
2.1.4  Th
e Borough  covers some 176 square  kilometres and, at mid -year 2020 , was 
estimated  to have a population of 209,397, of whi ch 103,843 (49.6%)  were males 
and 105,554  (50.4%)  were females , living in some 91,296  households.  
2.1.5  Av
erage household size in Warrington at the 2011 Census was recorded as 2.34 
people, slightly lower than the figure recorded for England and Wales.   Compared to 
neighbouring authorities, Warrington’s ethnicity is low with just 4.1% of its total population being non -white British (Census 2011).   Home ownership is high within 
the Borough with 71.6% of homes being owner occupied at the 2011 Census.  
Evolution of Warrington  
2.1.6  The town of Warrington, which is by far the largest settlement in the Borough , owes 
its existence  to the presence of a crossing point across the River Mersey, the 
importance of which can be traced  back as far as pre -roman times.  Following the 
arrival of the Romans, this crossing point was  subsequently incorporated into an 
important north -south route, which is now known as the A49. This route dissected 
the historic west to east routes and substantially influenced how the town and subsequently the Borough  has developed to date.  
2.1.7  On 
the back of its connectivity the settlement of Warrington established itself as a 
market town  in the medieval period, centred on the historical axis of Bridge Street, 
Horsemarket Street, Sankey  Street, and Buttermarket Street, which today 
constitutes the heart of the Town Centre as we know it.  The town’s role as a market 
town has prevailed right through to the present day.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
72.1.8  By the mid- 19th century, Warrington began to emerge as an industrial to wn at 
which time it began  to steadily expand. It was during this time that the railways and 
ship canal arrived into the area which  connected Warrington to London in the 
south; Glasgow in the north; Liverpool to the west; and  Manchester to the east – 
links which still exist today.  
2.1.9  By
 the early 20th century, Warrington had become a fully -fledged  industrial town. 
Development  was no longer centred on the historic axis, but instead extended out 
from the axis in all directions. The  axis however remained the back bone of the 
town’s urban form as well as the heart of the town’s social and municipal life.  
2.1.10  In
 1968 Warrington was designated as a New Town, primarily to take  economic 
advantage of  its unique position at the hub of the region’s  communication network, 
evidently aided by the arrival of  the regions motorways. Warrington was also 
becoming a significant growth area and the New Town was designated in part to 
manage and direct this rapid growth and to tackle the congestion issues it was facing. The Warrington New Town Outline Plan, approved in 1973, set out a strategy  
to expand the town’s population from about 120,000 to 200,000 by the year 2000. Whilst the planned  rate of growth was not fully achieved, the town physically 
expanded further outwards , the  population grew significantly and the growth that 
took place has markedly changed the status, profile and character of the town. As a 
result Warrington has evolved from being a medi um-sized industrial town to the 
home of major national and internatio nal companies, attracting working people 
from across the region.  
2.1.11  Si
nce the end of the New Town era, strategic planning policies sought to arrest 
outward growth  of the Town partly through recognition of the scale of growth 
achieved  and partly  through recognition that the New  Town development had little 
effect on the older urban  areas of Inner Warrington. Recent efforts  have therefore 
focused on regenerating and ‘restructuring’ th e older core of Warrington Town and 
maintaining the distinct identity of the Borough’s countryside and smaller settlements.  
2.1.12  Th
is Local Plan marks a new stage in the town’s development – one of managed 
growth  beyond the existing urban area  to reflect projected population and 
household changes over the plan period.  There is a recognition that the previous 
focus on using brownfield land to meet the towns housing and employment needs has now meant that Warrington is now running out of such land and supply is dwindling . The town is also encountering housing affordabi lity issues , with this 
being a particular problem for younger people and young families .  
2.1.13  Aft
er a prolonged period of growth on brownfield sites within the urban area , 
particularly in relation to residential development, the Council, reflecting a c hanged 
emphasis from Central Government at a national level, must now identify suitable areas for further development to ensure growth is plan -led, effectively managed  
and the future needs of the town are met. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
82.1.14  The challenge for Warrington is  therefore  to further enhance  its existing strengths 
based on its strategic location, strong economic performance and distinctive 
character and to make improvements which reinvigorate  a sense of place  and pride 
in the town, whilst allowing a sustainable and  managed level of growth to meet 
projected needs across the Borough . 
2.1.15  The
 town’s historical development is illustrated in Figure 1, with the historic axis 
amplified to stress its significance.  
 Figure
 1 – Warrington’s Historical Development  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
9Warrington within the Region  
2.1.16  Warrington lies at the hub of the region’s communications network. The M6, M56 
and M62 motorways intersect within the Borough , providing good access to all parts 
of the region and beyond. Warrington also lies on the region’s main North -South 
(West Coast Main Line) and East-West (T rans -Pennine)  rail routes. The Borough  is 
also traversed by the Manchester Ship Canal, an important commercial waterway 
linking the Port of Manchester with the Mersey.  
 
2.1.17  Manchester International  Airport  and Liverpool John Lennon Airport  both lie within 
easy reach. Warrington’s excellent connectivity is not solely confined to 
conventional transport  routes. Green corridors such as the strategically important 
River Mersey, Trans Pennine Trail, Sankey Valley  and the regionally significant 
Bridgewater Canal act to highlight the potential of the Borough ’s greenway network 
in fulfilling active travel obje ctives. This connectivity has enabled the Borough  to 
develop a strong and resilient economy with the town constituting a significant centre of employment in the North West, and being widely recognised as a key driver and contributor to the North West's economy and a key driver of growth for 
the UK generally.  
 2.1.18  Warrington is one of the most successful towns  in the UK today in terms of 
economic development, investment, employment rates and growth and over the last ten years has repeatedly been recognised as such in national research and 
league tables such as the Centre for Cities ‘Cities Outlook’.  
 
2.1.19  Warrington's place within the Region is illustrated in Figure 2 , where the Borough 's 
central location in the Atlantic Gateway  and the region can be seen.  
   Figure 2  – Warrington in the Region  
               
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
10Warrington’s Pro sperity and Vibrancy  
2.1.20  Warrington has a strong and resilient economy. Since the changes brought about by 
the New Town growth, which gave rise to a new workforce and new employment opportunities, Warrington has developed a strong labour market. In terms of employment measures, Warrington is a highly performing location on a national basis. Current land take up is good, and the Borough  has a strong and diverse land 
and premises offer.  The performance of the Town in terms of the property market 
and investment is tracked on a yearly basis in the ‘Warrington Annual Property 
Review’.  
2.1.2 1 Warrin
gton is identified by the Cheshire and Warrington Local Enterprise 
Partnership as one of its priorities for growth in its Strategic Economic Plan (SEP). The LEP particularly recognises Warring ton’s strengths in engineering and the 
nuclear sector and in logistics (due to its location and connectivity). The LEP also recognises Warrington Town Centre as one of the key opportunities in its area for the growth in urban living attractive to younger p eople.  
2.1.22  The 
Transport for the North (TfN) Strategic Transport Plan and Investment 
Programme identifies Warrington as having a key role in the growth and connectivity of the North and identifies strategic interventions in its Investment Programme.  T his provides a significant strategic context for the Local Plan and for 
Warrington as a whole.  
2.1.23  Despi
te a strong labour market, high levels of skills and strong growth in workplace 
earnings, there are some areas in Warrington with high levels of deprivation and the 
share of increasing prosperity has not been evenly distributed. Worklessness  is an 
issue in some areas of the Borough  with the lack of connectivity between areas in 
need and employment opportunities partly to blame.  
2.1.24  Ome
ga has be en one of the most successful development areas – the growth of 
logistics and manufacturing on this site has created  in excess of  8,000 new jobs and 
some 1,100 new homes are  being delivered . The Omega site is nearly built out 
however and the Council’s Economic Development Need Assessment (EDNA)  (2021)  
concludes there is an insufficient existing employment land supply to meet Warrington’s long term needs.  
2.1.25  Warring
ton is central to the Cheshire Science Corridor Enterprise Zone (which 
included Birchwood  Park) and the Sci- Tech  Daresbury Enterprise Zone is located on 
Warrington’s Southern Border.  
2.1.26  The 
Town Centre is a sub -regional centre which serves the Borough  and surrounding 
areas, but its catchment in the wider region is limited by those of the three regional centres - Chester, Liverpool and Manchester. Warrington's designation as a New 
Town led to the decentralisation of retailing to district centres in suburban locations and G emini Retail Park in an 'out of  centre ’ location. These sites now compete 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
11directly with the Town Centre and continued out of centre development poses a 
significant threat to the vitality and viability of the Town Centre.  
 2.1.27  The Town Centre has a strong retail offer , albeit that it has seen some major 
department store closures over the last few years,  and is gradually improving its  
diversity in terms of leisure and visitor facilities and the evening economy. Evidence 
indicates that the catering (including cafes, bars and restaurants) sector is underrepresented in the Town Centre compared with national averages in terms of 
the number of units and amount of fl oor space. The same is true of Town C entre 
offices and the reality is that the diversity of the town, for a sub -regional centre, is 
not good.  
 
2.1.28  The recently completed  Time Square Development make s a major contribution to 
addressing some of these issues. Once fully occupied, i t will provide a wide range of 
leisure, retail an d office uses as well as extensive public realm improvements.  
 2.1.29  The Warrington Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document (2021), 
incorporating the aspirations of the Town Centre  Masterplan  (2019) , seeks  to 
further strengthen the role  of the Town Ce ntre by promoting it as a focus for living, 
working, travel, culture and leisure at the heart of the town.   
 2.1.30  In terms of the visitor economy, the Borough  benefits from a number of key 
attractions and assets which are visited by residents within the Borough  and from 
elsewhere, such as Gullivers World, the Halliwell Jones Stadium and Walton Hall Estate. Heritage and natural environment assets, and particularly the Borough 's 
strategic green links, also contribute to tourism in the Borough  and the local 
economy.  
 
Warrington’s Neighbourhoods  
2.1.31  Although Warrington is a prosperous Borough , it is also an unequal one and a key 
defining feature of Warrington is the marked differences in prosperity and quality of life within the Borough . The 2019 Indices of  Multiple Deprivation (IMD)  have shown 
that deprivation in Warrington has decreased  slightly relative to the previous 
indices from 2015, with an average score of 18.9 compared with 19.3 in 2015 .  This 
means that Warrington now ranks 148th out of 317 local authorities compared with 
147th out of 326 in 2015. This places Warrington within the 46.7th centile, meaning 
53.3% of local authorities within England are less deprived than Warrington. There 
is significant variation between wards with some wards being amongst the least deprived (Lymm) and some in the most deprived (Poplars & Hulme) in the country.   
 2.1.32  With regards to health and disability deprivation, a significant percentage of the Borough 's SOAs rank amongst the worst nationally. These communities with the 
poorest health and disability levels are geographically concentrated within the Town Centre and Inner Warrington. Lifestyle factors are also worse in areas of relative deprivation. Poor self -reported health, sedentary lifestyle, smoking prevalence , 
poor diet behaviours and being overweight are all worse in Inner  Warrington.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
122.1.33  Generally, the health of Warrington residents is improving.   The average life 
expectancy of Warrington residents is improving, but the pace of improvement has 
slowed in  recent years, and the relative gap between Warrington and England has 
not narrowed.  There is also su bstantial variation within the B orough, with more 
socio -economically deprived areas experiencing poorer health outcomes.  The 
variation in terms of life expectancy related to deprivation is over 10 years for men and almost 7 years for women . Much work is on -goin g across the B orough to 
continue to improve the health and wellbeing of Warrington residents, this agenda 
is being driven by the Health and Wellbeing Strategy for Warrington 2019 -2023.  
2.1.34  The 
need for new homes within the Borough  has remained as important in the 
recent past as it did during the planned expansion of Warrington during its former 
designation as a New Town. In the 1990s and early 2000s  for example, and aside 
from providing much needed new market and affordable homes to meet the needs of local people, the delivery of new homes has spearheaded the town’s regeneration and renewal efforts which have revived and revitalised much of the older  core of Warrington – acting as a catalyst for physical change and often well 
needed investment in social and environmental infrastructure as a means of countering deprivation.  
2.1.35  The 
supply of new homes remained  relatively  buoyant  with significant levels of new 
homes delivered up to the  height of the last development boom  in the mid-2000s . 
Local monitoring over this period confirmed that 99 % of new homes ha d been 
delivered on previously developed land and that a healthy mixture of dwellings in 
terms of type and size ha d been delivered.  
2.1.36  Over mo
re recent years  however  there has been a noticeable fall in ho using 
completions.  In the monitoring period 2019/20 there were 541 net completions which saw a slight increase of 38 unit s on the previous monitoring period . 
Completions are forecast to increase over the short term with major developments underway at Omega and in south Warrington, but the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment shows that land supply will be come increasingly 
constrained over the longer term.  
2.1.37  Hou
se price data for Warrington, taken from Land Registry data closely mirrors the 
experience found nationally in that house prices grew strongly within the Borough  
between 2002 and 2007, with pa rticularly strong growth between 2002 and 2004. 
Owing to the national housing market downturn brought about by the realisation of the scale of bad debt that banks had, prices subsequently  fell, with the lowest prices 
being recorded in Warrington in early 2 009. Prices  remained  relatively static  for a 
period after this low  with the average house price in Warrington at July 2011 
standing at £141,988, somewhat lower than the national average of £163,049.  
Since then, prices have increased significantly. According to the latest Land Registry data collated in December 2019, average house prices in Warrington stood at £224,760, representing an increase of over 3 6% since 2011.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
132.1.38  Evidence on housing need suggests that, partly on the back of economic suc cess and 
changes in demographics, an increased supply of future new homes is required, and 
makes clear that there is a significant shortfall of affordable homes within the Borough . The most recent Local  Housing Needs Assessment (LHNA ) suggests that 
approximately 433 additional new affordable homes  need to be provided in the 
Borough  each year  over the plan period, with supply simply unable to keep pace 
with demand. The major reason affordable need is high is that the average house price is over  6 times avera ge household incomes , combine d with a falling supply of 
the B orough’s social housing stock as a result of the ‘right to buy’ . 
  2.1.39  Affordability issues are linked to suppressed household formation rates and this is a 
particular problem for young people  and young families .  This is becoming an 
increasingly urgent issue which the Local Plan aims to tackle for the longer term.  
 2.1.40  Another notable trend is Warrington’s aging population, with a significant increase in the need for homes suitable for older people.  
 2.1.41  With regards to neighbourhood services, evidence suggests that the Borough 's 
residents enjoy good access to a network of defined local retail and service centres . 
Recent development has however put increased pressure on local schools, hea lth 
facilities and other community facilities . More recently within the Borough , service 
delivery is being offered through a neighbourhood 'hub' model which brings 
together a range of public and in some instances private services into one place.  
 
Warringto n’s Built and Natural Environment  
2.1.42  The Borough has a unique identity with the town of Warrington surrounded by 
attractive countryside and a number of smaller outlying settlements, each with their own separate character. The Borough has a large number of heritage and ecological 
assets which contribute to Warrington’s identity and character.  
 2.1.43  Warrington has a varied  landscape character, important areas of nature 
conservation value  and extensive areas of high -grade agricultural land .  The 
Borough’s environmental assets, including its sites of international, national and local importance for biodiversity  must continue to be protected and opportunities 
taken to enhance their function and value, including improving linkages between them,  through a comprehensive Green Infrastructure network.  Strategic green links 
include the Mersey Valley corridor and Sankey Valley Linear Park, from which a series of wider and parallel links can be accessed.  The Borough  has an unrivalled 
network of internal connected green spaces and parks which gives Warrington  
much of its sense of place.  
 2.1.44  The Mersey Valley Corridor constitutes a wide tract of land (exceeding 2km  in 
places) extending across the Borough from Fiddlers Ferry Power Station in the west,  
to Hollins Green and the flood plain for the River Bollin in the east.  Its value lies in the mix of river valley habitats, notably wetlands, in the context of the Mersey Estuary as whole – one of the largest  estuaries in Europe and supporting 
internationally important numbers of birds.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
142.1.45  Sanke
y Valley Linear Park is an important corridor which runs north -south for over 
6km through Warrington, linking the Green Belt to the north to the River Mersey in 
the south.  It is characterised by ‘New Town’ eco logy-led landscaping adjoining 
Sankey Brook and the St Helens Canal, and it is important for flora and fauna as well as leisure, recreation and opportunities for active travel.  
2.1.46  Natu
re des ignations currently include 55 Local Wildlife Sites, 4  Local Nature 
Reserves, 4 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and 3 Special Areas of 
Conservations (SACs).  The Landscape Character Assessment for Warrington, 
identifies 20 defined landscape character areas across the Borough.  Current 
mineral operations  in Warrington include Southworth Quarry and Rixton Combined 
Site.  
2.1.47  With
 regard to the built environment, the Borough possesses a valuable legacy of 
heritage assets across the main urban area and the Borough’s smaller settlements which need to continue to be protected  and enhanced. Warrington has 379 Listed 
Buildings and 16 Conservation Areas, together with a large number of other buildings and structures of interest that are  included on a local list. The B orough 
also contains 12  Scheduled Ancient Mo numents, 1 Registered Battlefield and a 
wealth of archaeological remains.  
2.1.48  Whils
t the majority of designated heritage assets across the Borough are in good 
condition,  4 Listed Buildings and 3 Conservation Areas are included in Historic 
England’s Heritage at Risk Register.  
2.1.4 9 The
 Borough’s carbon footprint emissions have historically been dominated by 
Fiddlers Ferry Power Station, however this ceased operation in March 2020 in line 
with national government seeking to close all coal -fired power stations by 2025.  
2.1.50  The
re are a number of major sources of pollution  contributing to pockets of poor air 
quality  at a local level namely transport, industrial and domestic  heating. In addition 
to local sources, there are transboundary effects from regional, national and international sources that are outside the control of the local authority. The major source of pollution at a local level though has been assessed as relate d to transport, 
primarily road.  
2.1.51  Minim
ising the causes of, and adapting to the impacts of climate change is a key 
issue in Warrington . Indeed, the Council has declared a climate change emergency 
and launched a Green Energy Strategy in 2019 with the aim of becoming carbon 
neutral by 2030 . The town is built on the flood plain of the River Mersey and at the 
head of its tidal estuary. It is at risk from many different sources of flooding, the main source being the River Mersey and its five key tributarie s, but it is also 
susceptible to flooding from ordinary watercourses, surface water runoff and sewer flooding. In addition there are some residual risks associated with artificial water bodies such as the Bridgewater Canal, the Manchester Ship Canal, and v arious 
reservoirs. The extent of areas at risk from tidal flooding at the historic heart of the 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
15town mean that the effects of climate change are potentially significant, particularly 
in central Warrington. The Manchester Ship Canal does however play a vital role in managing fluvial flood risk along the Mersey, significantly reducing the incidence of flooding from fluvial flows.  
 2.1.52  Warrington’s Green Belt fulfils an important role in ensuring the separation of Warrington from neighbouring towns and citi es and preventing urban sprawl 
extending into the countryside.  However, it is important to balance this role with 
the needs of the Borough over the P lan period.  
 
Warrington’s Transport Network  
2.1.53  Warrington is well- connected to the motorway network.  The M6 provides a 
connection from Birmingham in the south to Carlisle in the north, whilst the M62 is 
an east -west link between Manchester and Liverpool. The M56 also runs east- west, 
through the south of the B orough and provides a connection between South 
Manchester and Chester.  
 2.1.54  Warrington is located on the Cheshire Lines Committee (CLC) Line that runs east to west, connecting Warrington to Manchester and Liverpool, and the West Coast Main Line (WCML) that r uns north to south through the B orough, calling at 
Warrington Bank Quay.  
 
2.1.55  The majority of bus services in Warrington are operated commercially, with over 
80% of the overall mileage provided by Warrington’s Own Buses (WOB). Other bus operators operate several bus services within Warrington, which are important in providing cross boundary trips in and out of Warrington.  
 2.1.56  Warrington’s compact size and fairly flat terrain provides an excellent opportunity for more local journeys to be made by walking and cycling. Currently, there are over 
70 miles of surfaced segregated cycle paths, shared use paths alongside roads and 
greenway routes across the borough . Within Warringto n Town Centre there are 
over 400 publicly available cycle parking stands. There are over 136 miles of public 
rights of way in Warrington, 128 miles of footpath and seven miles of bridleways 
and restricted byways. There are routes in towns, villages and the countryside.  
 2.1.57  One of the most significant challenges facing Warrington is however the 
dependency on car travel. The New Town development pattern has favoured the 
car. Warrington has very high car ownership levels (81% , Census 2011) and this is 
above the 74% national average. As a result, the car is the travel mode of choice in Warrington and dominates th e highways network.  
 2.1.58  The dominance of the car has led to the priority for other travel modes being reduced and serious congestion problems within the town. Cars, particularly when single occupancy, make poor use of available road space and offer a less energy efficient means of travel compared to sustainable transport modes.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
162.1.5 9 Growth in car dependency is a major contributing factor in the worsening health of 
Warrington’s population.  Increased reliance on cars for the majority of journeys toget her with use of cars for short (less than 2km) trips means that people do not 
achieve their recommended level of physical exercise.  This can lead to a wide range of health problems including obesity, respiratory illnesses and mental health issues.  
2.2 Chall
enges and Opportunities  
2.2.1  It
 is clear from the above spatial portrait that the Borough of Warrington varies 
significantly in terms of character, prosperity,  health and access to services and 
infrastructure.  
2.2.2  Th
ere are a number of challenges which need to be addressed in order to improve 
the Borough for those who live  in, work  in and visit Warrington.  Key challenges 
which the Borough faces can be summarised as : 
•Limi
ted housing and employment land supply;
•Housing affordability concerns;
•Meeting the needs of an aging population;
•Car dependency ;
•Traffic congestion ;
•Air quality impacts ;
•The sustainable supply of minerals and mineral products to meet development
aspirations ;
•Management of waterways ;
•Importing waste;
•Aging infrastructure; and
•Areas of deprivation.
2.2.3  Ho
wever, there are a significant number of opportunities which Warrington has 
benefited from and will continue to do so, with new opportunities also emerging.  
Many of these are linked to the Borough’s strategic location in the North West region between th e regional centres of Liverpool and Manchester but also the 
important wider links on both the motorway network and West C oast Mainline.   
Warrington is set to improve its links nationally with the introduction of HS2  and 
Northern Powerhouse Rail , which will see further benefits for the town on both a 
national and regional level.  
2.2.4   Fu
ture opportunities for Warrington can be summarised as:  
•Distin
ct character areas;
•Its connected network of green spaces and parks ;
•Its waterways and waterfronts and the unique opportunities they bring;
•Tourist/cultural attractions – Gullivers World, Walton Hall and Gardens, live
music events;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
17• An improving cultural offer in the Town Centre , building on the 
recommendations of the Warrington Culture Commission ; 
• An increased interest in Town Centre living – from both developers and 
occupiers – particularly  for younger people ; 
• Introduction of HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail ; 
• Investment in new infrastructure;  
• Thriving business community and successful economy;  
• Creation of new p laces/areas within the Borough.   
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
18VISION  
AND SPATIAL STRATEGY  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
193 Positive Planning for Warrington’s Sustainable Future  
 
3.1 Vision  
 
Introduction 
 
3.1.1  It is important that the Local Plan sets out a  positive  vision for Warrington’ s future 
development. The vision will provid e a common thread running through the  Plan’s 
Strategic Objective s, the Spatial Strategy and  into each individual planning policy . 
 3.1.2  The vision set out below reflects  Warrington’s strengths and constraints as  set out 
in the previous chapter  and carries forward relevant parts of the previous  Local Plan  
Core Strategy’s vision .  It is based on an understanding of Warrington’s future 
development needs and the Council’s growth aspirations.   It takes into account the 
wide range of representations made to previous  Local Plan consultations , the 
Council’s declaration of climate change and ecological emergencies  and the 
requirements of national planning policy . 
 3.1.3  Whilst the Plan Period extends over 18 years to 2038, the vision looks further ahead 
to ensure the Plan provides the basis for Warrington’s long term future growth for 
at least  the next 30 years.  
 
Vision  – Warrington 2038 and beyond  
 
1. Warrington will be  a place that works for all:  
 
• Providing opportunities for the most vulnerable ; 
• With a  strong , sustainable  economy that benefits everyone;  
• With strong, a ctive and resilient communities; and  
• Will be a carbon neutral, exemplar green town . 
 
2. Warrington’s long term growth will be positively planned to ensure that new homes, jobs 
and businesses are supported by major improvements to the Borough’s infrastructure, to 
the benefit of existing and new communities alike.  
 
3. Warrington will consolidate its position as one of the most important economic hubs in 
the UK and will see the development of major new employment locations. Its highly skilled 
workforce will support a wide range of economic activities, including engineering, hi -tech 
manufacturing,  green techn ologies,  business services, logistics and research and 
development.  
 
4. Warrington’s  central position within the Northern Powerhouse provides businesses with 
unrivalled access to the Manchester and Liverpool conurbations, the Manchester Ship Canal 
and the  national road and public transport networks. The future intersection of the two new 
major national rail routes, HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail, in Warrington will further 
enhance the Town’s strategic connectivity.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
205.New housing development will suppo rt Warrington’s economic growth and will be
focused on creating attractive, well designed, sustainable and healthy communities. New
homes will meet a wide range of needs including those of families, those struggling to afford
their own home, elderly people  and disabled people.
6.The character of Warrington’s places will be maintain ed and enhanced with a vibrant
Town C entre and main urban area, surrounded by attractive countryside and distinct
settlements. The unique elements of the historic , built and na tural environment that
Warrington possesses will be looked after, well managed, well used and enjoyed.
7.Warrington’s rich green space network (comprising radial green routes and the circuit of
parks and open space encircling the Town Centre and Waterfront)  together with its
extensive network of waterways  will provide a framework for Warrington’s growth and key
development areas. Major new parks, new green links and increased access to river and
waterside frontages will improve leisure  and active travel  opportunities  and increase the
Borough’s biodiversity.
8.New development will be successfully integrated into Warrington’s transformed public
transport system. The enhanced  Green Space and Waterways network will provide popular,
high quality walking and cycling routes  that promote active lifestyles, reduce carbon
emissions, contribute to improving  air quality  and help tackle climate change .
9.The Mersey valley running though the centre of the town together with the river itself
and the Ship Canal will provide an attractive setting for new development at Warrington
Waterfront and the regen eration and development of the Town C entre . The Town Centre
and Warrington Waterfront will become a focus for urban living with higher density
residential developments. The T own Centre will strengthen its role as the hub of the
Warrington’s commercial and recreational life with a greatly enhanced cultural offer.
10.There will be a transformation in how Warrington meets its energy needs, with a focus
on renewable sources and decentralised networks, benefiting Warrington’s existing and
future residents and businesses  and helping tackle climate change . New development  will
be built to the highest levels of energy efficiency and the Town will be at the cutting edge in
the use of new green technologies .
11.Warrington’s levels of recycling will continue to increase, whilst municipal and
commercial waste will be reduced. New waste facilities will ensure that residual waste is
sustainably managed. Warrington’s mineral resources will be protected and contribute to
the region’s future resource needs .
Why we
 have taken this approach 
3.1.4 Warrin
gton  has seen significant growth since its designation as a New T own and its  
success means it is a location where people want to live and where businesses want 
to locate. Over time i nfrastructure has not always  kept pace  with new development. 
This has resulte d in congestion on Warrington’s roads and pressure  on schools, GPs, 
the hospital and Warrington’s parks, gardens , community and cultural facilities .  It 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
21has also resulted in increasing carbon emissions and pressure on the borough’s 
natural environment, leading the Council to declare a Climate Emerg ency in 2019 
and an Ecological E mergency in 2020.  
 3.1.5 The vision therefore seeks to ensure that future growth is supported by wide 
ranging investment  in infrastructure that will not only support new development 
but will address existing congestion  and infrastructure constraints  across 
Warrington  as a whole.   Through carefully managing growth, Warrington will be 
able to significantly reduce its carbon emissions, whilst increasing its biodiversity.  
 3.1.6 War rington already has one of the strongest economies in the North West.  There 
has been a significant increase in employment development over the last few years, exemplified by the pace of development at Omega.  Our Economic Development 
Needs Assessment has identified that market demand to invest in Warrington is set 
to continue over the Plan period.   The Warrington Means Business Regeneration 
Framework  has set out the Council’s ambitious plans for economic growth.  It is 
essential that the Plan is able to su pply additional employment land to sustain and 
enhance  Warrington’s economic prosperity .  
 3.1.7 Increasing the provision of new homes is a key Government priority.  Our Local 
Housing Needs Assessment has confirmed the level of homes we need to meet 
Warrin gton’s demographic needs , to address issues of affordability  and to ensure 
sufficient homes are provided for the new jobs that will be created in Warrington.  
 3.1.8 It is important to ensure that everyone in our community has access to a home. Increasing the supply of homes will increase the availability of homes for young 
families and will enable the increased supply of affordable homes for rent and low cost ownership.  There is also the need to provide homes that are suitable for the 
increasing proportio n of Warrington’s population who will be elderly and to address 
the existing deficiency and future requirement for homes that can be readily adapted for people with disabilities.  
 3.1.9 The Borough has a unique identity with the town of Warrington surrounded by 
attractive countryside and a number of smaller outlying settlements, each with their 
own separate character.   The Borough has a large number of heritage and ecological 
assets which con tribute to Warrington’s identity  and character.  
 3.1.10  During  previous Local Plan consultations , a large number of residents expressed 
concern that this identity could be lost with the Borough providing a large number 
of new homes for people who will simp ly commute each day to jobs in Manchester 
or Liverpool and have a limited relationship with Warrington and its communities.  
 3.1.11 An essential component of the vision is therefore to ensure that the Borough’s unique identity is maintained and enhanced.  This is both in the context of 
Warrington’s distinct role in the wider North West region and in the relationship between the town, countryside and surrounding settlements within the Borough 
itself.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
223.1.1 2 Wa
rrington benefits from extensive open space and waterways  network s.  New 
development provides the opportunity to connect into  and enhance  these 
networks, providing new areas of open space for recreation, ecology and new 
routes for walking and cycling .  A number of major waterways pass through the 
Borough but over recent years , development has not always exploited this potential 
and too often development turns its back on the water and connections are 
fragmented with many areas of the waterside inaccessible.   New development 
provides an opportunity to  open up the Borough’s waterways  and green spaces  and 
ensure they become integral to Warrington’s character.  
3.1.1 3 As 
we invest in infrastructure, we also need to recognise there is a need for a 
transformation in the way people move around Warrington and  travel into and out 
of the Borough.  The Local Plan closely reflects the Council’s new Local Transport 
Plan  (LTP 4)  to ensure  that growth  over the Plan Period  and beyond  is supported by 
new transport infrastructure and services which reduce the reliance on the private 
car by promoting walking and cycling, whilst at the same time ensuring that the existing transport network is safe and efficient.  This is the only sustainable way to  
address the travel issues experienced in Warrington and such an approach wi ll have 
major environmental benefits.  It will also promote active and healthier lifestyles 
and ensure that everyone is able to easily get  to where they live, shop, study, work 
and access local services.  
3.1.1 4 As 
a Council, Warrington is leading the way  in terms of delivering a wide range of 
projects to promote sustainable energy production and is  on track  to becoming 
carbon neutral itself by 2030.  The Council  is committed to working with its 
residential and business communities to ensure Warrington as a whole transitions towards carbon neutrality.  This will require new development to be energy efficient 
and promote renewable and decentralised energy productio n.  If we are to make 
Warrington a truly sustainable place we also need to ensure the sustainable management of waste and mineral resources.  
3.2 Plan O
bjectives  
Introducti
on 
3.2.1  The
 Plan Objectives cover a range of development themes . They  will ensur e that the 
individual elements of the Local Plan are collectively able to deliver the Plan’s 
overall vision.  
3.2.2  The 
Objectives have been used to help assess different options for the Plan’s spatial 
strategy and provide a basis for  developing individual planning p olicies.   They are 
based on the O bjectives of Warrington’s previous Local Plan  Core Strategy  but have 
been updated to reflect Warrington’s future development needs , wider Council 
strategies and in response to changes to Government Planning Policy.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
233.2.3  The Objectives have been refined during the process of Plan preparation, taking into 
account representations made during previous  Local Plan consultations. 
Objec
tives  
W1 To enable the sustainable growth of Warrington  through the ongoing regeneration of 
Inner Warrington, the delivery of strategic and local infrastructure, the strengthening of 
existing neighbourhoods and the creation of new sustainable neighbourhoods whilst:  
•delivering a minimum of 14,688  new homes (eq uating to 816 per year) between
2021 and 2038, and
•supporting Warrington’s ongoing economic success by ensuring provision is made
to meet the need for  316.26 h ectares of employment land between 20 21 and
2038.
W2 To ensure  Warrington’s  revised Green Belt boundaries maintain the permanence of 
the Green Belt in the long term.  
W3 To strengthen and expand the role of Warrington Town Centre as a regional 
employment, retail, leisure, cultural and transport hub, whilst transforming the quality of 
the public realm and making the Town Centre a place where people want to live.  
W4 To provide new infrastructure  and services  to support Warrington’s growth;  address  
congestion ; promote  safer and more sustainable travel; and encourage  active  and healthy  
lifestyles.  
W5 To secure high quality design which reinforces the character and local distinctiveness 
of Warrington’s urban area, its countryside, its unique pattern of waterways and green 
spaces and its constituent settlements whilst protecting, enhanci ng and embracing the 
Borough's historic, cultural, built and natural assets.  
W6 To minimise the impact of development on the environment through the prudent use 
of resources and ensuring development  contributes to reducing carbon emissions,  is 
energy efficient, safe and resilient to climate change and makes a positive contribution to 
improving Warrington’s air quality.  
Why we
 have taken this approach 
3.2.4  U s
ing the previous Plan’s O bjectives as the starting point for the new Plan’s 
Objectives will ensure  a level of  continuity  in the planning of the Borough.  A 
significant amount of public consultation and evidence base work informed the 
previous Plan, which was adopted in 2014.   
3.2.5  Th
e Objectives have been updated to reflect the higher level of development that 
Warrington must plan for in order to meet its future development needs  whilst 
retaining the character and liveability  of the town .  There has also been significant 
change in national planning policy with the publication of new  versions of the 
National Planning Policy Framework  and associated National Planning Policy 
Guidance.  
3.2.6  The
 Council has produced a detailed assessment of the need for future homes, 
employment land and retail and leisure uses.  The Council is planning for a level o f 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24homes to meet  the Governme nt’s minimum requirement.   This will ensure enough 
homes are provided for Warrington’s growing population, including a substantial 
provision of affordable homes.  It will also support the number of jobs that will be 
created from Warrington’s future economic growth  and will help  address current 
issues of affordability .  Further detail on the number of homes and amount of 
employment land that the Local Plan will provide is set out in  the spatial strategy 
below and  the policies unde r Objective W1 in the next section.  
3.2.7  Pre
vious Plans ha ve been successful in promoting the ongoing regeneration of the 
Inner area of Warrington, ensuring productive development of brownfield land and 
in securing significant investment in the Town C entre.  This remains the priority of 
the Council.  The majority of new development will be within the existing urban 
area and the Council has significant ambitions to intensify development in the Town 
Centre and surrounding inner urban area.  This will also help with the Council’s 
desire to keep overall journey distances shorter, thus reducing the need to travel by 
car. 
3.2.8  In 
order for Warrington to meet its future development needs there is  however  the 
need for land to be released from the  Green Belt .  The Objectives will ensure that 
development on former Green Belt land complements rather than competes with development within the existing urban area  and that new infrastructure investment 
will benefit the Borough as a whole .  The Objectives will also help  to ensure that the 
revised Green Belt boundaries are able to endure over the long term, well beyond the end of the Plan period in 203 8. 
3.2.9  Spe
cific Objectives have been retained, refined and strengthened to deliver the 
other key elements of the vision .  These  include  infrastructure investment; reducing 
the need to travel by car; promoting sustainable modes of transport and active 
lifestyles; ensur ing protection and enhancement of the Boroughs’ unique character 
and its built and natural assets; and ensuring  Warrington’s long term environmental 
sustainability , including addressing  the commitments made by the  Council  in 
declaring climate change and ecological emergencies .  
3.3 Plan S
patial Strategy 
Introduc
tion 
3.3.1  Th
e Spatial S trategy show s how the Local Plan will accommodate  and manage  
development  in different locations  across the Borough  in accordance with the Plan’s 
vision and objectives .  
3.3.2  Th
e Spatial Strategy has emerg ed following consideration of a range of alternative 
options .  It ha s been informed by  the sites submitted by developers and landowners 
as part of the Local Plan ‘call for sites’ and  the large number of representations 
made to previous  Local Plan consultations.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
253.3.3  It has been informed by both planned infrastructure investment and also by the 
ability to deliver new and improved infrastructure to support new development and 
the growth of Warrington as a whole.  
 3.3.4  The Spatial Strategy is illustrated in Figure  3 - Local Plan Key Diagram with further 
detail provided in the policies under Objective W1 and in the strategic site 
allocations . 
 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
26Figure 3 – Local Plan  Key Diagram  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
27Why we have taken this approach  
 
3.3.5  The Plan’s main p riority remains to optimise the development potential of the  
existing urban area .  As such a number of key elements of the previous Plan’s spatial 
strategy therefore remain.   These include  intensifying development  in the Town 
Centre , the Inner area of Warrington and opening up the Waterfront as a new urban 
quarter  facilitated by the new Wes tern Link .  
 
3.3.6  It is not possible however to meet all of Warrington’s development needs within the existing urban area.  The Plan’s  spatial strategy has therefore been developed in 
order to meet the need for new homes, employment land and retail  supported by 
wide -ranging infrastructure improvements . 
 
Spatial strategy for meeting our need for new homes  
3.3.7  The existing urban area can accommodate around 11,8 00 new homes.  This means 
there is the requirement to release Green Belt land  for around 4 ,500 homes in order 
for the Council to meet its housing requirement.  The detailed land requirement 
calculation is set out in Policy DEV1 . 
 3.3.8  The Council has considered a range of options for the distribution of homes requiring  Green Belt release. The chosen spatial strategy is for:  
 
• an urban extension to the south east of the main urban area, which will deliver 
around 2,400 homes  in the Plan period up to 2038, with a potential for a further 
1,800 homes  beyond the Plan period ; 
• development of Fiddlers Ferry opportunity site for 1,300 homes  in the Plan 
period up to 2038, with a potential for a further 450 homes beyond the Plan 
period ;  
• development at Thelwall Heys of around 310 homes ; and  
• ‘incremental growth’ across the outlying settlements of around 800 homes . 
 3.3.9  The Council believes this option  provides the most appropriate spatial strategy for 
meeting Warrington’s housing needs.  
 3.3.10  The South East Warrington Urban Extension  (SEWUE)  will deliver a wide range of 
infrastructure and services to su pport the new development.   Internal roads will be 
designed to include segregated pedestrian and cycle paths and provide high levels 
of priority for public transport services.  New greenways will also be created which 
will connect to all parts of the urban extension. Residents wi ll have improved access 
to the Town C entre and eas e of access to employment areas  across  Warrington.  
 
3.3.11  The Fiddler Ferry Opportunity site will provide a new sustainable residential community whilst enabling the  regeneration of Fiddlers Ferry Power Station, the 
largest available brownfield site in the Borough.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
283.3.12  The Thelwall Heys site has the benefit of increasing housing delivery in the early 
part of the Plan period, complementing  the larger development sites without having 
a material impact on the functioning of Warrington’s Green Belt.  
3.3.13 Th
ese areas of development  will each  provide a high quality residential 
environment, sensitive to the heritage and ecological assets within  the sites 
themselves  and in their surroundings .  They can also be effectively integrated into 
the Borough’s green infrastructure network  and provide extensive areas of open 
space for recreation and biodiversity.  Green and waterside links will enable 
connections for walking and cycling within the development areas and to the wider 
Warrington area.  
3.3.14  Inc
remental development within the settlements will provide housing choice and 
help support local services without placing  unacceptable pressure on local 
infrastructure .  It will ensure  that the character of the respective settlement is 
maintained.  
3.3.15  Th
e revised Green Belt boundaries will ensure the long term integrity of the Green 
Belt.  The additional development capacity provided within the SEWUE , together 
with an ticipated future capacity within the Town C entre and wider existing urban 
area,  will ensure the revised Green Belt boundaries will endure well beyond the end 
of the Plan period.  
3.3.16  The
 Council has considered a range of alternative spatial options for  meetings its 
future housing needs .  Consideration was given to larger scale extension s to one or 
more of the outlying settlements.  This option was discounted due to : 
•the impact
 on the character of the settlements ;
•the increase in car trips that would be  generated given the increased distance
from the settlements to existing and future employment locations in theBorough ; and
•infrastructure investment in the settlements not providing  wider benefits to
address existing deficiencies in the main urban area.
3.3.17  Th
e Council also considered a range of alternative locations for Green Belt release 
adjacent to the main urban area.  The previous version of the PSVLP  (2019)  included 
the South West Urban Extension.   This was given further detailed consideration , but 
options including this urban extension  did not perform as well as the chosen spatial 
strategy.   In particular, the South West Urban Extension would  not enable  the 
brownfield regeneration benefits of Fiddlers Ferry or such wide ranging 
infrastructure benefits as  the South East Warrington Urban Extension . The Council 
also has concerns about the potential impact on the Western Link.  
3.3.18  A num
ber of other options have been given detailed considered during the 
preparation of the Local Plan  but non e performed as well as the chosen spatial 
strategy : 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
29• A more dispersed pattern of development would make it harder to deliver the 
required level of infrastructure to support the level of housing growth.  
• An urban extension to the west of Warrington would hav e a significant impact 
on the function of the Green Belt separating Warrington from Widnes and it would be harder to mitigate the impacts on social and physical infrastructure .  
• An urban extension to the north of Warrington would have considerable traffic impacts on the A49 and Junction 9 of the M62.   It would also impact on the 
character of Winwick and the designated historic battle ground.  
• An urban extension to the east of Warrington would have significant  ecological 
impacts  and potentially sterilise mineral reserves .  
 
Spatial Strategy for meeting our Employment Land needs  
3.3.1 9 The Council has updated it Economic Development Needs Assessment (EDNA  2021), 
which has identified a total need of 316.26 hectares of employment land up to 2038.  
 3.3.20  With regard to e mployment  land, the spatial strategy seeks to protect and increase  
land  supply within the existing urban area . Employment areas at Omega, Birchwood 
and Woolston are performing well and the Council is seeking to increase the office supply in the Town C entre.  These areas however are rapidly running out of capacity 
to provide for new employment land and the Council’s realistic urban supply has 
reduced to 38.87ha.   
 3.3.21  The Council has agreed in principle with St Helens Council that a 31.22 hectare 
extension to the west of the established Omega employment development, located in the Borough of St Helens, will count towards Warrington’s employment development needs.  Comparing future need against existing supply and the 
proposed Omega west extension leaves a shortfall of 246.17 hectares to be met through the updated draft Local Plan  (2021) . 
 3.3.2 2 The Council has re -assessed all of the potential employment sites submitted for 
consideration as part of the Loc al Plan process with regard to their ability to meet 
market demands and against a range of detailed site and sustainability criteria, including location, means of access and Green Belt performance.  A further key 
consideration was how the sites related to the emerging spatial strategy of the Plan and to planned infrastructure.   
 3.3.2 3 The main employment sites have been alloca ted at:  
 
• Fiddlers Ferry Power Station (101.0 ha Gross) – Redevelopment of the former 
brownfield Power Station site to the west of the borough, to provide for a mix of industrial and distribution uses.  
• South East Warrington  Employment Area (136.92 ha Gross) – this is located at 
the junction of the M6 and M56 and will meet a large proportion of the Borough’s identified B8 requirement.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
303.3.24  The proposed sites at Fiddlers Ferry and South East Warrington provide a total of 
237.92 ha, which is marginally below the required need by around 8 ha.  The Council 
considers that there is a strong likelihood the balance of employment land need will be met from windfall sites in locations such as Appleton Thorn, Warrington Town Centre and the wider urban area, meeting ongoing needs during, and after the Plan period . 
3.3.25  The
 Council has considered a number of other employment sites, in particular those 
which were given the highest grading through the Economic Development Needs Assessment .  All of these sites  however  have one or more significant constraints:  
•Port 
Warrington – Although proposed to be allocated in the previous PSVLP,
extending the Port  will result in loss of part of Moore Nature Reserve and there
are significant concerns regarding the  potential  impact on the Western Link.
•Warrington Commercial Park - was also proposed to be allocated in the previous
PSVLP but there are similar conce rns around the  potential  impact on the
Western Link.
•Wider Extension to South East Warrington Employment Location - concerns
around cumulative impact of development in south east Warrington, includingimpact on the Green Belt and on the local and strategic  road network.
•Land to the east of M6 Junction 21 – concerns around impact on strongly
performing Green Belt  and intervening landownership .
3.3.2 6 G
iven  these constraints, the Council is not proposing to make any further allocations 
to come forward later in the Plan Period or to provide safeguarded sites. The Council is however committed to undertaking a review into Warrington’s employment land needs before the end of the Plan period to ensure the long term supply of employment land. At this stage, it is likely that key infrastructure improvements, including the Western Link and motorway junction improvements , 
will have been delivered  and the impacts of any further required employment 
allocations can be fully appraised.  
Our Spatial Strategy for meeting Retail Needs  
3.3.2 7 Having updated its Retail N eeds Assessment and undertaken previous Town C entre 
health checks, the Council considers the retail hierarch y from the previous Plan 
remains appropriate and this is reflected in the spatial strategy.   The Retail Needs 
Assessment re -affirms the risk to the Town Centre of any further out of centre retail 
development.   Further detail is provided in Policy DEV5 . 
3.3.28 T
he Retail Needs Assessment does not identify the need for any substantive  
additional convenience  or comparison  floorspace over the Plan Period.  A limited 
amount of new retail floorspace is  proposed for the  local centres to be provided in 
the Water front, Fiddlers Ferry Opportunity Site and the South East Warrington 
Urban Extension in order to support new local communities . 
Infrastructure to Support Warrington’s Growth  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
313.3.2 9 The Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) provides details on the wide range of 
infrastructure required to support the Local Plan.  This includes the cost of 
infrastructure, funding sources and timescales for delivery.  The infrastructure 
requiremen ts include new and improved schools, health facilities, parks and open 
spaces, recreational facilities, environmental improvements, community facilities and transport schemes.  
 3.3.30  The Western Link  is the largest  transport infrastructure scheme  and is  fundamental 
to the delivery of the  spatial strategy of the  Local Plan.  The Western Link will 
provide a new road connection between the A56 Chester Road and the A57 Sankey 
Way, crossing the Manchester Ship Canal, the West Coas t Mainline and the River 
Mersey .  It will directly  enable the dev elopment of the Waterfront area and through 
reducing  traffic levels  on the existing road network, it will facilitate  a greater l evel of 
development within the Town C entre  and across I nner Warrington.  
 3.3.3 1 A key priority for the Local Plan is to ensure the phasing of development is related 
to the delivery of infrastructure.   In particular, the large allocation sites, including 
the Waterfront, Peel Hall, the South East Warrington Urban Extension and Fiddlers Ferry Opportunity site, require extensive new infrastructure and improvements to 
existing infrastructure to support new development. 
  3.3.32  This will have implications for the Council’s 5 year land supply as the lead in times 
for infrastructure delivery  mean that new homes in these allocation sites will only 
be able to make a minimum contribution in  the first 5 years of the Plan.  The Council 
is therefore proposing a Stepped Housing Requirement  over the Plan period in 
recognition of the need to ensure the timely delivery of infrastructure to support 
these major developments.  Further detail of the development trajectory is 
provided in Policy DEV1. 
 
3.3.3 3 The IDP provides a greater level of detail for infrastructure schemes in the early 
years of the Plan period.  The IDP will be subject to continual review and  will inform 
subsequent review s of the Local Plan .  This will enable refinement of the spatial 
strategy an d infrastructure requirements  over time . 
 3.3.3 4 The Council expects new development to provide a significant proportion of funding for infrastructure.  This will initially be through S106 planning obligations.   The 
Council will consider introducing a Comm unity Infrastructure Levy  immediately 
following adoption of the Local Plan, subject to the Government’s proposals for a potential National Infrastructure Levy .  Further detail on the delivery of 
infrastructure is provided in Policy INF5 . 
 3.4 Exceptional Circumstances for Green Belt Release 
 3.4.1  The Council is able to fully evidence and justify the exceptional circumstances required for Green Belt release, for all Local Plan allocations,  in accordance with the 
NPPF.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
32Optimising development potential of the existing urban area  
3.4.2  In accordance with paragraph 141 of the NPPF the Council has examined fully all 
other reasonable options for meeting Warrington’s identified need for development 
before concluding that exceptional circumstances exist to justify  Green Belt release.  
3.4.3  Th
e Local Plan will ensure that as much use as possible is made of suitable 
brownfield sites and underutilised  land. 
3.4.3  Th
e Council has carried out a comprehensive review of its SHLAA and Brownfield 
Resgister.   In doing so the Council has  incorporated the Town Centre masterplaning 
work undertaken by Warrington & Co .  This ensures the Council has a single robust 
assessment of the capacity of the existing urban area, including brownfield sites within the Borough’s  outlying settlements and a small number brownfield sites 
within the Green Belt where the principle of development is established.  
3.4.4  Th
e Council recognises that  some of these opportunities will  fall outside of the Plan 
period .  Together with the longe r term delivery from the Plan’s site allocations  and 
other potential sites within the wider existing urban area , this negates the 
requirement to take any additional  land out of the Green Belt as Safeguarded L and.  
3.4.5  Follo
wing previous Local Plan  consultations the Council has reviewed its density 
assumptions for the Town C entre and Inner Warrington  and is reviewing its 
residential parking standards , recognising the potential for high density 
development in these locations.   The Council is proposing minimu m density 
requirements for the Town C entre  and other sites that are in highly sustainable 
locations , together with minimum requirements for all site allocations to minimise 
the amount of Green Belt release required.  
3.4.6  T he
 Council has reconfirmed that no neighbouring authorities are able to meet any 
of Warrington’s housing development needs.  St Helens are making a contribution 
to meeting Warrington’s employment land needs through the proposed western extension of the exi sting Omega development.   This is demonstrated in the 
Council’s Statement of Common Ground.  It is also apparent that all of Warrington’s 
neigh bouring authorities are having to release Green Belt  land  themselves to meet 
their own development needs.  
Warrington’s Exceptional  Circumstances  
3.4.7  The starting point for Warrington’s Exceptional Circumstances is the requirement to 
ensure that sufficient land is provided to meet Warrington’s  development needs . 
The Plan’s proposed housing requirement will ensure  that issues of affordability are 
addressed  and that that sufficient homes are provided to support the planned lev el 
of economic growth, but this can only be achieved with the release of Green Belt. Similarly if Warrington is to provide sufficient employme nt land to meet its future 
needs then this can only be achieved with the  release of Green Belt  land .  
3.4.8  Th
e Exceptional Circumstances are further justified through the spatial strategy of 
the Plan.  The Plan will enable the creation of new sustainable  communities but in a 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
33manner which will support the delivery of  strategic infrastructure  required  to 
address existing issues of congestion and unlock major development sites with 
significant brownfield capacity.  
 3.4.9  This will ensure that the release of Green Belt  land  will work in parallel with 
brownfield development and infrastructure delivery  to provide a comprehensive 
Plan for Warrington as a whole . 
 
3.4.10  Exceptional Circumstances can also be demonstrated for each area of Green Belt 
release:  
 
• The South East Warrington  Urban Extension  will ensure that a major proportion 
of Warrington’s need for housing can be met sustainably through 
comprehensive planning and infrastructure delivery.  The scale of the urban 
extension will also provide capacity for growth well beyond the Plan period, 
ensuring the permanence of the revised Green Belt boundaries.  
• The exceptional circumstances for the removal of Green Belt land as part of the Fiddlers Ferry Opportunity Site relate to enabling the redevelopment of the 
largest brownfield site in the Borough, whilst providing a new sustainable 
residential community and a major ecological and recreational resource .  
• Land at Thelwa ll Heys will provide much needed homes in a sustainable location 
early in the Plan period and wit hout having a material impact on the functioning 
of Warrington’s Green Belt  in this area . 
• Green Belt release in the o utlying Settlements  will increase housing choice and 
support the vitality and viability of local services.  
• The South East Warrington Employment Area will make a significant and sustainable contribution towards meeting Warrington’s current and long term 
employment development needs . 
 
Implications of not meeting Warrington’s full development needs  
3.4.11  The Council has assessed option s of planning for  lower level s of development.  
These include options for meeting W arrington’s basic demographic need  for homes 
and purely local need for employment land .  These options would reduce the 
amount of Green Belt land required to be released.  
 
3.4.12  In the short term the Council considers that Warrington’s economic strength and attractiveness will result in ongoing development pressure.  This may initially be 
accommodated in the existing urban area through higher densi ty development but  
these options still  require Green Belt release.   A lower level of development may 
reduce the ability  of the Council  to plan comprehensively  for growth  and as a res ult 
infrastructure delivery could  be piecemeal and reactive.  
 
3.4.13  It is likely that there will be an absolute and proportionate increase in the number 
of people commuting into the Borough to work.  The conseq uences from this are 
likely to include increasing  congestion on Warrington’s transport network and  a risk 
of worsening  air quality  on some of the busier transport corridors where people 
live. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
343.4.14  A lac
k of housing supply over the longer term is likely to increase house prices, 
making housing less affordable for Warrington’s residents, in particular young 
people lookin g to get on the housing ladder.   It will also reduce the supply of 
affordable housing to meet Warrington’s needs.  
3.4.15  If 
the Council does not release additional land for employment, then the Council is 
concerned that in the medium and longer term Warri ngton’s status as a key driver 
of the North West economy will be threatened.   As development land is used up, 
potential development and investment could be lost to other regions of the UK and potentially overseas.  The Council’s Economic Development Needs Assessment is 
clear that there is already suppressed demand for employment land.  
3.4.16  From 
Duty to Cooperate discussions it is also apparent that if Warrington does not 
meet its development needs then this will place pressure on the other Boroughs 
within the Mid- Mersey Housing market area and in other adjoining Council areas.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
35STRATEGIC 
PLANNING POLICIES 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
364 Policies Relating to Objective W1
Objective W1: To enable the sustainable growth of Warrington through the ongoing 
regeneration of Inner Warrington, the delivery of strategic and local infrastructure, the 
strengthening of existing neighbourhoods and the creation of new sustainable 
neighbourhoods whilst: 
•delivering a minimum of 14,688  new homes (equating to 816 per year) between 2021
and 2038, and
•supporting Warrington’s ongoing e conomic success by meeting the need for  316.26
hectares  of employment land between 2021 and 2038.
4.1 Planning
 for Warrington’s  New Homes  
4.1.1 The
 Local Plan must  ensure that sufficient homes are delivered to support the 
growth of Warrington over the plan period  and that the type of homes delivered 
meet  the needs of all of the Borough’s  existing and future communities.  
4.1.2 Inc
reasing housing delivery will support the Council’s aim of promoting social 
inclusion. It will ensure people have genuine choice over the location in which they 
live and enable households to remain within their local communities over time.  
4.1.3  Pol
icy DEV1  confirms the Plan’s overall housing target and sets out where new 
homes  will be delivered and over what time period.  
4.1.4  Pol
icy DEV2  provides the basis to ensure that the full range of Warrington’s housing 
needs are met. This means ensuring homes are provided for those who require affordable housing, for families with children, older people,  students,  those with 
disabilities,  service families,  people who rent their homes and those wishing to 
commission or build their own homes.  
4.1.5  More
 detailed consideration is given to the needs of Warrington’s Gypsy and 
Traveller community in Policy DEV 3. 
Policy DEV1  – Housing Delivery  
Housing Requirement  
1. Over the 18 year plan period from 2021 to 2038 , a minimum of 14,688  new homes  will be
delivered  to meet Warrin gton’s housing needs. This equates to an a verage of 816 homes per
annum.
Housing Distribution  
2. The majority of new homes will be  delivered  within the existing main urban area of
Warrington, the existing inset settlements and other sites identified in the Council’s
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), which together have  identified
deliverable capacity for a minim um of 11,785 new homes.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
37 
3. The following sites will be removed from the Green Belt and allocated  for residential 
developmen t:  
 
a. South East Warrington Urban Extension  – minimum of 4,200  homes  of which a minimum 
of 2,400  homes will b e delivered in the Plan Period.  
b. Land at Fiddlers Ferry – minimum of 1,760 homes of which 1,310 will be delivered in the 
plan period as part of a wider mixed use development.  
c. Thelwall Heys  – minimum of 3 10 homes will be delivered in the plan period.  
 
4. A minimum of 8 01 homes will be delivered on allocated sites to be removed from the 
Green Belt adjacent to  following outlying settlements:  
  
a. Croft – minimum of 7 5 homes  
b. Culcheth – minimum of 200 homes  
c. Hollins Green – minimum of 90 homes  
d. Lymm – minimum of 306 homes 
e. Winwick – minimum of 130 homes  
 
Housing Density  
5. New residential development should optimise the amount of housing developed on a site.  
New development should therefore aim to achieve the following minimum densities:  
 
a) at least 130  dwellings per hectare (dph) on sites that are within the defined Town Centre 
of Warrington  subject to complying with the requirements of the Warrington Town Centre 
SPD; 
b) at least 50dph on sites that are within the wider Town Centre Masterplan area and s ites 
adjacent to a district centre or in other locations that are well served by frequent bus or 
train services; and  
c) at least 30dph on other sites that are within an existing urban area.  
 
6. Densities of less than 30dph will only be appropriate where they are necessary to achieve 
a clear planning objective, such as avoiding harm to the character or appearance of an area.  
 
Stepped Housing Requirement  
7. As part of the housing trajectory (Appendix 1) the housing requirement is to be stepped in 
the following way:  
 
a. 20 21 to 2025 (first 5 years) – 678 homes per annum.   
b. 202 6 to 2038 ( years 6 - 18) – 870 homes per annum.  
 
8. Should monit oring indicate that a 5 -year  deliverable and  / or subsequent developable 
supply of housing  land  over the Plan Period  can no longer be sustained, the Council will give 
consideration to a review or partial review of the Local Plan.  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
38Setting the Housing Target  
4.1.6  The target o f 816  homes per annum over the P lan period has been established using 
the Government’s Standard Housing Methodology  and has been assessed in detail 
within the Council’s Local Housing Needs Assessment (2021) . This represents the 
minimum number of homes that Warrington is expected to plan for, in a way which 
addresses projected household growth and historic under -supply.  
4.1.7 In pa
rallel the Council has also updated its Economic Development Needs 
Assessment to ensure that the Plan’s housing and employment requirements are 
balanced.  
4.1.8 The
 Local Housing Needs Assessment models the increased working age population 
that would result from a housing requirement of 816 homes per annum up to 2038 (15 years post the estimated adoption of the Plan). This increase in working age population is considered to be sufficient to support the number of additional jobs 
that are likely to be created in Warrington, taking into account the latest jobs forecasts for the Borough.  
4.1.9 Setti
ng the housing requirement of the Plan to the minimum requirement under the 
Government’s methodology therefore has the potential to meet Warrington’s future housing needs and support its continued economic growth, whilst minimising the impact on the Borough’s Green Belt.   
4.1.1 0 Establishing land requirements  
The land requirement to meet the Local Plan housing target over the Plan Period is summarised in Table 1 . 
Table 1 –
 Land Requirements over the Plan Period  
Annual target  816 
2021 to 2038 (18 years inclusive)  14,688  
Flexibility @ 10%  1,469  
Total Requirement  16,157  
Urban Capacity  11,785  
Green Belt Requirement  4,372  
4.1.1 1 It is 
necessary to include provision for flexibility on top of the overall land supply to 
allow for market choice and in the event that specific sites do not come forward. The Council has used a benchmark of 10%  which it considers provides sufficient 
flexibility  in the context of the Plan’s proposed housing land supply .  
4.1.1 2 In 
identifying land to meet the housing requirement, the Council has sought to 
maximise the capacity of the existing urban area to accommodate new development . This is to ensure that  all reasonable options have been identified for 
meeting our development requirements before consideration is given to releas e of 
Green Belt.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
394.1.1 3 The Council has carried out a comprehensive review of its SHLAA and incorporated 
the town centre master  planning work that was previously presented as a separate 
evidence base. This ensures the Council has a single robust assessment of the capacity of the existing urban area, including brownfield sites within the Borough’s outlying settlements and a small num ber brownfield sites within the Green Belt 
where the principle of development is established.  
 4.1.1 4 Despite maximising the capacity of the existing urban area, if Warrington is to meet 
its housing requirement , it can only do so through the release of Gr een Belt lan d to 
provide for approximately 4 ,500  new homes.  
 
 
Housing Distribution and Trajectory  
4.1.1 5 The distribution of housing is based on the Plan’s Spatial Strategy as set out in the previous chapter .  
 4.1.1 6 The NPPF (paragraph 73) requires local planning authorities to illustrate the expected rate of housing delivery over the plan period through a ‘housing trajectory’.  
 4.1.1 7 The NPPF also requires local planning authorities to identify and update annually a 
supply of specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide a minimum of five years’ worth of housing against their housing requirement. This should include a buffer 
moved forward from later in the Plan Period.  
 
4.1.18  In Warrington’s case the buffer should be 20% given past performance against the 
Government’s Housing Delivery Test . 
 4.1.19  The Plan’s housing trajectory is shown in Appendix 1 of the draft Local Plan. The trajectory confirms that the Plan provides for a sufficient land supply to deliver t he 
housing requirement for the Borough over the Plan Period as a whole. However, the need to release Green Belt land and the lead in times for the infrastructure required to support the larger allocation sites means that there will be a relatively lower level of housing delivery in the early years of the Plan Period, with housing delivery increasing over time.  
 4.1.20  The Council is therefore proposing a Stepped Housing Requirement . The housing 
requirement over the first 5 years will be 678 dwellings per annum . This will match  
deliverable supply  over this period when the 20% buffer is added . The requirement 
over the remaining 13 years of the Plan , will increase  to 870 dwellings  per annum . 
This will ensure the overall requirement of 14,688 is met.   
 4.1.2 1 The Government’s planning guidance recognises that such an approach is appropriate where strategic sites such as those being proposed by the Council will have a phased delivery or are likely to be delivered later in the plan period (PPG Housing and Economi c Land Availability Assessment para 34).  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
404.1.2 2 The Council’s Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) will update the housing trajectory 
each year, helping to ensure a five year supply is maintained throughout the Plan period and signalling any need for intervention and/or Plan review.  
Housing Density  
4.1.2 3 To ensure that land is used efficiently, Policy DEV1  encourages the use of high 
densities in appropriate locations , for example on sites that are close to town or 
district centres or to public transport facilities.  Densities of less than 30 dwellings 
per hectare (dph) are discouraged except where there is a legitimate planning reason for them, for example to ensure that development integrates successfully with the prevailing built form of the area  or to prote ct the historic environment .  The 
density of development on the allocation sites  should be at or above the minimum 
figures specified in the allocation policies .  
Supply beyond the Plan Period  
4.1.2 4 The Council recognises that consideration must be given to housing land supply 
beyond the Plan period if it is to demonstrate the permanence of the revised Green Belt boundaries in accordance with the NPPF.  
4.1.2 5 G
iven the major urban extensions being promoted as part of its spatial strategy, the 
Council has given consideration to an overall timescale of 30 years in accordance 
with the Government’s proposed amendment to the NPPF which requires Council’s 
to provide a longer term vision when promoting such forms of development. Having 
regard to  the inherent unce rtainties in looking this far into the future, the Council 
has used a set of notional assumptions covering the 12 years beyond the 18 year 
Plan Period. This is intended as a sense check, rather than a detailed assessment process.  
4.1.2 6 T
he rate of increase in households in Warrington decreases over the last 10 year 
period of the Plan. Over the period 2028 to 2038 household growth will reduce to an annual average of 605 homes per annum (2014 based household projections).  
4.1.2 7 I
n providing a positive plan for growth and based on the principles underpinning the 
Government’s standard housing method, the Council considers that by the end of the Plan period, house price affordability will no longer be a significant issue in Warrington. In considering the peri od beyond the end of the Plan, the Council has 
therefore assumed that no further affordability uplift will be required.  
4.1.2 8 G
iven the rate of job growth is also forecast to decrease over time, the Council 
considers that in providing for the needs of ho usehold growth there will be sufficient 
new homes to provide a balance with future jobs growth.  
4.1.29  Th
e Local Plan is already providing for an additional 1,948 homes through the 
flexibility factor in its land requirement calculation. The proposed Sout h East 
Warrington Urban Extension allocation will provide for around 1,8 00 homes beyond 
the Plan period, Fiddlers Ferry will provide around 450 homes  and the Waterfront 
265 homes .  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
414.1.3 0 T
he Council acknowledges that the availability of brownfield develo pment sites is 
likely to decrease over time. Nevertheless, given likely advances in technology and 
development trends over the next 18 years, the Council considers it is likely there will still be additional brownfield development sites within the existing  urban  area 
that will come forward beyond the Plan Period but which cannot be accounted for at present. The Council has therefore identified the average level of brownfield development in the final 5 years of the Plan period and has projected this forward to 
account for potential brownfield capacity.  
4.1.3 1 T
he table below compares the indicative scale of development needs in the 12 year 
period following the end of the Plan Period against the indicative land supply.  
Tabl
e 2 – Development needs beyond the  Plan Period  
Indicative Housing Require ment 2038 to 20 50 
Annual household growth 2028 -38* 605 
Projected forward 2039/40 to 2050/51 (12 years)  7,260  
Number of homes required 2039/40 to 2050/51 ** 7,406  
Indicative Housing Supply 2038 to 20 50 
Additional  supply within Plan from flexibility  1,948  
Garden Suburb delivery post 2038  1,800  
Fiddlers Ferry delivery post 2038  450 
Waterfront delivery post 2038  265 
Assumed brown field development  3,024  
Total indicative supply  7,487  
* 2014 based household projections
* * Based on calculation used in LHNA
4.1.3 2 It
 can be seen that the indicative requirement is broadly in line with the indicative 
supply over this period. 
4.1.3 3 
The Council is therefore confident that the amended Green Belt boundaries are 
capable of enduring well beyond the end of the Plan period in accordance with 
paragraph 136 of the NPPF in respect of future housing needs. As such, the Council 
considers there is no need for any safeguarding of land to meet future housing  
needs.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
42Policy DEV 2 – Meeting Housing Needs  
Affordable Housing  
1. In residential development of 10 dwellings or more, or with a gross floor area
greater than 1,000sq m, affordable housing will be required to be provided on the
following basis:
a. 20% on sites within Inner Warrington, inclusive of the Town Centre.
b. 30% elsewhere in the Borough and on all greenfield sites irrespective of their
location.
2. Where 20% affordable housing provision is made within Inner Warrington and the
Town Centre, half of the units should be for affordable housing for rent and half
should be for affordable home ownership.
3. Where 30% affordable housing provision is made elsewhere in the Borough,
affordable home ownership should account for one -third of the total affordable
housing units, with two -thirds being affordable housing for rent.
4. The exception to parts 2 and 3 of this policy is ‘build to rent’ schemes where all
affordable housing should be rented.
5. The Council will require rent to be set in accordance with the Government’s rent
policy for Social Rent or Affordable Rent subject to not exceeding Local Housing
Allowance rates, or be at least 20% below local market rent (including service
charge) and not  exceed Local Housing Allowance rates.
6. In accordance with Planning Practice Guidance, at least 25% of all affordable
housing units delivered by developers through planning obligations should be ‘First
Homes’.  First Homes must be discounted by a mini mum of 30% against market
value.  This will be increased to a 40% discount south of the Manchester Ship Canal,
having regard to the nationally set cap of £250,000 (post -discount).
7. Where general discounted market housing for sale is proposed, evidence must be
provided to demonstrate that the homes are genuinely affordable in the location
they are being proposed.
8. A lower proportion  of affordable housing  and/or different tenure split will only be
permitted where it can clearly be demonstrated to the  satisfaction of the Council
that development would otherwise not be financially viable, or where there is clear
evidence from a Registered Provider that an alternative tenure composition is
required to ensure a development is deliverable.
9. Affordable housing should be provided on the application site.  Only in exceptional
circumstances where the nature of the site is deemed unsuitable for affordable
housing will the Council accept a commuted sum in lieu of on- site provision.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
4310.  Where an applicant can demonstrate that there are building(s) on the application 
site which are genuinely vacant, the Council will credit the existing floorspace of the 
vacant building(s) against the overall floorspace of the new development.  
 
11.  The Council will require that Affordable Housing is provided for households and  
individuals eligible for the specific tenure of affordable housing in accordance with 
the Council’s nomination policy and will seek to ensure that the affordable housing 
is secured in perpetuity.  
 
Housing Type and Tenure  
11.  Residential development should provide a mix of different housing sizes and types 
and should be informed by the Borough -wide housing mix monitoring target in the 
table below; the sub -area assessment contained in the Council’s most up to date  
Local Housing Needs Assessment; and any local target set by a Neighbourhood Plan,  
taking into account site specific considerations.  
 
12.  The Council will require affordable homes to be built to the same design standards 
as private homes.  Where new development is providing flats as well as houses the 
Council will require a proportionate balance across private and affordable tenures.  
 
Space Standards  
13.  The Council will seek to provide dwellings that are appropriately sized and arranged 
to create well designed homes in accordance with Nationally Described Space 
Standards.  
 
14. The Council will require all dwellings to have appropriate outdoor amenity space.  
 
Optional Standards  
15.  The Council will seek that, as a minimum, all homes should be provided to Building 
Regulation Standard M4(2) ‘Accessible and Adaptable dwellings’.  
 
16.  The Council will seek that 10% of new housing meets Building Regulation 
requirement M4(3)‘ Wheelchair user dwellings’ i.e. designed to be wheelchair 
accessible, or easily adaptable for residents who are wheelchair users.  
 
17. In cases where the above requi rements are genuinely not viable or technically 
feasible, the Council will expect to see an open book assessment to evidence this  
before any lower level of provision is permitted . 
 
Housing for Older People  
18. In residential development of 10 dwellings or more  housing for older people should 
be provided .  
 
19.  The Council will support applications for Supported and Extra Care housing in 
accessible locations, subject to other relevant policies in the Plan.  Affordable 
housing provision will be required for all elements of a proposal that would create 
self-contained dwellings.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
44Self and Custom Build 
20. The Council will ensure  a sufficient supply of plots for self -build and custom -build
housing to meet the identified need on the Council’s register. Applicati ons for self -
build and custom housing development will be supported, subject to consideration
against the other relevant policies in the Plan.
Houses in Multiple Occupation  
21. Proposals for the change of use or sub- division of existing buildings to form flats or
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) will be granted permission provided they
would:
a. retain a suitable mix of housing types to meet needs in the area;
b. avoid harm ing the character and /or appearance of the area;
c. avoid harming the amenities enjoyed by occupiers of neighbouring residential
properties;
d. provide satisfactory levels of amenity for their future occupier(s) in terms of
outlook and natural light; and
e.provide off -street parking provision that is  reflective of the needs of the HMO
taking account of the number of occupiers, its location, nature of adjacent highway,
existing parking situation, existing highway network issues and potential impact on
safety and amenity.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
 Affordable Housing  
4.1.3 4  The NPPF requires Local Plans to meet their full, objectively assessed needs for 
affordable housing where this is consistent with other Plan policies.  Affordable 
housing in this context is specifically defined in the NPPF (see glossary).  
4.1.3 5  W
arrington’s Local Housing Needs Assessment (2021) assesses the overall need for 
affordable housing.   It concludes that the overall need for affordable housing 
amounts to 433 homes per annum between 2021 and 2038.  Despite thi s having 
increased from 377 since the previous LHNA (2019) was published, gross need has actually reduced but so too have re -lets of existing properties and so overall need 
has increased to 433 homes per annum.  
4.1.3 6  T
he NPPF makes it clear that affordable housing should be provided on major 
residential schemes and not minor developments (under 10 homes).   The policy 
requires that 30% affordable housing is provided in the majority of Borough, excluding brownfield sites in inner Warrington and the Town Centre where required provision is lower at 20%.  This recognises the lower level of viability in Inner 
Warrington in accordance with the Local Plan Viability Assessment (2021).  
4.1.3 7  T
he LHNA identifies  that the majority of affordable housing need in Warrington is for 
affordable homes for rent.  Securing affordable homes for rent is therefore the 
Council’s priority.  Taking into account the minimum provision of low cost home  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
45ownership in accordance with the NPPF, this means in Inner Warrington the Council  
will seek a 50/50 split between rented and low cost home ownership, with a 6 7/33 
split in all other areas.  
 
4.1.3 8 The Council has considered the Borough’s total affordable housing need in the 
context of its likely delivery through Policy DEV2.   If the full need was to be met in 
this way then this would require a significant increase to the overall housing requirement to a level comparable to that which raised significant environmental  
concerns when assessed as part of the Preferred Development Opti on and later at 
the Proposed Submission Version Local Plan consultation in 2019.   Any significant 
increase would also require housing to be delivered at a consistently higher rate than Warrington has achieved historically.  The Council is therefore not pro posing a 
further uplift to its proposed housing target of 816 dwellings per annum.  
 
4.1.39  In addition, by providing flexibility in land supply, there is the potential for further delivery should the housing market be able to deliver at a higher rate.  
 
4.1.40  The Council will seek to secure affordable housing provision in perpetuity; however,  
‘staircasing’ – the process which allows occupiers to own a greater proportion of 
their home - will be supported where the value from the sale is re -invested in 
affordable housing in Warrington.  
 
4.1.41  There is also now a national requirement to provide ‘First Homes’ (NPPG, May 2021), which are discounted by a minimum of 30% against market value.   The Council has 
increased this discount to 40% in the southern parts of the borough to ensure ‘First Homes’ are still affordable, given higher house prices.   The Council is aware that 
there are other areas of the borough where there are affordability challenges, including the north east of the borough.  The Council will therefore keep these 
discounts under review.  
 4.1.42 The Council’s preference for the remainder of low cost housing is shared ownership, or similar products such as rent to buy.  If discount mar ket housing is justified as an 
alternative, the Council will require the discount to be to a level that is affordable for those households in an area who are currently renting and are unable to affordable to buy a home.  This should be calculated using lower quartile private rents across 
the Borough, assuming rent ac counts for 25% of household income.  
 
4.1.4 3  Where there is a demonstrable local need, the Council will prioritise appropriate 
accommodation for Key Workers through its nomination policy or through local lettings policies.   
 
4.1.4 4 Where an applicant submits a viability assessment to demonstrate that full provision 
of affordable housing is not viable, the Council will undertake an independent review of this assessment, at the cost of the applicant.  
  
Off-site Affordable Housing  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
464.1.4 5  The Council’s priority will always be to secure on -site affordable housing to ensure 
mixed and balanced communities.  Only in exceptional circumstances will the Council 
consider a commuted sum where the site is demonstrably not suitable for affordable 
hous ing. 
4.1.4 6  W
here the Council has agreed a commuted sum in lieu of on- site affordable 
provision, the money will be spent on the provision of new affordable housing on suitable sites elsewhere in the Borough.   The Council may also use commuted sums 
in the  form of bridging funds to subsidise the provision of rented units or specialist 
accommodation by a Registered Provider.  
4.1.4 7  T
he level of commuted sum sought will reflect the developer subsidy that would 
have been required had provision been made on -site.  This will ensure that there is 
no difference in the level of contribution towards affordable housing between on and off
-site p
rovision.  
4.1.4 8  I
t will be the responsibility of the developer to calculate the value of the commuted 
sum in agreement with the Council.  The commuted sum should be calculated as the 
Residual Land Value of the site based on 100% market housing , less the Residual 
Land Value of  the site including policy compliant affordable housing.  
4.1.49  T
he calculation will need to be based on Warrington’s Local Housing Allowance for 
the rented proportion of the affordable housing and take into account local market values for the low cost homes ownership proportion.  
Vacant Building Credit  
4.1.50  The NPPG gives discret ion to Councils in how the Affordable Housing Credit is 
operated, subject to ensuring the operation is consistent with the Government’s policy intention to incentivise brownfield development.  
4.1.51  F
or the purposes of establishing whether the vacant building credit will apply, the 
Council will require the applicant to demonstrate that there are building(s) on the application site which are genuinely vacant.  The Council will assess each site on a 
case by case basis but it will expect that a building has been vacant for a minimum of 12 months and will require the developer to demonstrate that extensive efforts have been made to market the building at a value that is considered reasonable for the 
building’s particular use and location.  
4.1.52  I
f the building is covered by an extant or recently expired planning permission for the 
same or substantially the same development then the credit will not apply.  
Housing Mix  
4.1.53  The LHNA has made an assessment of housing need by both tenure and type of 
housing.   This is broken down by dwelling size and also market housing, low cost 
home ownership and affordable rent.  In summary demand identified in the Borough 
is as follows:  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
47Table 3 : Housing Demand in Warrington  
 
 1-bedroom  2-bedrooms  3-bedrooms  4+-
bedrooms  
Market  5% 30% 50% 15% 
Affordable home ownership  20% 40% 30% 10% 
Affordable housing (rented)  40% 30% 25% 5% 
 
4.1.5 4  There is a notable demand in Warrington for 1 and 2 bed affordable rented 
properties, particularly for young families and a shortage of 2  and 3 bed houses for  
affordable home ownership.  In the market sector, a balance of property sizes is 
required that takes account of current demand and the changing demographic profile over the plan period.   This includes a proportion of 2 bedroomed marke t 
properties for which there is a demand in Warrington as there is a low level of existing stock.  
 4.1.5 5  It should be noted that the breakdown of housing mix identified is a Borough- wide 
monitoring target.   The precise mix should be determined on a site by site basis , 
taking in account the sub- borough analysis which is contained in the Council’s most 
up to date Local Housing Needs Assessment.  The Council is also aware that 
Neighbourhood Planning Groups may prepare their own  local housing needs 
assessment s to inform the local policies in Neighbourhood Plans.  
 
Space Standards  
4.1.5 6 To help ensure that new dwellings  are appropriately sized and arranged to create 
well designed, the Council is adopting the Nationally Described Space Standards.   
The Council has recently published its Town Centre SPD which sets out standards in 
relation to dwelling size, design and layout which are in accordance with  the 
National Space S tandards.   
 
Optional Standards  
4.1.5 7  The NPPG provides the basis for the Council to set s tandards relating to the optional 
standard M4(2) (accessible and adaptable dwellings), and/or M4(3) (wheelchair user 
dwellings), of the Building Regulations.  The Council has used its Local Housing Needs 
Assessment to set the percentage requirements for th ese standards and has tested 
these requirements through its Local Plan Viability Assessment (2021).   In particular, 
it is considered that the M4(2) standard has a minimal increase in cost to developers yet provides for homes to be accessible and adaptable in future allowing residents to stay in their homes for life.  
 
4.1.5 8 As set out in Approved Document M of the Building Regulations - Volume 1: 
Dwellings , to comply with requirement M4 (2), step free access must be provided. 
Generally this will require a lift where a dwelling is accessed above or below the entrance storey.   This may raise viability issues for particular types of development, 
for example for blocks of four storeys or less .  The Council will seek to ensure that 
dwellings accessed above or below the entrance storey in buildings of four storeys or 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
48less have step -free access.   However, for certain  types of buildings this requirement 
may be subject to development- specific viability assessments an d consideration 
should be given to the implication of ongoing maintenance costs on the affordability 
of service charges for residents.  Where such assessments demonstrate that the 
inclusion of a lift would make the scheme unviable or mean that service charges are not affordable for intended residents, the units above or below the ground floor that cannot provide step free access would only need to satisfy the requirements of M4(1) of the Building Regulations.  
4.1.59  The
 requirement for ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ applies to all tenures.   However part 
M4(3) of the Building Regulations regarding ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ distinguishes 
between ‘wheelchair accessible’ (a home readily useable by a wheelchair user at the point of completion) and ‘wheelchair ad aptable’ (a home that can be easily adapted 
to meet the needs of a household including wheelchair users).  The Planning Practice 
Guidance  states that Local Plan  policies for wheelchair accessible homes should only 
be applied to those dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling.  
Housing for Older People and People with disabilities  
4.1.60  Warrington ’s older population is growing quickly and at a faster rate than the wider  
North West region and England as a whole.   Over the Plan period the population of  
Warrington aged 75 or older is projected to increase by almost 50%.  The Council  
Families and Wellbeing Directorate is taking a proactive role to addressing this  
demand and the Local Plan will contribute to their wider delivery strategy.  
4.1.61  Th
e LHNA identifies the need for around 25% of new homes in Warrington to be  
provided  to accommodate older persons and for an additional 1,053 bedspaces  
within extra care facilities (LHNA Table 48).  Whilst the need for bedspaces needs to be addressed over the plan period, the Council’s overall strategy to encourage more 
independent living  will be an important factor in decision making, where this is 
appropriate .  
4.1.62  T
he requirements for M4(2) (accessible and adaptable dwellings), and/or M4(3) 
(wheelchair user dwellings) will have a positive impact in meeting older persons needs over the plan period.   The Main Development Areas also have specific 
requirements to make provision for specialist housing for older people.  
4.1.63  Sp
ecialist homes for elderly people range from sheltered accommodation, 
residential care homes  to extra care o r adaptable homes depending on the nature of 
the site and proposals and demand in the local area.  For residential care homes a 
minimum of 80 -120 bedroom spaces would be needed to reach the necessary critical 
mass to run a 24/7 operation.  For sheltered ho using a smaller number of 
approximately 30 units (or fewer) is acceptable.  Demand for smaller units has been 
highlighted by colleagues and partners in adult social care.  
4.1.6 4  I
n terms of location, extra care facilities should be located to ensure ease  of access  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
49for visitors and to enable residents to access local services where appropriate.  These 
will be dealt with on a site by site basis.  
Custom and Self Build 
4.1.6 5  From April 2016, Councils have been required to keep a register of people who are 
interested in self or custom build housing and plan accordingly to meet this demand. In line with the Government’s aspirations to enable more people to build their own homes, the Council will consider applications for self -build properties favourably, 
having regard for all other policies in the Local Plan.  Provision of self -build plots is a 
specific requirement of the Local Plan site allocations, subject to demand on the Council’s register.  
HMOs  
4.1.6 6 The policy is intended to manage HMOs coming forward in the Borough.  It should be 
noted that a license is required to rent out an HMO and this is subject to additional requirements including space standards.  
Other Needs  
4.1.6 7 The Council  has identified other needs across the Borough as set out in the Local 
Housing Needs Assessment – including students, service families and those wishing 
to rent – and will monitor progress to ensure necessary provision is made.  If 
necessary provision is not being made and a specific policy requirement is identified 
then this will be dealt with through a future review of the plan.  
Policy DEV 3 – Gypsy & Traveller and Travelling Show People Provision  
Meeting Identified Need  
1. The Council and its partners will work together to provide an adequate supply of sites for
Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople to meet identified needs.
2. Provision will be made between 20 21 and 2032 for a minimum of an additional:
a.2 permanent pit ches for Gypsies and Travellers ;
b. 5 permanent plots for Travelling Showpeople ; and
c. 5-10 transit pitches for Gypsies and Travellers .
3.The need for Gypsy & Traveller’s and Travelling Showpeople  for the remainder of the Plan
period beyond 2032 will be assessed in a future review of the Local Plan.
4. Identification of sites to meet needs up to 203 8 and any unmet need up to 2032 will be
confirmed through a future review of the Local Plan.
Propos als for new sites  
5. Where there is an identified need or a demand for the provision of transit and permanent
pitches for Gypsy or Traveller use or plots for Travelling Showpeople, proposals will be
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
50favourably considered where they satisfy other relevant policies of the Plan and meet the 
following criteria:  
a. The proposed site is suitable for use as a Gypsy, Traveller or Travelling Showperson’s site
and can provide an acceptable living environment for future occupiers;
b. The site is not subject to physical constraints or other environmental issues that cannot
be mitigated to an acceptable level, or that would impact upon the health, safety or general
wellbeing of residents on the site;
c. The site is or can be well integrated within the local townscape in a manner in -keeping
with the local character, using boundary treatments and screening materials which are
sympathetic to the existing urban/rural form;
d. Be compatible with surrounding land uses particularly with regards to residential
amenity;
e. The si te has good access to the highway network and adequate provision is made for the
parking, manoeuvring and storage of all vehicles associat ed with the use of the site;
f. The site is served, or could readily be provided with, electricity, mains water, drain age,
sewage and waste disposal facilities; and for permanent sites
g. The proposed site is or can be made accessible to key local services such as primary
schools, GPs, shops and other  community facilities .
6. Planning permission for sites granted specifically for Gypsy & Traveller or Travelling
Showpeople use, will be subject to conditions restricting occupancy to  Gypsies & Travellers
or Travelling Showpeople who practice a travelling lifestyle.
Protection of Gypsy & Traveller and Travelling Showpersons  Facilities  
7. The Council will not permit development likely to result in the loss of existing permanent
consented Gypsy and Traveller or Travelling Showpersons sites unless it can be
demonstrated:
a. that the development would not lead to, or exacerbate  an identified shortfall in provision;
or
b. that replacement provision of at least equal or enhanced value can be pro vided in a
suitable location.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
Identified Need 
4.1.68 To respond to the needs of the whole community, there is a need to ensure 
adequat e provision is made within the B orough to meet the accommodation needs 
of Gypsy & Travellers and Travelling Showpeople.  
4.1.69  Natio
nal planning policy (Planning Policy for Traveller Sites - DCLG, 2015) requires 
local planning authorities to make an assessment of the accommodation needs for 
Gypsy & Travellers and Travelling Showpeople and to meet that need through the 
identification of land for sites.  More specifically, it requ ires local planning 
authorities to identify a supply of deliverable sites sufficient to provide 5 years’ 
worth of sites against their locally set target and a supply of developable sites, or 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
51broad locations for growth, for years 6 to 10 and, where possible, for years 11 -15 of 
their Local Plan.  
4.1.70 T
he Council commissioned new joint Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) in association with Cheshire West & Chester 
Council, Cheshire East Council and Halton Borough Council which was completed in 2018.  This assessment that takes account of the change to the definition of Travellers for planning purposes contained in the revised version of Planning Policy 
for Traveller Sites (PPTS) issued in August 2015 and provides a cred ible evidence 
base for the provision of new Gypsy and Traveller pitches and Travelling 
Showpeople plots for the 15 -year period from 2017 up to 2032 as required by the 
PPTS, with a split to 2030 to meet Local Plan periods for Cheshire East and Cheshire West  and Chester.   
4.1.71 Th
e GTAA (2018) provide d an up to date position with regard to Warrington’s need 
in terms of Gypsy & Traveller’s and Traveling Showpeople  as of August  2018.  It 
identifi ed a need for 15 further permanent Gypsy and Traveller pitches between 
2017 and 2032 in addition to those consented at the time of the report.  This 
represent ed a minimum requirement of 1 pitch to be provided every year up to 
2032, based on an equal rate of provision over the 15 year period.  
4.1.72 I
n terms of Travelling Showpeople the assessment identifie d a need for 15 plots 
between 2017 and 2032.  This represented  a similar minimum requirement of 1  plot 
to be provided every year up to 20 32, based on an equal rate of provision over the 
15 year period.  
4.1.73 T
he GTAA also recommend ed that Warrington provides a transit site of between 5  
and 10 pitches  (see Table 4 below) . 
Table
 4 - Summary of Gypsy & Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Needs for the  period 2017 to 2032*   
Requirement for Travellers Accommodation for period 2017 – 2032 (GTAA 2018)  
Type of Provision  Total Need  2017 -2022  2023 -2027  2028- 2032  
Gypsy and Travellers 
(Pitches)  15 (14+1)  5 5 5 
Travelling 
Showpeople (Plots)  15 (13+2)  5 5 5 
Transit Provision 
(Pitches)  5-10
(10-20 caravans)  5-10
*The need relates to travellers that meet the definition + 10% unknown need (GTAA 2018)
4.1.74 T
able 5  below identifies  the authorised sites and their capacity as at 31st August  
2018. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
52Table 5 - List of authorised sites (as at 31st August 2018) 
Sites with Permanent Permission at time of GTAA (2018)  
Type of Provision  Number of Pitches/Plots  Date of consent  
Gypsy & Traveller sites  
Land Adjacent to 57 Gorsey  Lane  2 27/10/2003  
Pennington Lane (to the west of 
Toll Bar Cottage)  4 31/07/2017  
Smithfield Caravan Park  2 05/11/1999  
Two Acre Caravan Park  20 21/09/2017  
Woodend Farm  1 27/06/2016  
Travelling Showpeople sites  
Liverpool Road, Gt Sankey  2 22/04/2009  
Land north of Hall Lane, Stretton  2 27/02/2014  
4.1.75 Ta
ble 6 identifies the number and capacity of sites that have received planning 
permission since the GTAA was published and which will therefore contribute 
towards meeting the need identified in the GTAA Report.  
Table
 6 - List of authorised sites ( consented since publication of GTAA 2018)  
Sites that have received Permanent Permission since the publication of 
GTAA(2018)  
Type of Provision  Number of Pitches/Plots  Date of consent  
Gypsy & Traveller sites  
Fir Tree Close, Stretton 
(2018/33053)  5 21/05 /2019 
Grappenhall Lodge, Cartridge 
Lane  (2019/36470 ) 6 08/11/201 9 
Former Timber Yard, Penkford Ln 
(2020/36470)  2 26/06/2020  
Travelling Showpeople sites  
Plot 16, Winwick Road Industrial 
Estate, Athlone  Road  5 19/07/2018  
Land East of Athlone Road 
(2019/34447)  5 24/04/2019  
4.1.76 Th
e Gypsy & Traveller sites that have been consented since the GTAA was published 
meet all of the need up to 2032 except for 2 pitches.  The Travelling Showpeople 
sites that have been consented since the GTAA was published meet the first 10 
years of need up to 2027 . 
4.1.77 The
 Council considers that the remaining need for both Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Show people will come forward from within the existing urban area 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
53and/or on previously developed land within the Green Belt.  The Council will 
confirm sites for future provision up to 203 8 in a future review of the Plan.  
4.1.7 8 T
he Council will also seek to identify a site for transit provision.   We will consider 
land in our ownership as part of this process and ask our other public sector 
partners to do the same.  
Assessing Further Need and Sites Site Criteria  
4.1.79  In assessing any future planning applications for ‘windfall’ caravan pitches for Gypsy 
and Traveller occupation to meet identified or newly arising need or demand, the 
suitability of the site and its impacts on the character of the local area need to be cons idered.  Sites for permanent provision should be located close to local services 
and facilities.  
4.1.80 It is
 important that site activity and usage does not have an adverse impact on existing 
residents due to issues such as noise, fumes, or vehicular movements.  Sites and proposals should meet highway safety standards, especially in relation to the manoeuvrin g of large vehicles and trailers.  
4.1.81 C
areful consideration should be given to how a site can deliver adequate living 
standards to residents.  This includes provisions for power, water, drainage, sewage and waste disposal facilities.  
4.1.82 P
roposals will be favourably considered where they satisfy the criteria set out in this 
Policy and other relevant policies of the Plan.  For example those relating to the protection of the Green Belt, heritage assets, open space, the best and most versatile agricult ural land, flood risk and nature conservation.  
Gypsy and Traveller Occupancy Restriction  
4.1.83 Planning applications for permanent Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites will normally be subject to a condition restricting occupancy to those  who 
practice a  travelling lifestyle in order to satisfy the definition in Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites (DCLG, 2015).  This will safeguard pitches for those leading, or intending to resume a nomadic lifestyle as identified within the GTAA, rather than allocations being used to accommodate demand from non -traveller households.  
4.1.84 This
 occupancy restriction will only apply to sites which have been granted planning 
permission specifically to meet Gypsy and Traveller needs.  For other residential caravan sites that have been judged acceptable against other policies, occupancy restrictions of this type would not be appr opriate.  
Protection Existing Facilities  
4.1.85 It is important to ensure that t he existing level of provision is protected in order to 
ensure that the level of supply is maintained.  
Key Evi
dence 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
54•National Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Local Housing Needs Assessment (20 21)
•Local Plan Viability Assessment  (2021)
•Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment  (2020)
•G&T Accommodation Needs Assessment (2018)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Other Pl
anning Documents  
•WBC P
lanning Obligations SPD
•WBC Design and Construction SPD
•WBC Town Centre SPD
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•WBC H
ousing Strategy 2018 -2028
Delivery
 Partners  
•Private 
Sector Developers
•Warrington & Co
•Registered Providers
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
554.2 Planning for Warrington’s Economic Growth  
4.2.1  Warrin
gton’s economy has seen continual growth since its designation as a New 
Town. This is set to continue over the Plan period .  Warrington sits  at the heart of 
the Northern Powerhouse, a key Government initiative aimed at re -balancing the 
national economy.  The Council is working with the Local Enterprise Partnership to 
promote growth and has its own economic development programme in Warrington 
Means Business.  
4.2.2  Ne
w businesses are attracted to Warrington due to its central location within the 
North West region, its excellent transport links and its highly skilled workforce. 
Many of Warrington’s existing businesses are looking to strengthen and expand their operations.  
4.2.3  Warrin
gton is home to a wide  range of businesses. These range  from major national 
and multi -national companies who have located their logistics operations at Omega, 
the cluster of nuclear technology businesses at Birchwood, through to a diverse range of businesses located across Warrington’s many industrial estates. The Town Centre is a focus for office development whilst there are many small scale businesses supporting Warrington’s local communities.  
4.2.4  Po
licy DEV4 seeks to ensure there is a sufficient supply of employment land to 
support Warrington’s economic growth  over the Plan period.   It also provides the 
basis to protect and enhance existing employment locations and support local businesses.  
Policy DEV4  - Economic Growth and Development  
Employment Land Requirement  
1.Over the 18 year Plan period  from 2021  to 203 8 provision will be made to meet the need
for 316.26  hectares of employment land to support both local and wider strategic
employment needs.
Employment Land Distribution  
2.The Town Centre will provide the main location for new  Class E Office development .
3. The following Employment Areas will continue to be the primary locatio ns for in dustrial,
warehousing , offices,  distribution development and other B Class Uses:
a. Omega
b.Woolston Grange
c.Appleton & Stretton Trading Estate
d.Winwick Quay
e.Birchwood Park
f.Centre Park
g.Lingley Mere
h.Gemini Westbrook
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
564. The following site s will be allocated as new Employment Areas in order to provide
sufficient land to meet Warrington’s Employment Land Requirement s:
a.South East Warrington Employment Area – 13 6.92 hectares
b. Fiddlers Ferry Power Station – 101.0 hectares
5.Small scale office uses will be supported within District and Neighbourhood Centres  and
in the  Lymm  Neighbourhood Planning Area  to meet identified local need s.
Proposals within Defined Employment Areas 
6. All allocated Employment Areas as defined on  the Policies Map will be protected for
employment use in order to maintain an adequate supply of employment land.
7.The Council will support development, redevelopment and changes of use proposals
within existing Employment Areas, provided that the proposed use falls within Use Classes,
E (offices, research and development and light industrial)  B2, or B8, or is a sui -generis
employment use.
8.Proposals for E class ( office ) development will need to be justified by reference to
sequential testing and market appraisal to determine that the development could not be
appropriately located on a more accessible central site within or close to the Town Centre in
accordance with the Overall Spatial Strategy.
9.Development within existing employment areas for purposes other than those listed
above will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that:
a.the development relates to ancillary services which will support the employment area by
making it more sustainable, viable and/or attractive or;
b.the site is no longer suitable or viable for employment uses;
c.the proposal will not undermine the viability of existing employment uses in close
proximity to the site and;
d.the alternative use is in accordance with or does not undermine the Plan’s overall Spatial
Strategy .
10.Where it has been demonstrated that an alternative use is acceptable, all opportunities
must be explored to incorporate an element of employment floor space  as part of the new
development.
11.Subject to assessment of local transport impacts, major warehousin g and distribution
developments will be primarily directed towards preferred locations at:
a.Appleton & Stretton Trading Estates
b. Omega
c.Woolston Grange
d.South East Warrington Employment Area
e. Fiddlers Ferry Pow er Station
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
5712.Where major warehousing and distribution developments are p roposed outside of these
areas, proposals should seek to locate development:
a.away from areas sensitive  to heavy vehicle movement s;
b.with d irect access to the Primary Route  Network ;  and
c.with access to rail or waterways where possible.
Supporting the Local Economy  
13.The Council will seek to assist the continued viability and growth of the local economy  by
ensuring development proposals do not lead to the loss of viable, accessib le sites and
buildings used for industrial/commercial purposes or other employment generating uses in
local communities inclu ding the countryside and its settlements.
14.The sustainable growth, expansion and diversification of local and rural businesses will
be supported, subject to meeting other relevant L ocal Plan and national policies .
15.When the genuine needs of local rural businesses cannot be accommodated within
settlement boundaries, and development would be located within the G reen Belt, proposals
will need to demonstrate  that ‘Very Special Circumstances’ exist to warrant the granting of
planning permission.
16. The Council will require all major development proposals to maximise access to
employment and training opportunities  for local residents.
Why we
 have taken this approach  
4.2.5  Th
e National Planning Policy Framework (20 21) states that planning policies and 
decisions should help create the conditions in which businesses can invest, expand 
and adapt.   Significant weight  should be placed on the need to support economic 
growth and productivity, taking into account both local business needs and wider 
opportunities for development.   The approach taken  should allow each area to build 
on its strengths, counter any weaknesses and address the challenges of the future.  
4.2.6  Th
e National Planning Policy Framework (20 21) also requires planning policies and 
decisions to recognise and address the specific locational requirements of different 
sectors.  This includes  making provision for clusters or networks of knowledge and 
data -driven, creative or high technology industrie s; and for storage and distribution 
operations at a variety of scales and in suitably accessible locations.  
4.2.7  Warrin
gton has ambitions for economic growth, as reflected in the Warrington 
Means Business regeneration programme, and in the Cheshire and W arrington 
Local Enterprise Partnership’s (LEP) Strategic Economic Plan (SEP).  
4.2.8  Warrin
gton is home to the largest cluster of nuclear research and technology firms 
in the UK Based at Birchwood Park, a designated Enterprise Zone, employ ing over 
5,000 p eople.  Warrington also has major employment clusters in:  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
58•Logisti
cs
•Precision Engineering
•Energy
•Telecoms and Software
•Business Services
4.2.9  The
re is strong market interest for distribution and industrial development in the 
south of Warrington as well as in other locations linked to the main motorway 
junctions, as well as at Birchwood, Gemini and Woolston Grange.  
4.2.10  Offic
e market demand in Birchwood and Gemini is healthy and the Council is 
actively promoting office development in the Town Centre.   Birchwood remains the 
focus for the largest requirements and there is an identified local need in Lymm.  
4.2.11  Acros
s the Borough there are existing employment locations at Omega, Woolston 
Grange, Appleton & Stretton Trading Estates, Port Warrington,  Winwick Quay, 
Birchwood Park, Centre Park, Lingley Mere  and Gemini Westbrook . 
Figur
e 4 – Existing and Proposed Employment Sites  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
594.2.12  Planning Practice Guidance is clear that the assessment of future employment land 
needs should be determined by looking at both past trends and future forecasting methods, and highlights that these should include historic land take -up and future 
employment  /population change.  The methodology employed in the Council’s 
Economic Development Needs Assessment ( 2021) assessed both historic land take -
up and labour demand and associated sensitivity testing when assessing the most appropriate approach.  
 
4.2.13  In determining the amount of employment land need ed for the Plan period, t he 
Economic Development Needs Assessment (20 21) concluded that the preferred 
forecasting method  for establishing need,  is a projection forward of past take -up 
rates that considers both strategic and local needs, resulting in a need of 3 16.26 
hectares  of employment land  up to 2038.  
 
4.2.14  Confirmation of how the Council is proposing to meet this need is summarised in 
the Table below:  
  
Table 6  – Employment Land Needs  
Total Requirement  316.26 ha 
Existing supply  38.86 ha 
St Helens Omega Extension  31.80 ha  
Fiddlers Ferry Brownfield Site   101.00 ha 
South East Warrington Employment Area  136.92 ha 
Total Supply  308.58  ha 
 4.2.15  The Council can demonstrate a realistic supply of 38.86 hectares  of land in the 
urban area.  
 4.2.16  Through the Council’s Duty to Co -operate discussions with neighbouring authorities, 
it has been agreed that a 3 1.80 hectare extension to the west of  the established 
Omega employment development, located in the Borough of St Helens, will count towards Warrington’s employment development needs.   
 4.2.1 7 The Council considered a number of sites which were promoted through the Local 
Plan ‘Call for Sites’.   The sites were assessed with regard to their ability to meet 
market demands and against a range of detailed site and sustainability criteria, 
including location, means of access, Green Belt performance and how they related to the emerging spatial strategy of the Plan and to planned infrastructure.  
 4.2.1 8 Following this process, the Council is proposing to allocate the following 2 additional 
Employment Areas  (as identified in Figure 4) : 
 
• Fiddlers Ferry Power Station ( 101.0 ha gross) – Redevelopment of  a former 
Brownfield Power Station site to provide for a mix of industrial and distribution uses.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
60•South East Warrington Employment Area (136.92 ha ha gross) – this is located at
the junction of the M6 and M56 and will meet a large proportion of the
Borough’s i dentified B8 requirement.
4.2.19  The
 proposed sites at Fiddlers Ferry and South East Warrington provide a total of 
approximately 237.92 ha, which is marginally below the required need by around 8 ha. 
4.2.2 0 The
 Council considers that there is a strong likelihood the balance of employment 
land need will be met from windfall sites in locations such as Appleton Thorn, Warrington Town Centre and the wider urban area, meeting some ongoing needs during, and after the Plan period, and compensating for some los ses of employment 
land to other uses.  
4.2.2 1 Sho
uld the western extension of Omega be approved following the S78 inquiry, 
then this could make a further contribution to meeting Warrington’s employment land needs over and above the 31.22ha already agreed through the ‘Duty to 
Cooperate’.  
4.2.2 2 The
 Council has considered a number of other options for employment land 
allocations, but at present these have a range of significant constraints.  Given these 
constraints, the Council is not proposing to make any f urther allocations to come 
forward later in the Plan Period or to provide safeguarded sites. The Council is 
however committed to undertaking a review into Warrington’s employment land needs before the end of the Plan period to ensure the long term supply o f 
employment land. At this stage, it is likely that key infrastructure improvements, including the Western Link and motorway junction improvements , will have been 
delivered  and the impacts of any further required employment allocations can be 
fully apprais ed.  
4.2.2 3 Gi
ven the demand for employment land and the need to release Green Belt land, it 
is essential that existing Employment Areas within the existing urban area are  
protected to maintain the quantity and enhance the quality of the employment capacity they provide.  
4.2.2 4 Lo
cal and rural businesses also make a vital contribution to Warrington’s economy 
and the vitality of its urban and countryside communities.  The Local Plan will 
ensure that existing local businesses are protected and have the opportunity to expand wherever possible.  
4.2.2 5 The
 Policy also seeks to ensure that local residents have the opportunity to benefit 
from Warrington’s economic growth and development.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
61• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• Economic Development Needs Assessment ( 2021) 
• Employment Land Availability Monitoring  
• Local Housing Needs Assessment (2021)  
• Cheshire & Warrington Local Enterprise Partnership -Strategic Economic Plan  
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 
 Council Wide Strategies  
 
• Warrington Means Business  (2020)  
• Warrington Town  Centre Masterplan (2020)  
 
Delivery Partners  
 
• Warrington & Co 
• St Helens Borough Council  
• Cheshire & Warrington Local Enterprise Partnership  
• Homes England  
• Private Sector Stakeholders  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
624.3 Meeting Warrington’s Retail and L eisure Needs  
4.3.1  Warring
ton has a clearly defined hierarchy of centres providing a range of shops, 
services and facilities across the Borough . 
4.3.2  War
rington Town Centre is the main hub for retail, transpor t and service uses 
serving the B orough as a whole and wider sub -region.  
4.3.3  The 
Borough has a large number of other centres which perform an important role 
in providing a range of facilities and employment opportunities within walking and 
cycling distance of where people live and work. These are defined as District Centres, Neighbourhood Centres and Local Centres as identified on the Policies map.  
4.3.4  The
 Council is also working closely with its partners to provide more efficient joined 
up services at a local level through the development of Neighbourhood Hubs.  
4.3.5  War
rington’s centres and the shops and services within them will continue to face 
considerable competition as people cho ose to do more of their shopping in large 
superstores or order goods and services online. Policy DEV5  therefore seeks to 
ensure that  centres at all levels in the hierarchy  provide and retain a range of shops, 
services and facilities and to provide a high quality of environment to enable them 
to compete more effectively.  
Policy DEV 5 – Retail and Leisure Needs  
Hierarchy of Centres  
1.Prov ision for retailing within the B orough will be based on the need to safeguard and
enhance the vitality and viability of the following hierarchy of centres:
Warrington Town Centre  as defined on the Policies Map  
The District Centres  as defined on the Policies Map:  
Birchwood  
Stockton Hea th 
Westbrook  
The Neighbourhood Centres as defined on the Policies Map:  
Chapelford  
Culcheth Village    
Fearnhead Cross  
Honiton Square, Penketh  
Latchford Village  
Lovely Lane  
Lymm Village  
Orford Lane   
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
63Poplars Avenue/Capesthorne Road  
The Local Centres as Identified on the Policies Map : 
Barley Road, Thelwall 
Bridge Lane, Appleton 
Bruche Health Gardens 
Burtonwood Village 
Callands Local Centre  
Church Street Howley 
Cinnamon Brow 
Cotswold Road, Poplars 
Croft Village 
Dam Lane, Woolston 
Folly Lane  
Dudlows Green Road 
George’s Precinct Langley Avenue  
Glazebrook Village 
Glazebury Village  
Gorse Covert Local Centre 
Harrison Square, Dallam  
Hollins Green Village  
Holes Lane , Manchester Road 
Hood Manor Local Centre 
Howson Road, Longford  
Knutsford Road, Latchford 
Knutsford Road, Grappenhall  
Locking Stumps Local Centre 
Longshaw Street, Bewsey  
Marsh House Lane, Fairfield  
Oakwood Local Centre 
Old Hall 
Omega  
Padgate Lane 
Parksway Woolston 
Station Road, Great Sankey 
Warrington Road (East ), Penketh 
Warrington Road (West), Penketh  
Winwick Village 
2. In order to meet the needs of the Main Development Areas, the following additional
centres are proposed:
Local Centres: 
South East Warrington Urban Extension 
Peel Hall  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
64Fiddlers Ferry  
Warrington Waterfront  
Neighbourhood Hubs 
3.Where new N eighbourhood Hubs cannot be accommodated in defined centres, they
should be in sustainable locations where the development would support the accessible co -
location of facilities and services.
New Re tail and Leisure Development 
4.Retail and Leisure uses will be directed towards the Town Centre, District, Neighbourhood
and Local Centres where the development  is of a scale and nature appropriate to the area
served by the centre. Proposals will be expe cted to enhance the vitality, viability and overall
attractiveness of the centre.
5.Where retail or leisure uses are proposed outside of a defined centre, the applicant will
be required to demonstrate that no suitable sites are available within the centr e or in edge
of centre locations through applying a sequential approach.
6.Where there are no suitable, available or viable sites within a defined centre, the
proposal must demonstrate that there are no significant adverse impact on that centre(s).
7.Proposal for retail, leisure and office uses over 500 square metres gross will need to
provide justification in the form of an impact test proportionate to the scale of the proposal.
Sustaining l ocal shops and services 
8.The Council will seek to support the health and wellbeing  of local communities by
ensuring development proposals;
a.avoid the loss or change of use  of viable convenience shops, cultural  facilities, post offices
and public houses where the loss would impact on the diversity of local services in
communities;
b.avoid an overconcentration of hot food takeaways in accordance with the approach set
out in the Council’s Hot Food Takeaway SPD;
c.support the retention of viable local health and community facilities.
Why we  hav
e taken this Approach  
4.3.6  Natio
nal P olicy continues to promote the importance of vital and viable centres. 
Warrington Town C entre remains the principle retail and service d estination in the 
Borough.  The Town Centre is supported by District, Neighbourhood and Local 
Centres which are dispersed across the B orough and provide an important role in 
meeting day to day needs of local communities.  
4.3.7  The
 policy approach set out above is to direct new retail an d leisure development 
into the Borough’s defined centres.  Such development should be of an appropriate 
size and scale to support the centre.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
65Figure 5  – Existing and Proposed Retail and Leisure Facilities  
4
.3.8 If retail and leisure uses are proposed on the edge or outside of a defined centre, it 
must demonstrated through sequential and impact tests that the vitality and viability of the centre is not compromised as a result.  
4
.3.9 The updated Retail  and Leisure Study Update  (2021) for the Borough has assessed 
the future need and capacity for retail and leisure floorspace over the plan per iod to 
2038 . With regard to comparison floorspace, the Assessment concludes  that 
existing stores in the Borough provide an oversupply and therefore  have the 
capacity to absorb needs  over the plan period.  There is no requirement for 
additional convenience goods floorspace up to 2035, and only a very limited requirement at 2038. The designation of the new local cent res in the Main 
Development Areas  (Warrington Waterfront, South East Warrington Urban 
Extension , Fiddlers Ferry  and Peel Hall) will provide for local needs and will make up 
the small shortfall in convenience goods in any case .  Any further out -of-centre 
retail could have a signifi cant detrimental impact on the Town C entre and the 
Borough’s other defined centres.   In terms of the leisure sector, recent 
development in the town centre has extinguished any requirement for additional large -scale leisure provision over the plan period.  
4.
3.10  The Assessment , together with previous work undertaken by the Council,  has a lso 
reviewed the  health and performance of the Town C entre and the three district 
centres.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
664.3.11  The current retail and leisure trends have consequences for the future of retail and 
leisure floorspace in Warrington  Town C entre . The prevailing conditions in respect 
of the comparison good s market are evident in respect of the lo ss of Marks & 
Spencer  and Debenhams  from the Town C entre, and its vacancy rate, which is 
higher than the national average. The location of Warrington is such that  residents 
can trave l easily to Liverpool, Manchester and the Trafford Centre which influences 
the retailers that can be attracted to the Town Centre . As a consequence of this the 
Town C entre’s future vitality and viability will not just be reliant on the comparison 
goods sec tor but also by the leisure developments which have been brought 
forward such as the cinema as part of the Time Square development.  
4.3.12  Furt
her detail on the Council’s proposals to develop and strengthen the Town 
Centre as set out in Policy TC1.  
4.3.13  The A
ssessment concludes that the Borough’s three District Centres are performing 
relatively strongly and each has a clear role and function. 
4.3.14  Bir
chwood performs a strong retail function in respect of both convenience and 
comparison goods. However, there is a lesser proportion of service uses. The purpose -built centre is well maintained and well used, and is considered to be vital 
and viable, evidenced by the low vacancy rates.  
4.3.15  Stoc
kton Heath is a traditional centre that is focussed around retail, but benefits 
from a range of complementary facilities and services, including a particularly strong variety of community facilities. It has a low vacancy rate and a high standard of environmental quality. It is therefore considered to be a vital and viable centre.  
4.3.16  Wes
tbrook is dominated by the Asda superstore and has a limited number of units. 
As such, the centre takes the form of a food superstore and additional retail units, rather than being a traditional ‘high street’. Whilst the centre does accommodate a 
good range of general facilities, including a church, medical centre, primary school and library, the vacant units impact on the appearance of the centre, therefore investment is needed to broaden the range of retail services in  order to fulfil its role 
as a District C entre.  
4.3.17  Natio
nal policy also encourages Local Planning Authorities to plan positively for the 
retention and integration of community facilities such as local shops, meeting places, public houses and places of w orship and other local services to enhance the 
sustainability of communities and residential environments.  Many, but not all, of 
these facilities are located in designated centres . They are particularly important in 
ensuring the vitality of the Borough’s o utlying settlements.  
4.3.18  Pol
icy DEV5  seeks to ensure that local shops, facilities and  services are protected, 
principally by ensuring that consideration is afforded to avoiding the loss of those which are proven viable or those which if lost would adv ersely impact the 
availability of services to any given community.  The Policy also seeks to take 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
67forward the successful approach to avoiding overconcentration of hot food 
takeaways, which is set out in detail in the Council’s Hot Food Takeaway SPD.  
 4.3.19  The Policy recognises the commitment of the Council to integrating service provision through the development of  Neighbourhood Hubs.  Where new 
Neighbourhood Hubs cannot be accommodated in defined centres, they should be located in areas where development would support the co -location of facilities and 
services being as accessible and sustainable as possible.  Neighbourhood Hubs such 
as Orf ord Jubilee Neighbourhood Hub and Great Sankey Neighbourhood H ub are 
not located within defined centres but nevertheless  provide focus for community 
and shared services.   Further detail on Neighbourhood Hubs is provided in Policy 
INF4  Community facilities.  
 Key Evidence  
• National Planning Policy Framework (2021 ) 
• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• Warringto n Retai l and Leisure Study (20 21) 
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 Other Planning Documents  
 
• Town Centre SPD – June 2021  
• Hot Food Takeaway (SPD) - April 2014  
• Environmental Protection (SPD)  
• Design and Construction SPD 2010  
• Parking Standards (SPD) - March 2015  
 Delivery Partners  
 
• Warrington Town Centre Business Improvement District  
• Private Sector  
• Warrington Together  
• Warrington & Co  
  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
685 Policies Relating to Objective W2 
Objective W2 : To ensure Warrington’s revised Green Belt boundaries maintain the 
permanence of the Green Belt in the long term.  
5.1  Warri
ngton’s Green Belt  
5.1.1  Warring
ton’s  Green Belt fulfils an important role in ensuring the separation of 
Warrington from neighbouring towns and cities and preventing urban sprawl 
extending into the countryside.  
5.1.2  The 
general extent of the Borough’s Green Belt will be maintained but as set out in 
Chapter 3, it is not possible for Warrington to meets its development needs without releasing some Green Belt land for development.   The land propose d for release 
equates to around  5% of Warrington’s total area of Green Belt.  
5.1.3  Pol
icy GB1  confirms the areas of land to be removed from the Green Belt and 
defines the revised Green Belt boundaries.   It confirms the settlements which are 
‘inset’  from the Green Belt, those settlements which are ‘washed over’ within the 
Green Belt  and sets out how development proposals within the Green Belt will be 
assessed.  
Policy GB1 - Green Belt  
General Principles  
1.The Council will maintain the general extent of the Borough’s Green Belt, as defined on
the Local Plan Policies Map, throughout the Plan Period and  to at least 20 50.
2.The Council will plan positively to enhance the beneficial use of the Green Belt as part of
Warrington’s Green Infrastructure Network.
Land removed from the Green Belt  
3.The following land has been removed from the Green Belt and the amend ed
Green Belt boundaries  are shown in Figure 6:
a.South East Warrington Urban Extension
b. South East Warrington Employment Area
c. Land to the east and south of Fiddlers Ferry Power Station
d. Thelwall Heys
e. Land at Warrington Waterfront
f. Land at Croft
g.Land at Culcheth
h. Land at Hollins Green
i. Land at Lymm
j. Land at Winwick
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
69Inset Settlements  
4. The following settlements are Inset (that is excluded) from the Green Belt:  
a. Appleton Thorn  
b. Burtonwood  
c. Croft  
d. Culcheth  
e. Glazebury  
f. Hollins Green  
g. Lymm  
h. Oughtrington 
i. Winwick  
 
5. Within these settlements new build development, conversions and redevelopment 
proposals will be allowed providing they comply with national planning policy , other 
relevant Local Plan policies and any relevant Supplementary Planning Documents . 
 
6. The boundaries of the Inset Settlements are shown on the Policies Map.  
 
Green Belt Settlements  
7. The following are Green Belt settlements (that is washed over) within the Green  
Belt:  
 
a. Broomedge  
b. Collins Green  
c. Cuerdley Cross  
d. Glazebrook  
e. Grappenhall Village  
f. Hatton  
g. Heatley/Heatley Heath  
h. Higher Walton  
i. Mee Brow/Fowley Common  
j. New Lane End  
k. Stretton  
l. Weaste Lane  
 
8. Within these settlements development proposals will be subject to Green Belt policies set 
out in national planning policy.  New build development may be appropriate where it can be 
demonstrated that the proposal constitutes limited infill development of an appropriate 
scale, design and character, unless the  infill break contributes to the character of the 
settlement.  
 
9. The boundaries of the Green Belt settlements are shown on the Policies Map.  
 
Developm ent Proposals  in the Green Belt  
10. In accordance with national planning policy, within the Green Belt, planning permission 
will not be granted for inappropriate development, except in ‘very special circumstances ’.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
7011.A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
12 . Other forms of development defined in national planning policy  to be an exception to 
inappropriate development within the Green Belt, will be supported , subject to meeting 
other relevant Local Plan policies  and any relevant Supplementary Planning Documents . 
Figure
 6 – Amended Green Belt Boundaries  
Why we 
have taken this approach  
Removal of Land from the Green Belt  
5.1.4  The National Planning Policy Framework ( 2021) states that ‘once established, Green 
Belt boundaries  should only be altered where ‘Exceptional Circumstances ’ are fully 
evidenced and justified, through the preparation or updating  of Plans’.   However, 
once strategic policies have established the need for changes to Green Belt 
boundaries, further detailed amendments may be made through non -strategic local 
policies, including Neighbourhood Plans.  
5.1.5  As se
t out in Chapter 3, there are significant ident ified needs for market and 
affordable housing, as well as land for new employment provision , that cannot be 
met in full with in the existing urban areas of the Borough. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
715.1.6  In line with national planning policy, additional work has been undertaken by the  
Council to understand the development capacity of underutilised land and 
brownfield sites, to ensure only the required amount of Green Belt land will be released  for development .  The Council is also proposing minimu m density 
requirements for the Town C entre, together with minimum requirements for all site 
allocations to minimise the amount of Green Belt release required.  
5.1.7  Thr
ough the Council’s Duty to Co-operate  discussions and as evidenced in the 
Council’s Statement of Common Ground, it is also cle ar that neighbouring Local 
Planning Authorities are in similar situations, and there is no capacity within adjoin ing authorities to absorb any of Warrington’s identified development needs . 
The one exception is the employment allocat ion in St Helens which provides an 
extension to the existing Omega development  in Warrington.   Both Councils have 
agreed that this will contribute towards meeting Warrington’s development needs.  
5.1.8  It 
is therefore concluded that in line with paragraph 141 of the NPPF  (2021) that the 
Council has  demonstrated that is has considered all other reasonable options for 
meeting its identified need for development through: 
•making  as
 much use as possible of suitable brownfield sites and underutilised
land ;
•optimis ing the densities used in developments to reflect the location of
development ; and
•engaging  constructively with neighbouring authorities to discuss options for
neighbouring authorities to accommodate some of Warrington’s identifiedfuture developme nt needs.
5.1.9  As
 set out in Chapter 3, t he starting point for Warrington’s ‘Exceptional 
Circumstances’ is the requirement to ensure that sufficient land is provided to meet the Council’s housing and employment development needs.  
5.1.10  ‘
Exceptional C ircumstances ’ are further justified through the spatial strategy of the 
Plan. The Plan will enable the creation of new sustainable communities but in a manner which will support the delivery of strategic infrastructure required to address existing issues o f congestion and unlock major development sites with 
significant brownfield capacity.  This will ensure that the release of Green Belt land 
will work in parallel with brownfield development and infrastructure delivery to 
provide a comprehensive Plan for Warrington as a whole.  
5.1.11  ‘
Exceptional Circumstances ’ can also be demonstrated for each area of Green Belt 
release  as set out in Chapter 3 and in each of the site allocation policies . 
5.1.12  Dem
onstrating Exceptional Circumstances to release Green Belt land for 
development has also resulted in some minor additional consequential changes to 
the existing Green Belt boundaries to ensure that the remaining Green Belt land 
fulfils the purposes and function of Green Belt land, and the revised boundaries are durable beyond the Plan period.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
725.1.1 3 In
 order to assist amending detailed Green Belt boundaries a comprehensive Green 
Belt Assessment has been undertaken.  The assessment considered the contribution  
that larger General Areas, individual parcels of Green Belt land adjacent to the main 
urban area and inset  settlement boundaries  and development sites promoted 
through the ‘call for sites’ process  make  to the 5 purposes of the Green Belt.  
5.1.1 4 The
 Green Belt Assessment has been one of the key factors that has informed the 
Plan’s spatial strategy and individual site allocations.  
Ensuring Green Belt Boundaries Endure Beyond the Plan Period  
5.1.1 5 The National Planning Policy Framework (20 21) requires that, when defining Green 
Belt boundaries, Plans should be able to demonstrate that Green Belt boundaries 
will not need to be altered at the end of the Plan period to ensure they will endure 
over the long term.  
5.1.1 6 Th
e Plan makes provision  for development potential beyond the Plan period for 
housing land. The Council has included flexibility of supply in its allocations for 
Housing land.  The land that has been removed from the Green Belt to facilitate the 
South East Warrington Urban Extension and Fiddlers Ferry allocations  will provide a 
supply of new homes that will extend a number of years  beyond the Plan period.  
5.1.1 7 The
 Council  considers that there will still be a realistic supply of brownfield land 
beyond the Plan Period  although it is acknowledged that the availability of 
brownfield development will decrease over time .  Further supply may arise from 
Neighbourhood Plans making minor amendments to Green Belt boundaries.  
5.1.1 8 Whe
n this potential land supply is compared against future development needs, the 
Council is able to demonstrate that the revised Green Belt boundaries will endure 
well beyond the end of the Plan Period without having to identify any ‘safeguard ed’ 
areas of land. Further detail on the approach to land supply following the end of the 
Plan Period is set out under Polic y DEV1.  
5.1.19  The
 Council recognises that  there are uncertainties over Warrington’s longer term 
employment land supply, beyond the end of the Plan Period. As such,  the Council is 
committed to undertaking a review into Warrington’s employment land needs 
before the end of the Plan period to ensure the long term supply of employment 
land. At this stage, it is likely that key infrastructure improvements, including the Western Link and motorway junction improvements , will have been delivered  and 
the impacts of any further required employment allocations can be fully appraised.  
Defining ‘Inset’ and ‘Washed Over’ Settlements  
5.1.20  Within the Borough there are a number of settlements varying in size and in the 
nature of services on offer.   The larger settlements and those which provide a 
greater number of services  are ‘inset’ from the Green Belt recognising the potential 
for their sustainable growth. Smaller settlements are ‘washed over’ by the Green 
Belt with greater restrictions on development.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
735.1.21  With
 the exception of the removal of Grappenhall Heys as an inset settleme nt, and 
half of the ‘washed over’ settlement of Stretton to the west of the A49, due to the 
develo pment of the  South East Warrington Urban Extension, it is considered that 
since the adoption of the Local Plan Core Strategy (2014)  that there have not been 
any material changes in circumstances that would warrant amend ments to the  
allocation and definition of  Inset and Green Belt Settlement s.  
5.1.2 3 The
 only amendments to boundaries of the settlements are those required to 
facilitate the allocated development sites in the Inset Settlements , including 
consequential changes necessary to ensure a robust Green Belt boundary . 
Development Proposals in the Green Belt  
5.1.2 4 National Policy defines limited forms of development which are appropriate in the 
Green Belt and confirms that very special circumstances are required for ‘inappropriate development’.  The Council will apply this national policy in assessing 
proposals in Warrington’s Green Belt.   
5.1.25  The 
Council’s Design and Construction SPD provides guidance on the conversion and 
re-use of buildings in rural areas .  Additional guidance on the assessment of rural 
workers dwellings, equestrian related development/uses an d other forms of 
development not regarded as inappropriate development by paragraph 149  of the 
NPPF will be provided in an updated version of this SPD or a new standalone SPD.  
Key Evidence 
•National Planning Policy Framework ( 2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Local Housing Need s Assessment (20 21)
•Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2020)
•Brownfield Register ( 2019 )
•Economic Development Needs Assessment (20 21)
•Warrington Green Belt Assessment  (2016)  and Addendums
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Other Planning Documents  
•WBC Design & Construction SPD
Council Wide Strategies  
•Warrington Means Business
Delivery P artners 
•Natural England
•Private Sector Stakeholders
•Public Sector Stakeholders
•Warrington and Co
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
746 Policies Relating to Objective W3 
Objective W3 : To strengthen and expand the role of Warrington Town Centre as a regional 
employment, retail, leisure, cultural and transport hub, whilst transforming the quality of 
the public realm and making the Town Centre a place where people want to live.  
6.1 W
arrington’s  Town Centre  and Surrounding A rea 
6
.1.1 The regeneration and evolution of the Town Centre is a priority for the Council 
forming a key component of Warrington's economic growth and regeneration strategy  - Warrington Means Business.  
6
.1.2 A number of large development initiatives are already being progressed by the public and private sectors within the Town Centre and the immediately surrounding areas that  form part of the Council’s Town  Centre Masterplan.   
6
.1.3 The Council acknowledges that tradi tional retailing is struggling and therefore the 
role of the Town Centre needs to evolve into a place that is more than just about shopping.  
6
.1.4 Policy TC1  seeks to maximise the number of people living in Warrington Town 
Centre and focus  its future as a vibrant hub of culture, leisure and entertainment, 
sustainable transportation, business and living.  This approach will positively 
support retailing and the Town Centre’s  ‘high streets’, reinforce  the Town C entre’s 
riverside location and preserve and enh ance its many  outstanding  heritage assets.  
6
.1.5 In June 2021 the Council adopted the Warrington Town Centre Supple mentary 
Planning Document (SPD). This document sets out the Council’s aims for future development in the town centre and emphasises quali ty of design and place;  
sustainable transport and development; and  protection of heritage and amenity. 
The overall objective being to make Warrington a truly liveable town for residents, businesses and visitors.  
Policy TC1 – Town Centre and surrounding area  
Widening the role of the Town Centre 
1.The Council will support development in the Town Centre , as defined on the Polices Map,
which strengthens its viability and vitality and promotes a greater diversity of uses, and in
particular which :
a.provides new homes ;
b.generat es job growth, particularly high value jobs;
c.adds to the provision and attractiveness of the Town Centre’s office market;
d.adds to the cultural and tourism provision on offer;
e.supports existing, committed and planned public and  private investment;
f.increases the use of the Town C entr e throughout the day and night;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
75g. supports the town in its role as a regional transport gateway/interchange and improves 
linkages to it  from the rest of the B orough and beyond espec ially by active  travel modes  and 
public transport. 
 
Enhanced Cultural Activities  
2. The Council will positively encourage enhanced and additional cultural activities and 
venues in line with findings of the Warrington Cultural Commission, including:  
 
a. additional performance venues, particularly theatre  venues;  
b. additional outdoor events and fairs;  
c. increased alfresco activity within the public realm of the main shopping streets;  
d. increased market provision, both indoor and outdoor;  
e. enhanced interpretation of War rington’s rich heritage.  
 
Key Development Sites in the Town Centre and surrounding areas  
3. The Council and its partners will support and promote comprehensive redevelopment 
and regeneration opportunities in accordance with the Town Centre Masterplan  and t he 
Warrington Town Centre SPD  in the following areas  which are identified on Fig 7: 
 
a. Time Square and the Cultural Quarter (including Bridge Street) for an increase in town 
centre living, commercial development including a new hotel and leisure uses;  
b. The Stadium Quarter  for significantly increase the residential offer, whilst enhancing the 
commercial/office provision and improving the cohesion of the public realm; 
c. The Southern Gateway for the creation of high quality residential development, togethe r 
with a new mixed use commercial area containing landmark buildings fronting on to the 
River Mersey at Bridgefoot/St James Church;  
d. Bank Quay Gateway for the creation of an enhanced transport hub focused around Bank 
Quay Station, supported by a mixture of uses including hotels, hospitality, offices and 
residential where it can be ensured that amenity standards can be met for new and existing 
residents;  
e. Eastern Gateway (including Cockhedge/St Mary’s Quarter/St Elphin’s 
Quarter/Thorneycroft) for the creation of new residential areas  with supporting retail and 
commercial uses ;  
f. Warrington Waterfront/Southern Gateway Opportunity Area for the creation of a new 
riverside park and a new residential  neighbourhood and improved connectivity into and 
across the town centre for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
4. The Council will continue to work with its partners to support the ongoing delivery of the 
Bridge Street Quarter/Time Square for mixed use development including leisure, retail, 
entertainment, offices  and residential  uses.  
 
Optimising the Town Centre’s development potential  
5. New residential development should aim to achieve the minimum densities specified in 
Policy DEV1 subject to complying with the requirements of the Warrington Town Centre 
SPD.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
766.There are opportunities for taller buildings at gateway sites to the Town Centre and along
the A49 strategic corridor, as identified the Warrington Town Centre SPD subject to:
a.ensu ring outstanding architectural quality;
b.a detailed  contextual analysis and strong design rationale;
c.enhancement of the public realm; and
c. a detailed understanding and mitigation of  any impacts on heritage assets, environmental
quality and residential amenity .
Improving the Town Centre’s Environment  
7.All development within the Town Centre  should comply with the guidance contained
within the Warrington Town Centre SPD  and should, where appropriate:
a.ensure the historic environment and heritage assets are sustained, conserved and
enhanced;
b.enhance the public realm and the environmental quality of the wider area;
c.create a vibrant and active street scene – through active ground floor street frontages and
the provision of street cafes ;
d.pay particular attention to key transport routes into the Town Centre to ensure
development contributes to a sense of arrival and ease of movement around the centre ;
and
e.contribute to sustainable travel initiatives identified in the  proposed  Town Centre Area
Travel Plan/Local Transport Plan .
Retail Development within the To wn Centre  and Primary Shopping Area  
8. New retail development  will be promoted within  the Primary Shopping Area within
Warrington  Town Centre as defined on the Policies Map.
9. Development in the Primary Shopping Area should  provide an active ground floor
frontage to maintain the character and enhance the vitality of the Town C entre’s main
shopping streets.
W
hy we  have  taken this approach  
Widening the role of the Town C entre  / Enhanced Cultural Activities  
6.1.6 The Town Centre is fundamental to Warrington's identity and how the B orough  
functions.  Whilst retail and Town C entre uses are directed to appropriate locations 
in other policies of the Local Plan, this policy looks at embedding the particular 
character, developmen t and opportunity areas identified in the masterplanning 
work for the Town C entre that forms part of Warrington's economic growth and 
regeneration strategy (Warrington Means Business, 2017) in the Local Plan.  
6
.1.7 The Town Centre boundary has been revise d to take account of  the ability of the 
town centre to accommodate the need for main town centre uses and to enable 
new development or the redevelopment of under -utilised space .  The revised 
defined Town Centre on the Policies Map now reflects the boundary  of the 
Warrington Town Centre SPD (2021).  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
77 
6.1.8 The NPPF (paragraph 86) requires planning p olicies to support the role of Town 
Centres by taking a positive approach to their growth, management and adaptation.  
 6.1.9 Paragraph 86 (f) of the NPPF recognises  that residential development often plays an 
important ro le in ensuring the vitality of Town C entres and encourages residential 
development on appropriate sites.  
 
6.1.10  Warrington Town Centre will be the primary focus for 'main Town C entre uses' 
which inc lude retail, leisure, office, cultural, entertainment and tourism related 
uses.  The Town Centre is being promoted as an office location and in this regard 
will play an important part in helping to support economic growth.  
 6.1.11  It is proposed that the wider Town Centre will increasingly become a focus for high density urban living and the hub of the Town’s cultural life.  It is intended that the 
Town Centre will be a vibrant and colourful heart to Warrington and its wider sub-region.  The redevelopment o f town centre brownfield sites is seen as important in 
delivering the extra homes needed across the borough.  The Council’s focus through 
the Warrington Town Centre SPD is on liveability for both future and present residents of the  town.   To do this the SPD guidance is forward thinking and 
concerned to ensure quality design, quality home space, good private and community amenity space, an improved public environment and sustainable 
development and living.  The appeal for the town centre sho uld be across the 
generations so that all can live and work together in an attractive environment that 
offers a quality choice of accommodation.  
 6.1.12 The leisure based Time Square development which was completed in 2020 i s an 
important step in the evolution of Warrington Town Centre.   As is the promotion of 
the Stadium Quarter which is close to Warrington Central Station and the bus interchange thereby providing sustainable transport links.  
 6.1.1 3 The Local Transport Plan (LTP4) seeks to support the re genera tion of the T own 
Centre through a “Town Centre Area Travel Plan” that will deliver a range of 
sustainable travel initiatives .  The First and Last Mile Transport Masterplan 
(FLMTM), which was developed in line with the LTP4’s aims, supports a variety of 
cultural opportunities on offer in the Town Centre through a range of sustainable 
travel initiatives which will support greening of the streets, reduced traffic in the 
town centre core, pedestrian and cyclist priority and reduced car parking.  The overa ll environment of the town centre will improve making it better to live, work 
and enjoy all the town centre has to offer.  
 6.1.1 4 Likewise, the current discussions about the nationally important rail improvements through HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail pr ovide the opportunity for the 
transformation of Warrington Bank Quay rail station to become a hub of north south and east west express rail connections.  This will further reinforce Warrington 
and its Town Centre as a nationally important place to live and  do business.  
  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
78Key Development Sites / Optimising Development Potential  
6.1.15 The priorities set out within Policy TC1 are to address  underused or underutilised 
areas where either comprehensive redevelopment or selective regeneration would 
improve both the areas themselves , benefit the Town Centre as a whole and 
function well with other areas.  
6.1.1 6 Se
ction 11 of the NPPF requires pla nning polices to promote the effective use of 
land in meeting an authorities needs for homes and other uses.  In particular, 
promoting and supporting the development of under -utilised land and buildings and 
suitable brownfield land is encouraged.  
6.1.1 7 In 
addition, making the most efficient use of land where there is an existing or 
anticipated shortage of land for meeting identified housing needs by ensuring that 
developments make optimal use of the potential for each site through the use of minimum dens ity standards is encouraged ( paragraph s 124 and 125  of the NPPF).  
6.1.1 8 In 
order to respond to these requirements, the Council has sought to maximise the 
capacity of the existing urban area to accommodate new development when identifying land to meet Warrington’s housing and employment needs.  The 
detailed masterplanning work that has been undertaken has identified significant 
additional capacity that can be delivered through the Council’s regeneration plans for the Town Centre, including the potential  for high density development and taller 
buildings .  Any development however should have regard to the design and amenity 
requirements as set out in the Warrington Town Centre SPD and meet the se 
standards  as a priority . 
Figure
 7 – Town Centre Masterplan C haracter Areas  (Extract from Town Centre 
SPD)  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
79 
 
6.1.19 The NPPF requires plans to provide a positive vision for the future of each area and to be prepared in a way that is aspirational but deliverable (paragraphs 15 and 16) .  
The Council’s economic and regeneration strategy and associated masterplanning 
work seeks to deliver the  Council’s aspirations for the Town Centre and surrounding 
areas and contribute to making the most effective use of land.  Therefore, any development proposals that wo uld compr omise the delivery of  this vision and the 
ability to maximise its development potential will not be supported.  
  
Improving the Town Centre’s Environment  
6.1.20  The River Mersey runs through the heart of the Town Centre, but like many places Warrington has in the past turned its back on its river.  It is proposed that Warrington will rediscover that it is a waterfront town through the redevelopment of sites along its riverfront and the provision of improved waterfront open spaces and walkways and cycle routes.  It will celebrate its river and will create new 
environments for living and doing business in the hear t of the T own.  
 
6.1.21  The Town Centre has an abundance of fine historic buildings and spaces.  For example Bridge Street, Palmyra Square, Queens Gardens, Bank Park and the Town Hall, the Transporter Bridge, together with the fine spires of its churches and important historic assets that people enjoy and reflect the character of the Town.  It is proposed that these assets be conserved  and their settings positively enhanced as 
part of the regeneration of the Town Centre.  
 6.1.2 2 Whilst, steps have been taken to improve the public realm previously, this has been fragmented and it is important that all development opportunities to improve  the 
Town C entre and the way it functions are not missed.  Such opportunities should 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
80look wider that the immediate site boundary and consider heritage issues as well as 
the contribution any development can make to the quality of the wider area, public realm and any gateways or routes.  
Retail Development in the Town Centre  
6.1.23 Warrington’s designation as a New Town in the 1970s le d to significant growth in 
the T own’s  population and expansion in local employment and the decentralisation 
of retailing to district centres  in suburban locations.  Following this, out of centre 
retailing on employment land at Gemini and along  Winwick Road was permitted.  
Whilst this was  consistent with the policy approach at that time, these 
developments now compete directly wi th the  Town Centre and the continued 
development of such uses in peripheral locations along with the expansion of on -
line retailing pose a significant  threat to the vitality and viability of the Town Centre. 
Consequently, the previous plan (the Local Plan Core Strategy) sought to resist this trend and there is now an increasing need  to refocus retail and other uses towards 
the Town Centre and build on the strength of the Golden  Square Shopping Mall and 
the Br idge Street Quarter/Time Square .  This is supported by the Council’s updated 
Retail Needs Assessment ( 2021 ). 
6.1.24  Withi
n the Town Centre retail development will be focused in the expanded Primary 
Shopping Areas (PSA), which incorporates the Time Square regeneration scheme 
that has recently been completed. 
Key Evid
ence 
•National
 Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Retail Needs Assessment  (2021)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Other Pl
anning Documents  
•WBC De
sign and Construction SPD  (2010)
•Planning Obligations SPD (2017)
•Warrington Town Centre SPD (2021)
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•Warri
ngton Means Business (20 20)
•Warrington Town  Centre Masterplan ( 2020)
•Local Transport Plan 4 (LPT4)  (2019)
•First and Last Mile Transport Masterplan (FLMTM) (2021)
•Public Art Strategy
Delivery
 Partners  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
81•Private Sector
•Public Sector
•Homes England
•Warrington & Co
•Warrington Cultural Commission
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
827 Policies Relating to Objective W4 
Objective W4 : To provide new infrastructure and services to support Warrington’s growth; 
address congestion; promote safer and more sustainable travel; and encourage active and 
healthy lifestyles.  
7.1 Sustainable Travel and Transport  
7.1.1  With 
the development of Warrington through the New Town era, came the over 
reliance on the private car as the favoured mode of transport for the Borough’s 
residents.  As the Town has grown  over time, the supporting highway infrastructure 
has not kept pace with the demand for trave l, leading to many locations where 
there is significant traffic congestion (with its consequential environmental impacts).  
7.1.2  T he 
proposed level of housing and employment growth across the Borough over the 
plan period means that there is a critical need to address this dependency on the 
private car and increase the  use of public transport, cycling and walking , as 
alternative ways to travel as well as the need for significant investment in 
supporting infrastructure .  There is also opportunity to minimise the need to travel 
by providing local facilities and services alongside new development.   
7.1.3  Goo
d transport links are crucial for a successful economy, a thriving town and 
villages, and for giving a good quality of life to local residents. The  challenge for the 
Local Plan is therefore to address any identified shortfalls in infrastructure  
provision , improve connectivity  and network efficiency  to support economic 
growth, whilst reducing the need for travel  by private car, improving safety, tackling 
air quality, encouraging active life styles, contributing towards the Climate Change agenda ; and supporting the transformational change in Warrington’s transport  
networks and services, as set out in the Council’s Local Transport Plan 4 (LTP 4) . 
Policy INF1  – Sustainable Travel and Transport  
To deliver the Council objectives of  improving the safety and efficiency of the transport 
network, tackling  congestion , reducing carbon  emissions and improving air quality , 
promoting sustainable transport options, reducing the need to travel  by private car  and 
encouraging healthy lifestyles, the Council will  e’xpect development  to: 
1.General Transport Principles :
a.Be located in sustainable and accessible locations, or in locations that can be made
sustainable and accessible ;
b.Ensur e priority  is given to walking, cycling and public transport within its design , and
reduc ing the need to travel  by private car;
c.Provide infrastructure for the charging of plug -in and other ultra -low emission vehicles, in
line with the Council’s Parking Standards SPD (2015) ;
d.Support proposals that reduce the level of trips made by single occupancy cars;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
83e.Consider demand management measures including the effective allocation of road space
in favour of public transport, pedestrians and cyclists;
f.Mitigat e its impact(s) or improve the performance of Warrington’s Transport Network,
including the Strategic Road Network, by deli vering site specific infrastructure which will
support the proposed level of development ;
g.Ensure traffic generated by development is appropriate to the type and nature of the
routes available and that there is no advers e impact on the local community;
h.Improv e and develop appropriate road, rail and water freight transport routes and
associated multi modal freight transport facilities in order to assist in the sustainable and
efficient movement of goods , in accordance with other relevant Local Plan policies ;
i.Consider the impacts on the wider region’s Strategic Road Network and w ork with
adjoining Local Planning Authorities and wider stakeholders to assess the impacts of
transport initiatives outside of the Borough, where impacts have been identified and need
to be mitigated ; and
j.Consider how development can be futureproofed, through the provision of measures  to
support new and emerging technologies, such as Autonomous Vehicles.
2.Improv e Walking and Cycling  Facilities  (Active Travel)  including :
a.Give a high priority  to the needs and safety of pedestrians and cyclists in new
developments, through the provision of high quality cycling and walking network s that
seamlessly integrate with existing networks ;
b.Improv e way finding (including route signage );
c.Enhanc e  and develop  integrated networks of continuous, attractive and safe networks
for walking and cycling including well designed  and improve d  roads, Rights of Way and the
Greenway Network (as shown on the adopted Policies Map). This should include
appropriate segregation  of users and high priority should be given to users at junctions.
Where appropriate, the Council will consider the use of planning conditions or planning
obligations to secure the required improvements ;
d.Increas e accessibility for all members’ of society through improvements and the provision
of new infrastructure to make the most of potential environmental, social and health
benefits;
e.Give priority to routes linking residential areas (especially those in recog nised areas of
deprivation ) with employment areas, transport interchanges and hubs, schools, Warrington
Hospital and other local services and facilities;
f. supporting the provision of new or improved routes between Warrington and surrounding
local authority areas; and
g.Provid e high quality  secure  and conveniently located bicycle  parking facilities at new
developments, at transport inte rchanges and hubs, the T own Centre and community
facilities.
3.Improve Public Transport Including:
a.Secur e improvements to  public transport infrastructure and services (to include bus, rail,
taxi and private hire)  in partnership, where appropriate  with operators and delivery
partners;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
84b.Be locat ed in areas with easy access to high quality and regular public t ransport  services ,
to ensure  public transport is a viable and attractive option by integrating the development
with existing public transport infrastructure and services;
c.Providing additional public transport infrastructure and services that are related in scale
to the proposed development where existing facilities are not available or are in need of
improvement or an appropriate subsidy to help mitigate the impacts of the  proposed
development ;
d.Consider options to enhance Bus Priority at junctions and the provision of dedicated  bus
lanes;
e.Support proposals for new public transport networks and services, such as future Mass
Transit systems  and low or zero emission veh icles ;
f.Support proposals for rail infrastructure and services and the provision of rail facilities as
appropriate;  and
g.Engage in proposals for the delivery of High Speed Rail and Northern Powerhouse Rail.
4.Protect future re -use of disused rail corridors
a.Development will not be permitted on former railway lines for any use that will inhibit the
re-use of that area for future transport improvements. Development proposals in the
vicinity of former railway lines should demonstrate that they will not prejudice the potential
for the re use of those areas for transport objectives, including the provision of public
transport and sustainable transport schemes and / or corridors to support the sustainable
growth of the Borough.
5.Improve Freight Transport  Provision including:
a.Provide  new overnight parking facilities, in accordance with other relevant Local Plan
policies, w here there is an identified need for the provision of overnight lorry parking
facilities, due to a lack of local provision, or where it has been established that unauthorised
or inappropriate parking is causing a nuisance;
b.Where new or expanded distribution centres are being proposed, they should include
adequate lorry parking to meet the number of vehicle movements proposed, to ensure
parking is available on site to cater for the anticipated use ; and
c.Ensur e appropriate routes are utilised, provided or improved so that there is no adverse
impact on residential roads or neighbouring occupiers .
6.Sustainable Transport of Minerals and Waste
a.Developers will be encouraged to transport minerals and waste via the most sustainable
transport mode ( e.g rail and water) wherever practicable.
b.Where this is not feasible ( e.g. the development is located too far from rail, river or canal
links to make using them economical) or would be so costly as to render the minerals or
waste development unviable, proposals  for development involving the transport of minerals
or waste by road  will be supported  where the applicant can clearly demonstrate that:
The use of more sustainable transport modes is not practicable; and  
The proposed access arrangements would be safe and appropriate to the proposed  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
85development and the highway network is able to accommodate the traffic 
generated without having an unacceptable detrimental impact on road safety or an  
unacceptable  impact on the environment or local residents.  
7.Transport Assessments and Travel Plans
All major development proposals that are likely to generate significant movements  will be 
accompanied by a Transport Assessment and a Travel Plan in line with Council guidance 
which will address the following requirements:  
a.That the proposed development will not result in an unacceptable impact on safety ;
b. That trips generated by the development can adequately be served by Warrington’s
Transport Network, including the Strategic Road Network;
c.Identify where there are any significant effects on Warrington’s Transport Network
and/or the environment and ensure  that appropriate  mitigation measures including the
required infrastructure are identified and in pla ce before the development is brought into
use;
d.Show how the Transport Assessment and associated Travel Plan have demonstrated how
the proposed development will link into and enhance existing walking, cycling or public
transport infrastructure;
e.Commit to the implementation of a series of  measures  and initiatives  to facilitate and
encourage the use of sustainable travel (walking, cycling or public transport use); and
f.Developments will be required to monitor the effectiveness of the travel plan and the
traffic generated by that development and share this data with the Local Authority, on an
agreed annual basis.
Why we
 have taken this approach  
7.1.4  Th
e National Planning Policy Framework (20 21) states that transport issues should 
be considered from the earliest stages of Plan-making and development proposals, 
so that:  
•The poten
tial impacts of development on transport networks can be addressed;
•Opportunities from existing or proposed transport infrastructure, and changing
transport technology and usage, are realised – for example in relation to the
scale, location or density of development that can be accommodated;
•Opportunities  to promote walking, cycling and public transport use are
identified and pursue d;
•The environmental impacts of traffic and transport infrastructure can be
identified, assessed and taken into account – including appropriate
opportunities for avoiding and mitigating any adverse effects, and for net
environmental gains; and
•Patterns of movement, streets, parking and other transport considerations are
integral to the design of schemes, and contribute to making high quality places.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
867.1.5  Investment in a high quality public realm linking housing, employment and town 
and village  centres encourages people to walk and cycle and positively manages 
vehicular access that enables more sustainable patterns of travel. Well- designed 
places with excellent public realm can quickly establish the key function of a place, therefore promoting a nd encouraging more sustainable lifestyles.  
7.1.6  To 
effectively influence an individual’s choice about their mode of travel, a range of 
options must be available that provide accessible, attractive, safe and reliable 
alternative options in respect of cost, time and convenience. Public transport has a 
vital role to play in planning for sustainability and future needs by facilitating 
sustainable developments, as well as by encouraging a modal shift towards low 
carbon transport. An increase in the number of shorter journeys made on foot and 
bicycle will contribute towards sustainability by reducing carbon emissions, as well 
as being beneficial for health and tackling congestion.  
7.1.7  Section 9 of the NPPF  (2021) stresses the importance of sustainable transport and 
how this should be promoted through plan making and decision taking.  Paragraph 110 of the NPPF identifies that when assessing sites for allocation for development 
in plans or specific applications for development appropriate opportunities for the 
use of sustainable transport modes for the movement of goods or people should be promoted.  In addition, paragraph 5 of the National Planning Policy for waste (DCLG, 2014) requires Waste Planning Authorities wh en assessing the suitability of sites 
and/or areas for new or enhanced waste management facilities to consider (amongst other things) the capacity of existing and potential transport infrastructure to support the sustainable movement of waste, and products  arising 
from resource recovery and to seek when practicable and beneficial the use of modes other than road transport.  
7.1.8  Whilst, road haulage is likely to remain the predominant mode of transport for minerals or waste in many instances, planning applications for mineral and waste development will be expected to show that potentially more sustainable non road-based options for transporting minerals have been considered.  
7.1.9  Whe
re road traffic is unavoidable all attempts should be made to avoid resid ential 
and minor roads. It would not be desirable to allow proposals which could exacerbate any existing transport impacts or create unacceptable new impacts. The transport implications of the proposed development will be taken into account including the s uitability of the road network to accommodate the traffic that would 
be generated and the effect on highway safety. It is important to ensure that the 
effects of traffic generated by minerals or waste developments are minimised, 
particularly in relation to  the effects on local communities, the environment and the 
local road network.  
7.1.10  Dev
elopment will only be permitted where Travel Plans and Transport 
Assessments/Transport Statements are agreed and there is adequate provision for existing or planned t ransport infrastructure and other measures.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
877.1.11  A Travel Plan is essentially an action plan designed to help organisations implement 
measures to reduce the need for travel and to facilitate and encourage the remainder to travel more sustainably. It sho uld help to reduce local traffic 
congestion, car parking problems and help to promote healthy lifestyles, economic growth and environmental improvements.  
7.1.12  Fo
r any new development, it is important to encourage sustainable travel options 
from day one of occupation before car -based travel habits become established. 
Travel Plans can be origin -based (Residential Travel Plans) or destination -based 
(Workplace / Business Travel Plans).  
7.1.13  Wh
ere there are major development proposals close to the Council ’s boundary, the 
Council will ensure that the cross border impacts are considered as part of the 
Transport Assessment and liaise with the neighbouring transport authority  and 
Highways England, as required .  
Key Evi
dence 
•Nation
al Planning Policy Framework  (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC LTP 4  (201 9)
•Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan (2019)
•Warrington Multi -Modal Transport Model (2016)
•Transport for the North’s Strategic  Transport Plan (2018)
•WBC Highway Design Guide Notes
•WBC Parking Standards SPD (2015)
•National Planning Policy for Waste (Oct 2014)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•Climate Emergency Declaration WBC
Counci
l Wide  Strategies  
•Warringt
on Means Business
Deliver
y Partners  
•Private
 Sector  Stakeholders
•Public Sector  Stakeholders
•Neighbouring local authorities
•Sustrans
•Highways England
•Network Rail
•Public Transport operators
•Transport for the North
•Cheshire and Warrington LEP
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
887.2 Transport  Safeguarding  
7.2.1  The
 proposed levels of housing and employment growth across Warrington will 
result in an increasing number of trips being made by all transport modes to, from, 
and within the Borough.  Good transport links are crucial for a successful economy, a 
thriving Borough , and for giving a good quality of life to local residents.  It is vital that 
improvements are made to our highway and transport networks to be able to accommodate these additional trips.   
7.2.2  The 
development of new transport infrastructure will require land. It is the role of 
the Local Plan to ensure that the land we are likely to require to enhance our transport network is safeguarded and protected from development until suitable transport improvements can be delivered in an appropriate and timely manner.  
Policy INF2 - Transport Safeguarding 
General Safeguarding Principles  
1.The Council will support priorities and improvements set out in the Local Transport Plan
and other delivery documents by ensuring development will not prejudice the
implementation of proposed transport schemes and projects that require land beyond the
limits of the public highway.
Safeguarded Land and Schemes  
2.The Council will safeguard land for the following schemes, as shown on the Policies Map:
a.Bridgefoot  Link (formerly known as Bridgefoot Bypass), providing improved access
between development sites to the north end of Centre Park, Warrington Bank Quay station
and the wider Town C entre ;
b.A new or replacement high -level crossing of the Manchester Ship Canal between Ackers
Road, Stockton Heath and Station Road, Latchford;
c.Warrington East Multi -Modal Corridor improvement  (part of the former safeguarding
known as Long Lane Diversion) , connecting Birchwood to Central Warrington via Birchwood
Way, to allow future highway and public transport improvements to be delivered to support
Warrington’s growth ; and
d.Warrington Western link .
3.These and additional schemes will be tested using the Council’s Multi Modal Transport
Model  and any  additional land considered necessary  will be safeguarded via a future review
of the Local Plan.
Why we h
ave taken this approach  
7.2.3  The
 National Planning Policy Framework (201 9) states that transport issues should 
be considered from the earliest stag es of plan -making and development proposals, 
so that:  
•The pote
ntial impacts of development on transport networks can be addressed;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
89•Opportunities from existing or proposed transport infrastructure, and changing
transport technology and usage, are realise d – for example in relation to the
scale, location or density of development that can be accommodated;
•Opportunities to promote walking, cycling and public transport use areidentified and pursued;
•The environmental impacts of traffic and transport infra structure can be
identified, assessed and taken into account – including appropriate
opportunities for avoiding and mitigating any adverse effects, and for net
environmental gains; and
•Patterns of movement, streets, parking and other transport considerati ons are
integral to the design of schemes, and contribute to making high quality places.
7.2.4  Th
e National Planning Policy Framework  (2021) states that planning policy should 
identify and protect, where there is robust evidence, sites and routes which could 
be critical in developing infrastructure to widen transport choice and realise opportunities for large scale development.  
7.2.5  Th
e sch emes detailed within Policy INF2  (and illustrated in Figures 8 to 11  below)  
have been identified as being necessary to facilitate the proposed housing and economic growth in Warrington. If the identified improvements are to be delivered in the future it is  vital that the land that they require be protected from 
development by other uses.  
Figur
e 8 – Bridgefoot Link  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
90Figure 9  – High Level Ship Canal Crossing  
Figur
e 10  – Warrington East Multimodal Corridor  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
91Figu
re 11  – Warrington Western Link  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
927.2.6  Using
 the Multimodal Transport Model to inform future reviews of the Local Plan 
will provide the robust evidence base we need to safeguard any additional land for 
transport schemes.  
Key Eviden
ce 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Local Transport Plan 4 (LTP4) (2019)
•Warrington Multi -Modal Transport Mode l (2021)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
(2021)
•SA 
Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
Council W
ide Strategies  
•Warrington
 Means Business
Delivery P
artners  
•Private Se
ctor Stakeholders
•Public Sector  Stakeholders
•Highways England
•Public Transport Operators
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
937.3 Warrington’s Utilities , Telecommunications  and Broadband  
7.3.1  Ut
ility infrastructure encompasses services such as water supply, sewerage 
treatment, electricity, gas, and telecommunications, including the provision of 
Broadband services .  Responsibility for the supply and maintenance of existing 
utility services rests largely with statutory undertakers.  
7.3.2  The
 provision of new and supporting utilities, considering connect ions to existing 
utility infrastructure, exploring  spare capacity  and the required  additional capacity, 
is an essential element of the Borough’s future development needs .  
7.3.3  Pr
oviding and future proofing telecommunications  infrastructure is an essential 
element of delivering sustainable development and infrastructure needs to respond 
to the social, economic and environmental needs of the local community and businesses within the Borough that depend on it on a daily basis.  
7.3.4  Ad
vanced Telecom munications have the ability to transform people’s lives , the 
economy, and need to be an integral part of the growth and development proposals for the Borough, to ensure Warrington’s residents and businesses can prosper and grow as required.  
Policy INF3 – Utilities , Telecommunications  and Broadband  
General Principles  - All Utilities  
1.All development proposals must demonstrate that engagement has taken place with the
required Statutory Undertakers  and Infrastructure providers , and provide a strategy for  how
they will connect to public utilities infrastructure  and or deliver the required infrastructure
to support development , these  include:
a.Water;
b.Sewer age and surface water drainage ;
c.Gas;
d.Electricity ; and
e.Telecommunications  including Broadband.
2.The Council will support the installation of existing and emerging telecommunications
technology in new residential and employment development, to improve the connectivity of
the population, support business growth and facilitate  home working.
3.Developers will be required to work with the Council and appropriate providers to deliver
the necessary physical infrastructure and networks as an integral part of all new
developments, taking into account the need to ‘future proof’ development to accommodate
emerging technologies.   Developers will be required to undertake  early dialogue with
infrastructure providers to identify the infrastructure needs arising from new development
and ensure that these are addressed through building design, utility networks and
connections in time to serve the proposed development.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
944.On large development sites or sites developed on a phased basis, applicants will be
required to ensure that the delivery of development is guided by site wide strategies for
infrastructure (e.g. foul, surface water and clean water) which ensure coordination between
phases of development over lengthy time periods and by numerous developers.   Conditions
or planning obligations may be used to secure these phasing a rrangements.
Development Proposals  in the V icinity of U tilities  Infrastructure  
5.Development will not be permitted in the vicinity of sewage treatment works, high
pressure oil or gas pipelines, or other sensitive installations, where they would present an
unacceptable loss of amenity or risk to those using the development, or sterilise the future
expansion or operation of an existing facility .  Applicants will be expected to submit
appropriate information to demonstrate that the proposed development will be acceptable
and if necessary provide suitable mitigation measures where development is proposed in
the vicinity of such installations.
6. Deve lopment proposals for new , expanded  or improved utility service infrastructure
providing essential services and facilities, including electricity supply, gas or heating supply,
water supply and waste water management, that comply with other relevant Plan p olicies
will be permitted provided they can demonstrate that there is an identified need for such a
facility within the Plan area, which cannot be met through existing facilities and that they
minimise environmental harm, and provide adequate mitigation measures, in light of
operational requirements and technical limitations.   Development proposals at existing
utility sites in the Green Belt in the form of infilling or redevelopment, will be supported
where they are needed to respond to future growth and environmental needs  and accord
with national and local policies .
7. Development proposals should ensure suitable access is maintained for water supply and
drainage infrastructure.  Development layouts will be expected to be designed to take these
into account and applicants may be required to submit construction management plans and
details of any protection provisions to ensure the integrity of the water and sewerage assets
are maintained both during and after construction.
8. Development layouts should consider the proximity of proposed dwellings to foul water
pumping stations and allow for a distance of 15 metres from the boundary of the curtilage
of the dwellings to reduce the risk of loss of amenity associated with the operation of the
pumping station.
Development Proposals (Telecommunications)  
9. The Council will support applications for prior approval and proposals for commercially
operated or public service telecommunications equipment provided that they comply with
the relevant health and safety guidelines and satisfy the following criteria:
a. Proposals are supported by the necessary evidence to justify the proposed development;
b. There is no reasonable possibility of sharing existing facilities in the locality (either in
terms of antennae, buildings or sites);
c. In the case of radio masts, there is no reasonable and more appropriate possibility of
erecting antennae on an existing building or other structure;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
95d. There is no unacceptable harm to residential amenity, the character and appearan ce of 
the area, the street scene, a heritage asset , pedestrian movement  or the satisfactory 
functioning of the highway ; and  
e. If the site, of necessity, is in a prominent or open location, all practicable measures have 
been taken in the design and positio ning of the proposal to minimise any such harm.  
 
10. Where the proposal complies with health and safety guidelines but the above criteria 
cannot be met, the Council will need to be satisfied that there are overriding technical or 
operational considerations  to justify the grant of planning permission.  
 
Development Proposals (Broadband Provision)  
11. All new residential and commercial development must be served by high speed 
Broadband, or if this is not feasible at the time of the development undertake all reasonable 
actions to enable a high speed Broadband connection at a future date , unless it can be 
demonstrated through evidenced consultation with Broadband providers that this would 
not be possible, practical or economically viable.   
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 7.3.5  In line with the requirements of the NPPF (20 21), strategic policies should set out an 
overall development strategy , and mak e sufficient provision for the delivery of 
utilities ’ infrastructure , whilst ensuring the amenity protection of e xisting and future 
user of developments .  
 7.3.6  The agent of change principle, with the publication of the revised NPPF  (2021), is 
now a feature of national planning policy .  The NPPF  (2021) states that planning 
policies and decisions should ensure that new development can be integrated effectively with existing businesses and community facilities (including places of worship, pubs, and music venues and sports clubs).  Existing businesses and  facilities 
should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of development permitted after they were established.  The paragraph goes on to 
confirm that where an existing business or community facility could have a significant adverse effect on new development (including changes of use) in its 
vicinity, the applicant (or agent of change) should be required to secure suitable mitigation before the development has been completed.   This is of key relevance to 
ensuring the ongoing operation of existing utilities infrastructure  in the Borough . 
 7.3.7  The level of proposed growth in Warrington will require an increase in waste water treatment capacity.  Discussions with United Utilities, the only sewerage undertaker operating in the plan area,  have not revealed an operational need to identify new 
sites for waste water t reatment works, however, UU has  indicated that there is 
likely to be a need to increase the capacity of existing treatment facilities in the south of the Borough in order to cater for the proposed growth in these areas.  
 7.3.8  The NPPF  (2021) also advises that adva nced, high quality and reliable 
communications infrastructure is essential for economic growth and social well-being. Planning policies and decisions should support the expansion of electronic 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
96communications networks, including next generation mobile technology (such as 
5G) and full fibre high speed broadband connections. Policies should set out how 
high quality digital infrastructure, providing access to services from a range of providers, is expected to be delivered and upgraded over time; and should prioritise full fibre connections to existing and new developments (as these connections  will, 
in almost all cases, provide the optimum solution).  
7
.3.9 It is therefore im portant that new developments must be 'future -proofed' with 
appropriate digital infrastructure that will meet existing and future communication needs. It is essential that the Council works with developers to make sure that the appropriate digital infrastructure is incorporated, including 4G and 5G networks (or future technologies as they become available).  
K
ey Evidence 
•N
ational Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (2021)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
C
ouncil Wide Strategies  
•W
arrington Means Business
D
elivery Partners  
•U
tility Providers
•Private Sector Stakeholders
•Public Sector Stakeholders
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
977.4 Warrington’s Community Facilities  
 
7.4.1  The provision of appropriate community facilities creates both sustainable communities and improves the overall health and wellbeing of residents.  For this reason Policy INF4 seeks to protect existing facilities and services as a starting point, 
and where  facilities are to be replaced with other development then alternative 
provision should be made.  
 
7.4.2  The Policy also seeks to ensure that adequate new facilities are provided, where 
necessary, in both existing and new communities, in line with the devel opment 
proposed in the Local Plan.  The extent of new infrastructure requirements is set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, with community facilities making up a big part of the type of infrastructure required – from schools and health facilities to 
leisure  and open space provision.  
 
Policy INF4 - Community Facilities  
 
General Principles  
1. The Council and its partners will seek to  promote health and wellbeing and reduce health 
inequalities within the Borough by supporting the development of new, or the co -location 
and co -ordination  of existing education, health, social, cultural and community facilities.  
Where possible such facilities should be located in defined  centres  or neighbourhood hubs . 
(See Policy DEV5 Retail and Leisure Needs ). 
 
2. The Council will: 
 
a. Safeguard existing social and community infrastructure, subject to a continued need or 
likely future need or demand for the facility in question; and require alternative comparable 
or improved provision where a development scheme would result in the loss of important 
social and community infrastructure;  
b. Require the provision of new social and community infrastructure where a development 
would increase de mand for it beyond its current capacity or generate a newly arising need;  
c. In circumstances where new social or community infrastructure is required, ensure that 
this is provided close to the need arising, or where it is a larger facility which serves a wider 
population, in locations with good accessibility by walking, cycling and public transport;  
d. Require high quality and inclusive design of social or community infrastructure; and  
e. Promote the co -location and multi -functionality of social or community infrastructure.  
f. The Council will continue to support  the sustainability of local communities and  their  local 
economies by protecting existing facilities, particularly in  defined centres and in  the outlying 
inset and Green Belt settlements .  
 
New Hospital for Warrington  
3. The Council  recognises the need for and  supports the NHS Hospital Trust in the 
development of a new hospital for Warrington, either through redevelopment of the 
existing hospital site or on a new site.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
984.If a new site is the NHS Hospital Trust’ s preferred o ption, the Council will seek to allocate
a site for a new hospital in a future review of the Local Plan. The new site must be in a
location that provides ease of access for residents from across the Borough  and be well
served  by public transport.
W
hy we have taken this approach  
7
.4.3 Sustainable neighbourhoods require a range of services and facilities which are 
accessible. The NPPF (Paragraph 93 ) requires that Councils plan positively for the 
provision of social, recreational and cultural facilities and services the community 
needs.  The value of social interaction within communities is identified, along with supporting healthy lifestyles through the provision of appropriate facilities.  
7
.4.4 Some social and commu nity facilities are essential, whilst others play an important 
role in stimulating a sense of community and improving quality of life. For the purposes of the Local Plan, social and community uses are defined as public, private or community facilities including: community/meeting halls and rooms; health facilities; libraries; places of worship; bespoke premises for the voluntary sector; schools and other educational establishments; theatres and performance spaces, arts venues, museums, sport and leisure fac ilities ; parks and other publicly 
accessible open spaces, public houses, allotments, cemeteries and youth facilities.  
7
.4.5 Social and community facilities can also be linked to important local employment opportunities and this is particularly relevant fo r Warrington’s outlying settlements.  
7
.4.6 The management and protection of existing facilities is just as important as the assessment of the need for new provision.  Existing facilities which perform an important role in the local community should not be  lost without replacement 
provision. Where new or improved social or community infrastructure is deemed necessary to support a development, and where this by reason of its nature or scale cannot be provided for on- site or on other land controlled by the de veloper, the 
Council will expect contributions to secure the provision or improvement of a facility off -site.  
7
.4.7 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been prepared to support the Local Plan.  This 
identifies  the infrastructure required to support the proposed levels of 
development across the Borough.  It considers the provision of community facilities as well as broader physical infrastructure improvements.  See Policy INF5 . 
7
.4.8 The Council is working with a wide range of partners to ensure the appro priate 
provision of community facilities. A number of organisations have come together under the umbrella of ‘Warrington Together’ to promote coordinated service deliver and co -located services and facilities.  
7
.4.9 The health and social care system in W arrington, Warrington Together,  has 
confirmed the requirement for a new Hospital for Warrington. The current hospital is outdated and is not able to meet the future needs of Warrington’s growing and 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
99aging population. It is currently reviewing the business plan for the hospital in the 
context of wider NHS service delivery across the North West region and in terms of 
its relationship with the Warrington CCG. The Council is committed to working with 
the NHS Hospital Trust to deliver the new hospital either through redevelopment of the existing Lovely Lane Site or on a new site. This will be confirmed through a future review of the Local Plan.  
 7.4.10  Policy INF 4, along with Policy INF5,  provides the means of ensuring that the 
necessary infrastructure that has been identified through the IDP can be delivered.  This is essential in the context of the NPPF (2021).  
 Key Evidence  
• National Planning Policy Framework (2021 ) 
• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan (20 21) 
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 Delivery Partners  
 
• Public Sector  Partners  
• Warrington & Co  
• Livewire  
• Warrington Together  
• Warrington Clinical Commissioning Group 
• Halton and Warrington NHS Hospital Trust  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1007.5 Delivering  Warrington’s  Infrastructure  
7.5.1  Suff
icient and appropriate infrastructure is crucial to the well- being of communities. 
From transport infrastructure, healthcare, education and utilities, the delivery of 
well-planned infrastructure which takes account of current and future needs is a 
fundamental part of the plan making process.  
7.5.2  The 
provision of appropriate infrastructure is also essential for  Warrington’s  
continued growth which underpins the Local Plan’s  development  strategy to 203 8. 
New development can place a strain on existing infrastructure, but it also has the 
potential to provide or help provide new infrastructure, or to improve existing infrastructure and services.  
7.5.3  Pol
icy INF 5 seeks to ensure that demand and implications for infrastructure are 
identified and provided for in a timely manner.  
Policy INF5 - Delivering Infrastructure  
1.Development will be required to provide or contribute towards the provision of the
infrastructure needed to support it.
2.The Council will seek planning obligations  where development creates a requirement for
additional or improved services and infrastructure and/or to address the off -site impact of
development so as to satisfy other policy requirements. Planning contributions may be
sought to fund a single item of infrastructure or to fund part of an infrastructure item or
service, subject to statutory processes and regulations .
3.Where new infrastructure is needed to support development, the infrastructure must be
operational no later than the appropriate phase of development for which it is needed.
4. Obligations  will be negotiated on a site -by-site basis and will only be sought where these
are:
a.necess ary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;
b.directly related to the development; and
c.fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.
5.Appropriate matters to be funded by planning contributions include, but are not limited
to:
Affordable housing . 
Public realm improvements and creation, including public art . 
Improvements to Heritage Assets . 
Flood defence and alleviation schemes, including SuDS. 
Biodiversity enhancements.  
Open space, including green infrastructure and allotments . 
Transport improvements, including walking and cycling facilities . 
Education provision . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
101Utilities . 
Waste management . 
Health infrastructure . 
Sport, leisure, recreational, cultural and other social and community facilities . 
6. The Council will only consider the viability of development proposals at the planning
applications stage where:
a. required planning obligations are in additi on to those  considered as part of the Local
Plan ’s viability appraisal; or
b.where there  are exceptional site specific viability issues  not considered as part of the
Local Plan’s viability appraisal; or
c.where it can be clearly demonstrated, through a robust site -specific F inancial Viability
Assessment , that development would not be financi ally viable if full planning obligations
were sought.
In these cases, applicants should provide viability evidence through an ‘open book’ 
approach to allow for the proper review of evidence submitted and for reasons of 
transparency.   The Council will then  be able to balance the benefits of the proposals against 
any harm arising from not securing the full planning obligation requirements.   
7.Where the Council approves a development where it has been demonstrated that it is not
viable to provide the full planning obligation requirements, the Council will include a review
mechanism with in the S106  Agreement  to ensure that additional contributions are secured
should viability improve over time.
Why we
 have taken this approach  
7.5.4  It 
is crucial to the del ivery of the Local Plan that the necessary  infrastructure is 
provided  to support the level of growth identified  in a phased and co -ordinated 
manner, guided by the Infrastructure Development Plan (IDP) and any additional 
site specific requirements to support development proposals.  
7.5.5  The
 IDP identifies the social, environmental and economic infrastructure that will be 
required to support the development and gro wth set out in the Local Plan. The IDP 
is a ‘living document’ which will be updated over time.  
7.5.6  Infr
astructure can be provided directly by developers; or planning contributions can 
be used to deliver on or off -site infrastructure to address or mitigate the impacts of 
developments. Where appropriate i.e. where it is necessary to make the 
develo pment acceptable in planning terms, developers will be required to provide 
the necessary infrastructure or contribute to its provision through Section 106 contributions and/or the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) should the Council introduce it.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1027.5.7  On larger site allocations, including the proposed urban extensions (See Policies  
MD1 – MD6), the infrastructure requirements for each site are set out in detail, 
along with timescales for delivery. This is reflected in the IDP.  
7.5.8  The
 Council require s that new and improved social and community facilities, utilities 
and other infrastructure is provided to meet the needs of development in a timely 
manner so as to make a positive contribution to the creation of sustainable communities, promote social inc lusion and reduce deprivation.   
Development proposals will be expected to provide contributions towards various stages of the provision of infrastructure, as follows:  
•Initial
 costs e.g. design and development work; and/or
•Capital costs; and/or
•Ongoing revenue such as the management and maintenance of services and
facilities.
7.5.9  In a
ccordance with national policy and guidance,  infrastructure and viability 
considerations must be assessed in detail during the preparation of the Local Plan.  
As such the Council will only consider the viability of development at planning 
application stage in exceptional circumstances.   
7.5.10  In 
accordance with re vised guidance in the NPPF (2021) and accompanying PPG, the 
approach to viability is to be ‘open book’ and the  onus is on the applicant to 
demonstrate a change in circumstances since the Local Plan Viability Assessment has been carried out. In such cases, the Council will commission an independent review of the viability study, for which the applicant will bear th e cost.  
7.5.11  Whil
st the Council has not yet adopted a CIL Charging Schedule, this may  follow in 
due course and so the policy provides flexibili ty for it to be implemented.  When a 
Charging Schedule is in place, Section 106 agreements will continue to be  used for 
site specific contributions and affordable housing.  
7.5.12  A P
lanning Obligations Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) was adopted by 
the Council in January 2017.  This explains how developer contributions will be calculated. This will be updat ed following adoption of the Local Plan. 
Key Evid
ence 
•National
 Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Local Plan Viability Assessment  (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (20 21)
•Planning Obligations SPD (2017)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
103Council Wide Strategies  
•Local Transport Plan 4 (LTP 4) (2019)
•WBC SFRA Level 1 & 2 (2018)
•WBC Housing Strategy 
Delivery
 Partners  
•Private 
Sector
•Public Sector
•Warrington & Co
•CCG
•Education
•Highways
•Livewire
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1047.6 Aerodrome Safeguarding  (Manchester Airport)  
7.6.1 By virt
ue of its importance to the national air traffic system Manchester Airport is 
an officially safeguarded aerodrome and parts  of its safeguarded area fall within the 
Borough. This may influence the type of development allowed in certain areas, and 
in order to determine the safety implications of a proposal there is an established safeguarding process between local planning authorities and safeguarded Aerodromes.  
Policy INF6 – Aerodrome Safeguarding (Manchester Airport)  
General Principles  
1.Development that would adversely affect the operational integrity or safety of
Manchester Airport or Manchester Radar will not be permitted.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
7.6.2 The sa
feguarding zone for Manchester Airport is defined on a safeguarding map 
issued by the Civil Aviation Authority  (CAA). The CAA  define certain types of 
development that, by reason of their height, attraction to birds or inclusion of or effect upon aviation activity, require prior consultation with the Airport Operator or 
National Air Traffic Services Ltd.   
7.6.3 For Warrin
gton th is includes all buildings, structures, erections or works exceeding 
90m in height, any proposal within 13km of the aerodrome with the potential to 
attract birds (e.g. significant areas of landscaping, water bodies, nature reserves, bird sanctuaries, waste facilities, sewage works, mineral extraction or quarrying), all proposals connected with an aviation use within 13km of the aerodrome, and all applications for wind turbines throughout the whole of the Borough.  
7.6.4 Govern
ment advice in OPDM Circular 1/2003 ‘Advice to Local Planning Authorities 
on Safeguarding Aerodromes and Military Explosives Storage Areas’ sets out the detailed guidance on how safe and efficient operations can be secured.  
7.6.5 In acc
ordance with this circular, Manchester Airport is a statutory consultee for 
certain planning applications for developments that require safeguarding to protect the safety of the Airport’s operation.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan  (2021)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
105•OPDM Circular 1/2003 ‘Advice to Local Planning Authorities on Safeguarding
Aerodromes and Military Explosives Storage Areas’
Counci
l Wide Strategies  
•Warringt
on Means Business
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1068 Policies Relating to Objective W5
Objective W5 : To secure high quality design which reinforces the character and local 
distinctiveness of Warrington’s urban area, its countryside, its unique pattern of waterways 
and green spaces and its constituent settlements whilst protecting, enhancing and 
embracing  the Borough's historic, cultural, built and natural assets.  
8.1 W
arrington’s Places  
8
.1.1 The Borough of Warrington comprises a complex network of places, within which 
people exercise their choice of location for residence or business, and their 
destination for employment, shopping, education, health treatment, leisure, culture 
and entertainment.  
8
.1.2 Different areas within the Borough have different characteristics and differing needs 
and it is important to recognise this when considering the development priorities 
for Warrington up to 203 8. 
8
.1.3 Warrington’s places can be broken down into the following categories:  
•I
nner Warrington ;
•Sub-urban Warrington ;
•Countryside and s ettlements ; and
•Warrington’s visitor attractions.
F
igure 12  – Warrington’s Places  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1078.1.4  Thi
s policy sets out the unique attributes of these spatial areas , details the strategy 
for each one over the plan period  and promotes the preparation of Neighbourhood 
Plans to provide more detailed local policies for t hese areas . 
Policy DC1 - Warrington’s Places  
Inner Warrington  
1.The Inner Warrington Area is defined by  the six unparished wards of Orford, Fairfield  and
Howley, Poplars & Hulme,  Latchford East, Latchford West and Bewsey & Whitecross .
2.Development  in this area will be required  to:
a.Improve the overall environment of area through public realm improvements ;
b.Improve access to services and infrastructure;
c.Promote sustainable transport measures;
d.Promote access to green infrastructure;
e. Imp rove the housing offer to provide a range of tenures and types of dwellings in this
area;
f.Provide sufficient amounts and types of affordable housing in accordance with Policy
DEV2  to meet specific local needs ;
g.Provide new employment opportunities and training to local people;
h.Include high quality design and materials;
i.Not be detrimental to air quality and wider public health.
3.The Central Six Regeneration Masterplan sets out ambitions for a wide range of project s -
from parks to housing and air quality to employment - for the inner Warrington Wards ,
which together support residents’ ambitions for the  improvement of their localities .
Development proposals should address the priorities set out in the Masterplan.
The Town Centre  
4. Additional guidance on the design of new properties , the conversion of existing p roperty
and amenity provision and standards are provided in the Town Centre Supplementary
Planning Document which covers the town centre area.  Development proposals in this area
will be expected to meet the requirements of this document.
Suburban Warrington  
5.The many distinct parts of sub urban Warrington will be the focus for infill and small scale
development on brownfield and greenfield site s within the existing urban boundary.
6.Development in such areas will need to be in -keeping with the existing character  of the
area and be sustainable.
Warrington’s Circular Parklands  
7. The Council is committed to preserving and enhancing the Borough’s Circular Parklands
which surround the Inner Warrington area and are a key attribute to the Town and the
Town Centre.  The Council and its partners will continue to promote opportunities to join up
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
108this circular network more effectively and to make better use of it for amenity, cultural and 
leisure uses, as well as for sustainable transport.  
Countryside and Settlements  
8.The inset settlements of Burtonwood, Croft, Culcheth, Glazebury, Hollins Green,
Lymm/Oughtrington and Winwick will be protected in terms of their relationship with the
main urban area and their individual scale and function.
9.Appropriate and sustainable developm ent will be directed to the settlements on varying
scales reflecting existing services and infrastructure.  Outside of the existing settlement
boundaries, some new development will be accommodated  through release of Green Belt .
10.Areas of countryside  surrounding the  inset  settlements , including Green Belt
settlements,  will continue to be protected from inappropriate development in accordance
with their Green Belt designation  (See policy GB1).
Warrington’s Visitor Attractions  
Town Centre  
11.The Council and its partners will continue to promote the Town Centre as a leisure and
cultural destination and will ensure a range of uses are provided which cater for retail
needs, the leisure ( including night -time) economy, Town Centre living,  visitor
accommodation , commerce and enterprise, higher and further education and sporting
events/facilities. (See policy TC1).
Victoria Park  
12.The Council and its partners will look to preserve and enhance the unique characteristics
of Victoria Park.  Appropriate development  ancillary to the role of the park will be supported
where it:
a.Does not result in an unsubstantiated loss of green space or adversely affect the quality
and extent of sports, play and park facilities that create vibrancy and activity throughout the
day;
b.Makes the park more sustainable, viable and attractive;
c.Supports and does not impact upon the works undertaken by the Environment Agency’s
Flood Risk Management Strategy;
d.Preserves the flood management role of the park as part of the id entifi ed functional flood
plain;
e.Opens up access to and enjoyment of the River Mersey and riverside links through to the
Town Centre, the Waterfront and B lack Bear Park;
f.Improves the functionality and quality of Green Infrastructure; and
g.Preserves and enhances the historic interest of the park, and historic assets within,
including their setting, in accordance with national and local policies relating to Heritage
Assets.
13.Development in areas immediately surrounding the park should have regard to se curing
appropriate access and should deliver improvements to the park’s environment and
facilities where possible.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
10914.Victoria Park forms part of the functional flood plain in the Council’s Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment, as such any new or enhanced facilities within the park should be constructed
using flood resilient materials and design.
Walton Hall Estate  
15.Development proposals at Walton Hall Estate will be supported where they:
a.Preserve or enhance public access to the Estate;
b.Preserve or enhance the primary function of the Estate as a sport, recreation, leisure and
hospitality destination;
c.Do not conflict with the tranquil setting of the Gardens;
d.Conserve and enhance the historic environment;
e.Re-use existing facilities and buil dings where possible and appropriate;  and
f. Improve  the quality and range of amenities to diversify interest for visitors.
16.All proposals should also have regard to national and local policies relating to the Green
Belt (See Policy GB1 ) and the histor ic environment (See Policy DC2 ).
17.Proposals for uses other than recreation, leisure and hospitality will only be supported
where these are ancillary in nature and appropriate in scale and where proven critical to
supporting the Estate to become financi ally self -sustaining.
Gulliver ’s World  
18.The C ouncil will continue to support the operation of  Gulliver’s World  as a successful
regional attraction.
19.The maintenance and improvement of existing facilities  will be supported where this will
not have a detrimental impact on surrounding residential areas  and the local road network .
Neighbourhood Plans  
20.The Council will encourage the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans to  set Local Policies
and provide greater detail in relation to development priorities specific to particular areas
and local communities .
Why we
 have taken this approach  
8.1.5  Thi
s policy seeks to recognise the varying nature of the Borough in terms of existing 
development patterns within the urban area and outlying settlements , and also 
takes account of key tourist attractions .  Within each of  these  areas there are 
different priorities which need to be articulated through the Local Plan.  
8.1.6  The
 areas of Inner Warrington and S ub-urban Warrington are notably different in 
terms of t he built environment, levels of deprivation and health and well- being.  It is 
clear that particular focus is required in Inner Warrington to address some of the 
key issues here and the Central Six Regeneration Masterplan seeks to directly 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
110address these inherent problems . This is a Council approved document providing 
informal planning guidance. The Warrington Town Centre Supplementary Planning 
Document is an adopted planning document.  Through  its focus on liveability in the 
town centre it provides guidance on how health and well -being can be addressed 
through design in new development and conversion proposals  including  specific 
guidance on the expectations of the Council around open space provision, amenity 
and providing  good living and working conditions.  The Central Six Regeneration 
Masterplan and the Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document are therefore 
key in supporting policy objectives of DC1 for Warrington’s inner areas.  
8.1.7  Subur
ban Warrington varies in itself but the main thrust of the policy for these 
areas is to protect residential amenity  and ensure new development is in keeping 
with its established surroundings.  
8.1.8  Pol
icy DC1 recognises the varying scale and characteristics of Warrington’s 
settlements and the importance of the surrounding countryside. 
8.1.9  The 
policy seeks to provide broad strategic parameters and intentions for these 
areas whilst allowing for more detailed local policies through the production of Neighbourhood P lans or masterplans.  
8.1.10  For e
xample, Lymm is the largest of the settlements and it has a distinct identity 
which is largely determined by its plentiful heritage assets including the village centre which is a designated conservation area, the Bridgewater Canal which passes through the village and a range of Grade I and Grade II listed buildings.  Lymm Parish has been formally designated as a Neighbourhood Area and the Lymm Neighbourhood Plan Group are in the process of preparing a Neighbourhood Plan.  This will set more specific development parameters for the settlement and provide 
design guidance for specific development sites.  
8.1.11  The 
Council is committed to enhancing Warrington’s offer  in relation to visitor 
attractions, by enhancing and protecting existing attractions and creating additional visitor destinations.   The Council is also committed to enhancing the Town’s Circular 
Parklands which are a key attribute to Warrington and in particular the Town Centre .  Improved access to the Circular Parklands is important for amenity, cultural 
and leisure pu rposes but also from a sustainable transport perspective and in the 
context of the LTP4 ‘Last Mile’ programme.  
8.1.12  The
 intention for Warrington T own Centre is  for it  to become a visitor destination in 
its own right  by broadening the offer of leisure and cultural facilities which will 
com plement its retail offer.  The Town Centre is already undergoing significant 
change with the Times Square development well underway which will bring a cinema complex, improved and en larged market accommodation, offices and 
retail/leisure units.  Other parts of the Town Centre are also undergoing significant 
change such as the Stadium Quarter which will promote cultural events at the Warrington Wolves rugby stadium and will also see fu rther investment in 
educational and youth facilities.  Promoting more residential development in the 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
111Town Centre will further broaden its function and appeal as an important regional 
town.   The Town Centre Masterplan has been prepared to support this over all 
strategy and further detail is set out in Policy TC1.  Improving access to the Town 
Centre by sustainable transport modes will also be key to elevating its role as a 
destination.  
8.1.13  Vict
oria Park provides an important town park facility for the re sidents of 
Warrington, principally through its proximity to the Town Centre, its scale and its 
extensive and diverse range of sports and play facilities.  More recently, the use of 
the park has been further widened to include hosting music and other cultur al and 
leisure events.  The park has seen a significant amount of investment in recent years in relation to flood defence works and upgrading of facilities.  It is important that the park is protected and its current role is maintained and enhanced whereve r 
possible.  It is also essential that any new development is not detrimental to this important asset, whilst recognising that some improvements and development may be required within the park itself.  
8.1.14  Ther
e is recognition that ongoing improvements will necessary at Walton Hall 
Estate, which comprises of Walton Hall, Walton Park and Gardens, and Walton Municipal Golf Course,  in order to ensure that the full potential of the Estate’s 
assets are being realised and that ultimately the Estate can become financial ly self -
sustaining.  Policy DC1  seeks to promote the opportunity that the Walton Hall 
Estate presents alongside putting in place a framework to guide redevelopment proposals to ensure that any commercial activities intended to generate income do not undermine public access, the Estate’s existing function or its setting.  
8.1.15  Gulliv
er’s World is a much valued attraction within the Borough, it is has a wide 
regional catchment in terms of drawing visitors in to Warrington.  The Council will continue to support this attraction and work closely with the operator in relation to future expansion plans, whilst also  managing the interrelationship of this major 
attraction with  nearby communities.  
8.1.16  Nei
ghbourhood planning is not a legal requirement but a right which communities 
in England can choose to use.  Neighbourhood planning enables communities to play a much stronger role in shaping the areas in which they live and work and in supporting new development proposals.  A number of communities in Warrington 
have expressed an interest in bringing forward Neighbourhood Plans.  The Council 
will support neighbourhood planning groups to bring forward Neighbourhood Plans that are consistent with the Local Plan, including giving consideration to oppo rtunities for allocating small and medium sized sites suitable for housing in 
their area  in accordance with paragraph 70  of the NPPF.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance  (PPG)
•SFRA Level 1 and 2 (2018)
•Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Addendum (2021) 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
112•Local Housing Needs  Assessment  (2021)
•EDNA  (2021)
•Retail Study Update (2021 )
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Other Pl
anning Documents  
•WBC De
sign and Construction SPD  (2010)
•Warrington Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document (2021)
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•Cultural
 Framework
•Public Art Strategy
•Local Transport Plan 4 ( LTP4) (2019)
•Central Six Regeneration Masterplan  (2020)
•First and Last Mile Tran sport Masterplan (FLMTM) (202 1)
Delivery
 Partners  
•Private 
Sector
•Public Sector
•Cultural  Commission
•Warrington & Co
•Central Area Neighbourhood Board
•Neighbourhood Plan Groups
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1138.2 Warrington’s  Historic Environment  
8.2.1  Th
e evolution of Warrington has resulted in a valuable legacy of heritage assets 
throughout  the Borough. There are a number of Scheduled Monuments, Listed 
Buildings, Conservation  Areas  and a Registered Battlefield , as well as a large number 
of buildings with local architectural or historic interest .  
8.2.2  Po
licy DC2  seeks to ensure that the Borough’s historic environment is  protected, 
enhanced and proactively managed, whilst supporting appropriate, sustainable 
development.   
Policy DC2 - Historic Environment  
General Principles  
1.The Council will, through planning decisions and in fulfilling its wider functions,
proactively manage and work with developers, the local community and others to support
proposals which conserve or, where appropriate, enhance the historic environment of
Warrington.
2.Particular consideration will be given to ensure that the significance of those elements of
the historic environment which contribute most to the Borough’s distinctive identity and
sense of place are not harmed.  These include, but not excl usively :
a.Evidence of Roman activity such as the settlement at Wilderspool and the roads at
Appleton and Stretton.
b.Moated sites, country houses, farmhouses and associated outbuildings in the countryside
including Bradley Old Hall, Barrow Old Hall and Bewsey Old Hall.
c.The site of the Battle of Winwick, also known as the Battle of Red Bank, now a registered
Battlefield.
d.The Borough’s industrial heritage including the Bank Quay Transporter Bridge, Sankey
Canal, Bridgewater Canal and Manchester Ship Canal, Sankey Viaduct and other associated
infrastructure and buildings.
e.Places of worship of different denominations.
f.The range of civic and institutional buildings , including the Town Hall, Libraries and
Schools.
g.The town’s mid to late ninet eenth century terraces around Palmyra Square.
h.The buildings associated with the Borough’s role as a major centre for brewing including
the range and quality of its public houses.
i.Conservation Areas and Listed Buildings across the Borough.
j.Key cultural assets encompassing parklands, woodlands, landscapes, canals and riversides,
museums, libraries, art galleries, public art, food and drink, customs and traditions.
3.As well as fulfilling its statutory obligations, the Council will:
a.Seek to  identify, protect and enhance local heritage assets through the review and update
to its Local List;
b.Promote heritage -led regeneration including in relation to development opportunities;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
114c.Produce new C onservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans;
d.Develop a positive strategy to safeguard the future of any heritage assets that are
considered to be “at risk”;
e.Adopt a proactive approach to utilising development opportunities to increase the
promotion and interpretation of the Borough’s rich archaeological wealth; and
f.Develop a positive heritage strategy for the Borough.
Assessing Development Proposals  
4.Proposals affecting a designated heritage asset, or an archaeological site of national
importance,  should conserve those elements which contribute to its significance. Harm to
such elements will be permitted only where this is clearly justified and outweighed by the
public benefits of the proposal. Substantial harm or total loss to the significance of a
designated heritage asset (or an archaeological site of national importance) will be
permitted only in exceptional circumstances.  Where permission is granted for a
development which would result in the partial or total loss of a designated heritage asset ,
approval will be conditional upon the asset being fully recorded and the information
deposited with the Historic Environment Record (HER).
5.Proposals which would remove , harm or undermine the significance of a non -designated
heritage asset will only b e permitted where the benefits are considered sufficient to
outweigh the harm to the character of the local area.
6.Where the proposal affects (non- designated) archaeological sites of less than national
importance it should conserve those elements which contribute to their significance in line
with the importance of the remains. In those cases where development affecting such sites
is acceptable in principle, mitigation of damage will be ensured through the preservation of
the remains in situ as a preferred solution. When in situ preservation is not justified, the
developer will be required to make adequate provision for excavation and recording before
or during development, the findings of which should be deposited with the Historic
Environment Record.
7.Proposals within or affecting the setting of a Conservation Area will only be permitted
where it preserves or enhances the character and appearance of the area including those
elements which have been identified within the Conservation Area appraisal as  making a
positive contribution to the significance of that area.
8.All applications which affect a heritage asset should be accompanied by a Statement of
Significance which may form part of a Design and Access statement and/or a Heritage
Impact Assessme nt. This should provide the information necessary to assess the impact of
the proposals on the heritage asset and its setting including demonstrating how the
proposal has taken into account the elements that contribute to its significance , including
where relevant , its architectural and historic interest, character and appearance.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
8.2.3  The N
PPF (2021) identifies conservation and the enhancement of the historic 
environment as a strategic matter. It goes on to state at paragraph 1 90 that Plans 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
115should set out a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic 
environment, including heritage assets most at risk through neglect, decay or other threats.  
8.2.4  It 
is essential to define the key elements that contribute to the Borough’s historic 
environment to ensure they are preserved and where possible enhanced through new development. This is particularly important given the scale of new development proposed over the Plan Period.  
8.2.5  Th
ere are 3 79 Listed Buildings and 16 Conservation Areas in the Borough, together 
with a large number of other buildings and structures of interest that are included 
on a Local List. The Borough also contains 12 Scheduled Ancient Monuments , a 
Registered Ba ttlefield and a wealth of archaeological remains.  
8.2.6  Wh
ilst the majority of designated heritage assets across the Borough are in good 
condition, 4 Listed Buildings and 3 Conservation Areas are included in Historic 
England’s Heritage at Risk Register 2 020. 
8.2.7  Th
e Council acknowledges that its Local List of non -designated heritage assets is out 
of date and Parish Councils and other community groups have made a number of suggestions for additions to  the Local List. The Council is also aware that not all of 
the Borough’s Conversation Areas have Character Appraisals and Management 
Plans.   
8.2.8  Th
e Council recognise s that it needs to undertake a more proactive role to 
managing and promoting heritage i n the Borough. The Council will therefore work 
with Historic England , local communities  and other relevant Stakeholders , to set out 
clear priorities  for its heritage work .  
8.2.9  Th
e Council will take positive action to secure the retention, repair, maint enance 
and continued use of heritage assets and will: 
•seek
 support and funding from all available sources to set up grant and repair
schemes;
•use its available powers to take action in the case of vulnerable and
deteriorating buildings;
•seek to secure th e retention of buildings of architectural or historic interest,
subject to reasonable standards of health and safety; and
•provide guidance and advice to owners and developers.
8.2.10  Wit
h regard to buildings at risk, the Council will aim to ensure their c ontinued use, 
maintenance, repair and restoration, making use of powers available if owners fail to carry out essential repairs, as appropriate.  
8.2.11  The
 Council will keep the designation of Conservation Areas under review, update 
its Local List and br ing forward enhancement schemes as resources allow.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1168.2.12  In support of this work the Council will make use of available sources of finance, 
guidance and advice, and seek to work in partnership with Historic England where appropriate.  
8.2.13  As w
ell as confirming the Council’s proactive role, t he Policy also provides a 
comprehensive basis to assess development proposals, setting out how development should safeguard and respond to the historic environment. 
8.2.14  Once
 lost or altered, features of the  historic environment cannot be replaced. It is 
therefore important that decision making is based on a full understanding of the significance of heritage assets affected by development, the impacts arising from those proposals and the wider public benefit arising from the proposed 
development.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register (2020)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Other Pl
anning Documents  
•WBC De
sign and Construction SPD
•WBC Conservation Area Management Plans
•Historic England Guidance
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•WBC Publi
c Art Strategy
•Warrington Means Business
Delivery
 Partners  
•Historic
 England
•Cheshire Constabulary
•Private Sector  Stakeholders
•Public Sector  Stakeholders
•Cheshire Archaeology Planning Advisory Services
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1178.3 Warrington ’s Green Infrastructure Netw ork 
 
8.3.1  The B orough of Wa rrington contains significant areas of open countryside, which 
contain extensive areas of agricultural land, a varied landscape character and 
important areas of nature conservation value, mostly within the relatively narrow gaps of open land separating Warrington from neighbouring towns and smaller settlements within and beyond the B orough.  These areas have been well protected 
to date primarily through an established and adopted Green Belt .  
 8.3.2  The B orough's environmental assets, include;  its sites of international, national and 
local importance for biodiversity ; high value agricultural land on degraded peat and 
strategic green links such as  the Mersey Valley Corridor and Sankey Valley Linear 
Park, from which a series of wider and parallel links can be accessed .  In addition, 
Warrington lies at the centre of a wetland nature recovery network which stretches from south Lancashire down to south Cheshire, with the international sites of Risley 
Moss, Holcroft Moss , Rixton Clay Pits SAC and a number of SSSI’s (Holcroft Moss, 
Risley Moss, Rixton Clay Pits and Woolston Eyes) at the heart of it.   These asse ts 
must continue to be protected and opportunities need to be taken to enhance their 
function and value, including improving linkages between them, through employing a green infrastructure approach . 
 
Policy DC3 – Green Infrastructure  
 
Strategic Green Infrastructure  
1. The Council, in partnership with other agencies and stakeholders will adopt a strategic 
approach to the care and management of all the B orough's green infrastructure and seek to 
protect, enhance and extend the multifunctional network in order to maintain and develop 
the wider public health, active travel, flood management, climate change, ecological and 
economic benefits it provides . 
 
Green Infrastructure Opportunities  
2. A key focus of these efforts will be on reinforcing  and maximising the environmental and 
socio -economic benefits from, th e following  strategic green links which connect the 
Borough  to the wider sub -region :  
 
a. The Mersey Valley;  
b. Sankey Valley Park and St. Helens Canal;  
c. The Bridgewater Canal;  
d. The River Bollin;  and 
e. The Trans  Pennine Trail 
 
3. The Council is committed to supporting wider programmes and initiat ives which seek to 
connect the B orough’s Strategic Green Infrastructure assets with residential communities, 
employment areas  and other green infrastructure assets both within and outside of the 
Borough,  including : 
 
a. Great Manchester Wetlands N ature  Improvement Area; 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
118b.Bold Forest Park ;
c. W alton Hall Estate ;
d. The Mersey Forest ;
e. The Circular Parklands; and
f.The River Mersey frontage where it passes through the Town Centre.
4.The Council will work with partners to strengthen and expand the network of ecological
sites, corridors and stepping stone habitats to :
a.secure a net gain in biodiversity ;
b.to expand tree cover in appropriate locations across the Borough;
c.to improve landscape character, water and air quality ;
d. to help adapt to flood risk and mitigate the impacts of climate change ;
e.to contribute to the development of the Mersey  Forest ;
f. to contribute to the wider regional nature recovery network of wetland sites by enhancing
the wetlands across Warrington ; and
g.to support the retention of underused farmland for habitat creation and management.
Development Proposals affecting Green Infrastructure  
5.All development proposals should, as appropriate to their nature and scale:
a.protect existing green infrastructure  and the functions it performs , especially where this
helps to mitigate the causes of and addresses the impacts of climate change ;
b.increase  the functionality of existing and planned green infrastructure  especially where
this helps to  mitigate the causes of and addresses the impacts of climate change;
c.improv e the quality of existing green infrastructure, including local networks and
corridors, specifically  to increase its attractiveness as a sport, leisure and recreation
opportunity and its value as  a habitat for biodiversity;
d.protect and improve  access to and connectivity between existing and planned green
infrastructure  to develop a continuous right of way and greenway network and integrated
ecological system/network ;
e.secur e new green infrastructure  in order to cater for anticipated increases in demand
arising from development particularly in areas where there are existing deficiencies
assessed against  standards set by the Council  in accordance with Policy DC5 ; and
f.provide long -term management arrangements for new and enhanced green infrastructure
within development sites.
6.Where a loss of , or negative impact on green infrastructure functionality  or ecological
system/network  is unavoidable, development proposals should demonstrate what
mitigation measures are proposed and/or replacement green infrastructure will be
provided.   Any replacement or mitigation measure should seek to  secure a net gain in
biodiversity assessed against the latest version of the  DEFRA Metric  and be deployed as
closely as possible to the affected green infrastructure  asset.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
119Why we have taken this approach  
 
Warrington’s Green Infrastructure Network  
8.3.3 The NPPF defines green infrastructure as a network of multi -functional green space, 
urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of e nvironmental and 
quality of life benefits for local communities.  
 
8.3.4 In respect of Warrington green infrastructure i s considered to constitute the 
Borough’s collective network of green spaces and environmental features including 
for example parks and formal gardens; village greens; wetlands, woodlands and meadows; all watercourses, including small brooks, canals and the corridors through which they fl ow; playing fields, amenity space in housing estates; transport 
corridors and rights of way.  Through recognition of the many benefits it can provide for people and for wildlife, green infrastructure is widely recognised as a critical 
ingredient in creatin g successful places where people want to live and work.   The 
policy identifies a number of strategic green links  that connect the borough with the 
wider sub -region and represent  opportunities  for reinforcing and maximising the 
environmental and socio -econo mic benefits that green infrastructure provides (Fig 
XX). 
 8.3.5  The Mersey Valley Corridor constitutes a wide tract of land (exceeding 2kms in places) extending across the Borough from Fiddlers Ferry Power Station in the west, 
to Hollins Green and the flo od plain of the River Bollin in the east.  Its value lies in 
the mix of river valley habitats, notably wetlands, in the context of the Mersey Estuary as a whole - one of the largest estuaries in Europe and supporting 
internationally important numbers of bi rds. 
 8.3.6 Sankey Valley Linear Park is an important corridor which runs north -south for over 6 
kilometres through Warrington, linking the Green Belt in the north to the River Mersey in the south.  It is characterised by ‘new town’ ecology -led landscaping  
adjoining Sankey Brook and the St Helens Canal and is important for flora and fauna as well as leisure, recreation and opportunities for active travel.  
 8.3.7   The Bridgewater Canal is a 65km (39 mile) canal stretching from Runcorn to Le igh.  
It runs through the south of the Borough.
  From Warrington, the route provides a 
connection to Runcorn  in the west and through Lymm and onwards towards 
Altrincham in the east.  
 8.3.8  T he Transpennine Trail (TPT) is a long distance path running from coast to coast 
across northern England.  It forms part of National Cycle Route 62 and like the 
Bridgewater canal runs through the south of the Borough , providing a connection to 
Runcorn/ Widnes in the west and through Ly mm and onwards towards Altrincham in 
the east.  
 
 Figure XX – Key Green Infrastructure  Links/Opportunities  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1208.
3.9 The NPPF (paragraph 17 5) states  that local planning authorities should set out a 
strategic approach to maintaining and enhancing networks of habitats and green 
infrastructure in their Local Plans, planning positively for the enhancement of natural capital at a catchment or landscape scale across local authority boundaries and the NPPG indicates that Local Plans should identify the strategic location of existing and proposed green infrastructure networks.  
8.
3.10 The NPPG identifies how green infrastructure can help support a number of planning goals  including:  
•B
uilding a strong, competitive economy by driving economic growth and
regeneration  and helping to create high quality environments which are
attractive to businesses and investors.
•Achieving well- designed places  by enhancing the built environment through the
provision of features such as green roofs, street trees, proximity to woodland,public gardens and recreational and open spaces  and in a wider landscape
context reinforcing and enhancing local landscape character, contributing to asense of place and natural beauty.
•De
livering a wide choice of high quality homes, providing opportunities for
recreation, social interaction and play in n ew and existing neighbourhoods and
enhancing local landscape character, contributing to a sense of place.
•Promoting healthy  and safe communities by improving the wellbeing of
neighbourhoods , helping create safe and accessible environments, providing
opportunities for recreation , exercise , social interaction, experiencing and caring
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
121for nature, community food -growing and gardening  and thereby delivering 
mental and physical health benefits.  
• Conserving and enhancing the natural environment by  contribute a range of 
benefits, including ecological connectivity, facilitating biodiversity net gain  and 
nature recovery networks and opportunities for communities to undertake 
conserv ation work . 
• Helping to reduce air pollution, noise and the impacts of extreme heat and extreme rainfall events.  
• Meeting the challenge of climate change by contributing to carbon  storage, 
cooling and shading , opportunities for species migration to more suit able 
habitats and  improving drainage (including the use of sustainable drainage 
systems), managing flooding and water resources; and improving water quality.  
 8.3.11 The Strategic Green N etwork/Links that traverse the B orough are of fundamental 
importance to the natural environment and character of Warrington and as such 
the spatial strategy seeks  to reinforce this.  Policy DC3 outlines a strategic approach 
to the care and management of the Borough's Green Infrastructure  and seeks to 
conserve the B orough’s assets as well as protecting the vital and wide ranging 
functions the se assets perform.  In order to protect the functions that green 
infrastructure performs proposals for development  will be assessed against the; role 
that the site plays as part of the existing or proposed Greenway Network of recreational footpaths , bridleways  and cycleways (identified on the Policies Map ); 
its landscape and/or nature conservation value; its value as a buffer zone between other uses; its value as a visual amenity or townsc ape feature in contributing to the 
character or appearance of the surrounding area; and its importance as a community resource.  
 8.3.1 2 To maximise the social, economic and environmental benefits of green infrastructure and to conserve, restore and enhance  ecology and biodiversity the 
Council is promoting an integrated approach.  It will  seek to ensure that green 
infrastructure is a multi- functional resource capable of delivering the quality of life 
and ecological benefits required by the species it serves;  as well as those needed to 
underpin wider sustainability issues such as mitigating the causes of and adapting to the impacts of climate change.  Alongside this the Council will also seek to ensure that opportunities to improve the quality of the network, to the benefit of both people and wildlife, are taken, as well as opportunities to connect areas of fragmentation so as to create a continuous right of way network and integrated 
ecological system throughout the Borough.  
 
8.3.1 3 The Government’s 25 year Environment Plan has a target to increase the coverage of woodland in England by up to 12% by 2060.  The Government supports the development of the Northern Forest along the M62 Corridor, through the partnership of the Community Forests and the Woodland Trus t.  The Mersey Forest 
Plan is the local delivery Framework for the Northern Forest.  The Mersey Forest 
Plan sets local targets for woodland cover including in Warrington Borough.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1228.3.14  The built up areas contain a variety of types of urban green spaces.  In particularly 
the main urban area of Warrington contains a significant amount of green space as 
a legacy of its former New Town status.  A unique feature of this network is a framework of  linked open spaces that form a necklace around the Town Centre and 
the masterplanning areas (Warrington’s “Circular Parklands”).  
8
.3.15 In addition, the history and development of Warrington is intrinsically linked to the River Mersey as a major crossing  point.  However, the river today is a vastly 
underutilised feature that is hidden from those in the town centre.  The Town Centre SPD promotes development along the frontage of the river and seeks to improve access to the river with new green links that can combine to form a linear park alongside the River Mersey and connect the green spaces that surround the town centre.   An east to west green link that connects Victoria Park to the east of 
the town centre with Bank Quay Station in the west has been identified as an important connection to be delivered.  
8
.3.16 In exceptional circumstances where it is not possible to avoid some loss in the functionality of the network it is expected that replacement provision will be provided in order to satisfy national p olicy.  Any replacement provision or mitigation 
measures should be in close proximity to the site so as to maintain the integrity of the network.  
8.
3.17  The NPPF  indicates that Local Plans should seek to secure measurable net gains in 
biodiversity (Paragraph 179b).  The proposed updated DEFRA  Biodiversity Metric is 
designed to provide ecologists, developers, planners and other interested parties with a means of assessing changes in biodiversity value (losses or gains) brought about by development or changes in land management.  The metric is a habitat 
based approach to determining a proxy biodiversity value.  An updated version of the tool that was introduced in 2012 is currently out for consultation.   
8.
3.18 The Government’s 25 year Environment Plan also sets the UK’s ambition to develop a growing and resilient network of land, water and sea that is richer in plants and wildlife.  It includes a number of commitments for nature, including publishing a 
new strategy for nature to replace Biodiversity 2020.  The Plan identifies an 
objective of establishing a Nature Recovery Network.   Natural England is supporting 
Warrington Borough Council in identifying and establishing such a network across 
Warrington and beyond its boundaries, through developing an ecological wetland 
network model.  This GIS tool can be used to support decisions for land managers, 
planners, developers and others around appropriate management and creation 
opportunities for wetlands and their assoc iated habitats to support natural capital 
benefits.  
8.
3.19  The network has been mapped and modelled by Natural England and shows a wetland nature recovery network of existing core sites, fragmentation zones, enhancement zones and areas of expansion to buffer the wetland network.  This 
network has been created usin g data which describes the underpinning conditions 
which are suitable for wetlands, including geology and soil characteristics.   It is able 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
123to predict where the ground is suitable for wetlands and as such allows decisions 
around where and what type of wetl and, both natural and more artificial structures 
such as Sustainable Drainage Systems, could an d should be located across the 
Borough .  The Council will continue to work with Natural England to identify a full 
ecological network and give consideration for the need for the preparation of an 
SPD that will map out the ecological network and set out the Council’s considerations and expectations whe n such sites are proposed for development or 
impacted  by proposed development nearby . 
  8.4  Biodiversity and Geodi versity  in Warrington  
  8.4.1 In addition, to the strategic green  links t he Borough’s green infrastructure network 
incorporates a range of designated sites of nature conservation value.   These 
include: Public Rights of Way (PROW); Local Nature Reserves; Local Wildlife Sites; Special Areas of Conservation (SACs); Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs); Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGs); and the Greater Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area (NIA)  (see Fig 13) . 
 8.4.2  Warrington B oroug h contains numerous old marl ponds and several former mineral 
extraction sites , together with significant areas of open countryside that provide 
important wildlife habitats and are of high nature conservation value.   
 8.4.3 There are three designated European sites of international importance for nature 
conservation in the east of the B orough.  The sites at Risley Moss and Holcroft Moss 
are t wo of three sites which make up the Manchester Mosses Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)  designated for their value as degraded raised peat bogs still 
capable of natural regeneration .  The nearby Rixton Clay Pits comprises part of an, 
extensive disused brickworks excavated for glacial boulder clay which have filled 
with water since workings ceased in the 1960s.  The site is also a SAC designated for 
its value as habitat for Great crested newts.   The site also supports species -rich 
grassland, scrub and mature secondary woodland.   All three of these s ites together 
with Woolston Eyes are  also nationally protected as UK Site of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI), the only such site in the B orough.  
 8.4.4 Warrington has four Local Nature Reserves  (LNRs ) and 55  Local Wildlife Sites  
(LWSs) .  LNRs are a stat utory designation made under Section 21 of the National 
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949.  Two of these, Risley Moss and Rixton 
Claypits , are also sites of international importance for nature conservation ( SACs ).  
LNRs are for both people and wildlife offering convenient access to nature and 
providing special opportunities to study or learn about nature or simply to enjoy it.   
LWSs are the most important non -statutory wildlife sites in Warrington  and cover a 
wide variety of habitats such as anc ient woodland, grassland, and wetlands.  The 
quality and interconnectivity of these sites is vital to sustain wildlife in the context of pressures arising from urbanisation, agricultural intensification and climate change.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1248.4.5 Warrington also has t wo Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGs)  (formerly Sites 
of Importance for Nature Conservation - SINCs ) identified for their indigenous 
woodland species and geology outside statutorily protected sites such as SSSIs. They 
are important as an educational, historical and recreational resource.  
8.4
.6 The Great Manchester Wetlands NIA was adopted by the Greater Manchester and 
Cheshire Local Nature Partnerships in May 2013 and covers around 40,000 hectares extending across parts of Salford, Trafford, Wigan and  Warrington.  The area of the 
NIA within Warrington is shown on the Policies Map.  The vision is for the NIA to become an exemplar of biodiversity restoration, enhancement and the delivery of landscape -scale ecological wetland network for wildlife and peop le. 
8.4
.7 The NIA designation does not prevent new development, and some of the allocations in this Local Plan are within the NIA.  However, a location within the NIA makes it essential that a high level of appropriate green infrastructure is incorporated  within any development site in order to increase the area of priority 
habitats, improve connectivity between habitats and species populations and enable the movement of key species within the NIA and beyond.  Also the NIA includes extensive areas of peat deposits in the east of the borough (see Fig 16), which are 
valuable elements of natural capital for the purposes of carbon storage in the form of restorable peat.  Opportunities should be taken to restore the degraded bogs, wherever possible.  
F
igure 13 – Warrington’s Designated Green Infrastructure Assets  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
125 
8.4.8  A number of species of plants, birds and animals are specifically protected by European or national legislation due to their significance or vulnerability.   There are 
a number of protected animals that are found in the Borough.  These include bats, water voles, owls, otters  and Great Crested Newts.  
  
Policy DC4 - Ecological Network  
 
1. The Council will work with partners to conserve, restore and en hance biodiversity and  
secure a measurable net gain for biodiversity and enhance public access to nature across 
the Plan area.  These efforts will be guided by the principles set out in the National Planning 
Policy Framework and those which underpin the strategi c approach to the  care and 
management of the Borough’s Green Infrastructure in its widest sense  contained in Policy 
DC3. 
 
2. Sites and areas that make up the B orough’s ecological network and are  recognised for 
their nature and geological value are shown on  the Policies Map and include:  
 
a. European Sites of International Importance  
b. Sites of Special Scientific Interest  
c. Regionally Important Geological Sites  
d. Local Nature Reserves  
e. Local Wildlife Sites  
f. Wildlife Corridors /Natural Improvement Areas  
 
The specific sites covered by the above designations at the time of publication are detailed 
in Appendix 4. 
 
Development affecting Sites of International Importance  
3. Proposals for development which may affect European Sites of International Importance 
will be subject to the most rigorous examination in accordance with the Habitats Directive.  
Development  or land use change not directly connected with or necessary to the 
management of the site and  which is likely to have significant effects on the site ( either 
individually or in combination with other  plans or projects) and which would affect the 
integrity of the site, will not be permitted unless the  Council is satisfied that;  
 
a. there is no alternative solution; and  
b. there are imperative reasons of o ver-riding public interest for the development or land 
use change  and where suitable mitigation or compensatory provision has been made .  Any 
mitigation or compensatory provision must be assessed in a project –related Habitats 
Regulations Assessment and be fully functional before any likely adverse effect arises.  
 
Development affecting Sites of National Importance  
4. Proposals for developme nt in or likely to affect Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) 
will be subject to special scrutiny.  Where such development may have an adverse effect, 
directly or indirectly, on the SSSI it will not be permitted unless the reasons for the 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
126developme nt clearly  outweigh the nature conservation value of the site itself and the 
national policy to safeguard the  national network of such sites  and the loss can be mitigated 
through off- site habitat creation  to achieve a measurable net gain in 
biodiversity /geodiversity  assessed against the latest version of the DEFRA metric . 
Development affecting Sites of Regional and Local Importance  
5.Proposals for development likely to have an adverse effect on regionally and locally
designated  sites will not be permitted unless it can be clearly demonstrated that there are
reasons for the  development which outweigh the need to safeguard the substantive nature
conservation value  of the site or feature  and the loss can be mitigated  through off- site
habitat creation  to achieve a measurable net gain in biodiversity/geodiversity  assessed
against the latest version of the DEFRA metric .
Development affecting Protected and/or Priority Species and Priority Habitats  
6.Proposals for development which may adversely affect the integrity or continuity of UK
priority  habitats , irreplaceable habitats, or other habitats of local importance, or adversely
affect EU Protected Species, UK  Priority Species or other species of local importance, or
which are the subject of Local  Biodiversity Action Plans will only be permitted if it can be
shown that the reasons for the  development clearly outweigh the need to retain the
habitats or species affected and that mitigating  measures can be  provided which would
reinstate the habitats or provide equally viable alternative  refuge sites for the species
affected.
7.All development proposals affecting protected sites, wildlife corridors, priority  habitats ,
irreplaceable habitats, EU Protected S pecies  or priority  species (as identified in Local
Biodiversity Action Plans)  should be accompanied by information  proportionate to their
nature conservation value including;
a.a site survey carried out by suitably qualified or experienced person to establish the
presence, extent and density of these species and identify features of nature and geological
conservation importance; an assessmen t of the likely impacts of the development proposals
for the protection and management of features identified fo r retention;
b.an assessment of whether the reasons for the development clearly outweigh the nature
conservation value of the site, area or species; and
c.proposals for compensating for features damaged or destroyed during the development
process , includ ing mitigat ion through habitat creation  to achieve a measurable net gain in
biodiversity/geodiversity  assessed against the DEFRA metric .
d. proposals for compensating for any negative impacts on species during the development
process, including mitigation through off -site habitat creation.
8.Where development is permitted, the Council will consider the use of conditions or
planning  obligations to ensure the protection and enhancement of the site’s nature
conservation interest  and/or to provide appropriate  compensatory measures.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
127Why we have taken this approach  
 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
8.4.9 Section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 places a 
duty on all public authorities in England and Wales to have regard, in the exercise of their functions, to the purpose of conserving biodiversity.  Local planning authorities should take a pragmatic approach, with the aim of fulfilling  statutory obligations in a 
way th at minimises delays and burdens, whilst protecting the environment.  
 8.4.10  Conserving biodiversity is an important element of sustainable development. Government gu idance in the NPPF  (2021) and NPPG indicates that in delivering 
sustainable development local authorities should enhance as well as protect biodiversity and natural habitats.  
 8.4.11  Paragraph 8 of the NPPF states that achieving sustainable development means that 
the planning system has three overarching objectives, which are interdependent and need to be pursued in mutually supportive ways (so that opportunities can be taken to secure net gains across each of the differ ent objectives):  
 
a) an economic objective – to help build a strong, responsive and competitive 
economy, by ensuring that sufficient land of the right types is available in the right 
places and at the right time to support growth, innovation and improved 
productivity; and by identifying and coordinating the provision of infrastructure;  
b) a social objective – to support strong, vibrant and healthy communities, by 
ensuring that a sufficient number and range of homes can be provided to meet the 
needs of present and future generations; and by fostering a well -designed and safe 
built environment, with accessible services and open spaces that reflect current 
and future needs and support communities’ health, social and cultural well -being; 
and  
c) an environment al objective – to contribute to protecting and enhancing our 
natural, built and historic environment; including making effective use of land, 
helping to improve biodiversity, using natural resources prudently, minimising waste and pollution, and mitigating  and adapting to climate change, including 
moving to a low carbon economy.  
 
8.4.12  In addition, paragraph 17 4 of the NPPF states that the planning system should 
contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment by:  
 
• protecting and enhancing valued landscapes, sites of biodiversity and geological 
value and soils  (in a manner commensurate with their statutory status or 
identified quality in the development plan);  
• recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside, and the wider benefits from natural capital and ecosystem services – including the economic 
and other benefits of the best and most versatile agricultural land, and of trees and woodland;  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
128•maintaining the character of the undeveloped coast, while improving public
access to it where appropriate;
•minimising impacts on and providing net gains for biodiversity, including by
establishing coherent ecological networks that are more resilient to current and
future pressures ;
•preventing new and existing development from contributing to, being put atunacceptable risk from, or being adversely affected by, unacceptable levels ofsoil, air, water or noise pollution or land instability. Development should,
wherever possible, help to improve local environmental c onditions such as air
and water quality, taking into account relevant information such as river basin
management plans; and
•remediating and mitigating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated andunstable land, where appropriate.
8
.4.13 Whilst sites of  importance for their nature and geological value fall within the wider 
remit of ‘Green Infrastructure’, NPPF  (paragraph 1 75) requires the specific 
identification of such sites and a distinct policy approach to ensure their protection as well as taking a s trategic approach to maintaining and enhancing networks of 
habitats and green infrastructure.  Policy DC4 responds to this by setting out the formal designations active within the Borough and ranking these in order of their 
importance, in order to guide th e degree of protection afforded to these designated 
sites.  
8
.4.14 These designated sites are not only important in their own right but collectively they form part of an ecological network.  Ecological networks are habitat patches suitable for particular t ypes of species connected by movement corridors through 
the intervening habitat matrix which are important for maintaining biodiversity.  Some of these sites experience pressure from leisure uses, agricultural practices and development.  We must manage the  Borough’s ecological resource to prevent 
damage and habitat fragmentation and give appropriate support for wider duties, such as the Water Framework Directive  and Habitat Regulations . 
8
.4.15 The NPPG confirms that the relevant evidence in identifying and mapping local 
ecological networks can include : 
•t
he broad geological, geomorphological and bio -geographical character of the
area, crea ting its main landscapes types;
•key natural systems and processes within the area, including fluvial and coastal;
•the lo cation and extent of internationally, nationally and locally designated sites;
•the distribution of protected and priority habitats and species;
•areas of irreplaceable natural habitat ;
•habitats where specific land management practices are required for theirconservation ;
•main landscape features which, due to their linear or continuous nature,
support migration, dispersal and gene flow, including any potential for new
habitat corridors to link any isolated sites that hold nature conservation value,and theref ore improve species distribution;
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
129•areas identified by national or local partnerships with potential for habitat
enhancement or restoration, including those necessary to help biodiversityadapt to climate change or which could assist with the habitat shifts  and species
migrations arising from climate change;
•audits of green infrastructure, such as open space within urban areas;
•information on the biodiversity and geodiversity value of previously developedland and the opportunities for incorporating this in developments; and
•areas of geological value which would benefit from enhancement and
management.
8.4.1 6 T
hese networks also form important Green Infrastructure links which Policy DC3 
seeks to protect, enhance and extend.  Collectively, they form a network  of 
corridors and stepping stones, allowing the survival and dispersal of species of 
biodiversity priorit y. 
8.5 Open Spa
ce, Sport and Recreation Provision  
8.5.1  Ac
cess to high quality open spaces and opportunities for sport and recreation 
contributes  to the health, well- being and cohesion of our communities as well as 
proving opportunities for active travel.   As the Borough’s population increases, the 
pressure on current provision will mount and there will be a need to provide 
significant areas of new open space and long term management  arrangements.  
8.5.2  Th
e Local Plan will help deliver aims and objectives of other Council strategies, such 
as the Corporate Strategy  and the Active Warrington Strategy , which seek to 
improve the health and wellbeing of Warrington’s population by ensuring good 
access to sport and recreation opportunities.  
Policy DC5 - Open Space, Sport and Recreation Provision 
Open Space  Strategy  
1.The Council will work with partners to ensure that a comprehensive range of sport and
recreation facilities will be provided across Warrington  to meet the needs of the existing
and proposed population, including:
a.Equipped play areas
b.Informal play areas
c.Parks & Gardens
d.Natural /Semi -natural greenspaces
e.Allotments
f.Sports pitches and facilities
2.The Council will encourage partnership working to ensure that sufficient quantity and
quality of, and convenient access to open space, sport and recreation provision is secured
through the following measures:
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
130a.Protecting existi ng provision and ensuring that any new open space created will be
afforded protection in accordance with Policy DC3  and criteria (7 ) below;
b.Addressing existing deficiencies in provision through qualitative enhancement of existing
provision, improving ac cess to existing facilities or securing new provision ; and
c.Ensuring that proposals for new development contribute to open space, sport and
recreation provision commensurate to the need generated by the proposals .
3.In determining the nature of new or improved provision the Council will be guided by the
evidence base  (Open Space Audit; Sports Facilities Strategic Needs Assessment; Playing
Pitch Strategy and associated Action Plan s) and consult with providers  and stakeholders,
together with potential use rs of the green space wherever possible, to ensure that provision
meets local needs.
Open Space  and Equipped Play Provision  
4.All residential development proposals of 40 dwellings or more  will be required to
contribute to the provision of open space and equipped play  provision *, together with
secure arrangements for its management and maintenance, where existing facilities have
insufficient capacity to serve the increase in population arising f rom the development.   The
amount, type and form of open space and equipped play provision will be determined
having regard to the open space standards and the quantity, quality and accessibility of
existing provision  as specified in the most up -to-date versions of the  Council’s Open Space
Audit and Planning Obligations SPD.
* The requirement to provide equipped play provision only applies to family
accommodation (ie. two bedrooms or more).
Any development within the town centre  (as defined in the Town Centre SPD) where it can 
be demonstrated that it is not possible to provide any or adequate on- site provision will be 
expected to make a financial contribution towards off- site provision/enhancements to open 
space elsewhere in the town centre in accordance with the requirements of the Council’s 
Town Centre and Planning Obligations SPD’s . 
Outdoor Sports - Playing Pitches  
5.All residential development proposals  of 40 units or more  will be required to contribute
to the provision of  outdoor playing pitches (including A GPs) , together with secure
arrangements for its  management and maintenance.  The amount, type and form of pitch
provision will be determined having regard to the nature and size of development proposed
and the community needs likely to be generated by it, having regard to the most up- to-date
Playing Pitch Strategy – Action Plan .
Where on site provision is not possible or appropriate, a financial contribution towards  
suitable new provision or enhancement of existing facilities off site will be  sought  and 
secured through a legal agreement.  
Indoor Sport  and Recreation Facilities  
6.All residential development proposals of 40 dwelling units or more will be required to
make provision for indoor sport  and recreation facilities, where existing facilities have
insufficient capacity to serve the increase in population arising from the development.   The
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
131amount, type and form of facility provision will be determined having regard to the nature 
and size of development proposed and the community needs likely to be generated by it.  In 
most instances the scale of development will not be sufficient to require on- site provision 
and financial contributions will be sought towards new provision or enhancement of existing 
facilities off site taking into account the requirements of the most up -to-date Sports 
Facilities Strategic Needs Assessment and associated  Action Plan.  
Where major development sites of a strategic nature would result in an increase in demand 
which could not be accommodated within an existing facility(s) and is of such a level that it 
would require the delivery of a completely new facility, the Council will see k to secure the 
delivery of the new facility as part of the overall development proposal. 
Protection of Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  
7.The Council will not permit development likely to result in an unacceptable loss of existing
open  space , sport or recreation facilities for non -recreation purpose s unless it can be
demonstrated that it meets one of exceptions listed in paragraph 9 9 of the NPPF .
This policy applies to all existing sites and facilities that have an open space/recreation use 
or value, irrespective of whether they are owned or managed by the public, private or 
voluntary sectors.  
Why we
 have taken this approach  
Open Space, Sport and Recreation Provision  
8.5.3 P arks and green spaces are good for people’s health, the local economy and the 
environment.  There is unequivocal evidence that living in proximity to green spaces 
increases well- being and reduces mortality rates regardless of income.   Living near 
to green spaces is proven to encourage physical activity and reduce obesity and 
stress, which are two of the most significant health issues facing the UK  (footnote -
SA baseline info  1 The Marmot Review (2011) The Marmot Review: Implications for 
Spatial Planning [onl ine] available at:  
https://www.nice.org.uk/media/default/About/what- we-do/NICE -guidance/NICE -
guidelines/Public -health -guidelines/Additional -publications/Spatial -planning/the -
marmot -review -implications -for-spatial -planning.pdf  
8.5.4 Gre
en spaces also help to create attractiv e environments in which people will 
choose to live and in which business will invest.  
8.5.5 Parag
raph 98 of the NPPF states that “Access to a network of high quality open 
spaces and opportunities for sport and recreation can make an important 
contribution  to the health and well-being of communities” and that “planning 
policies should be based on robust and up- to-date assessments of the need for 
open space, sports and recreation facilities  (including quantitative or qualitative 
deficits or surpluses)  and opportunities for new provision”. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1328.5.6 The local open space standards are designed to ensure that all residents have good 
access to a range of recreation opportunities which are able to meet a variety of 
different needs and demands.  The standards have been used in Warrington for several years or more, and are derived from the national ”6 Acre Standards” 
produced by National Playing Fields Association (now superseded by the Fields in Trust (FiTs) standards).  
8.5.7  The 
different typologies of open s pace are shown on the Policies Map.  It should be 
noted that some small open space sites  are not shown on the Policies Map.  All 
open spaces that are of public value, whether or not they are shown on the Policie s 
Map, are protected by Policy DC5 .  This will also apply to any new areas of open 
space to be created as a result of new residential development.  
8.5.8 In a
ccordance with national guidance the Council has assessed the needs of its 
population through separate assessments of open space, outdoor sports and recreation.  The Council’s evidence base for open space and recreation provision consists of an Open Sp ace Audit; a Playing Pitch Assessment and a Sports Facilities 
Strategic Needs Assessment.   Whilst,  these provide a good understanding of the 
current level of provision of open space, sports pitches and built sports facilities provision across the B orough  they are in the process of being updated to take 
account of Ward boundary changes; provision that has been provided since they were published  and the revised Plan period.  These documents t ogether with the 
associated Strategies and Action Plans will be used  to guide decisions on capital and 
revenue resource allocation, as well as to highlight key spatial priorities and deficiencies to be addressed through funding bids and S106 planning obligations  to 
support future growth . 
8.5.9 The 
Council have undertaken an audit of the quantity, quality and accessibility of 
open spaces within the Borough (footnote).  The Council’s Open Space Audit 2016  
includes standards for the quantity, quality and accessibility of all types of green space and provides a comprehensive audit of all the typologies of green space.  It provides an assessment of the quantity, quality and accessibility of open space provision across the Borough on a ward basis and details of surpluses and deficits of the various types of open space based on the standards adopted by the Council.  It also provides Ward Profiles that detail the types, locations, amount and size of open space provision within each ward.  All o f our standards for open space  are set out in 
Table 7 . 
Table 7  
– Open Space Standards  
Open Space Standards (Open Space Audit 2016)  
Fields in Trust (FiT) Planning and Design for Outdoor Sports and Play (2008)  
Typology  Quantative 
Standard  
(Ha per 1000 
people)  Standard per 
person  
(M2 per person)  Accessibility Standard  
(meters)  
Equipped 
Play 0.25  2.5 LAP – 60 straight line  
LEAP – 240 straight line  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
133Open Space Standards (Open Space Audit 2016)  
NEAP - 600 straight line  
Informal Play  0.55  5.5 300 straight line  
Parks & 
Gardens  1.6 16 District Park (15 -25ha) - 1200  
Local Park (2 -15ha) – 600 
Small Park (0.4 -2ha) – 400 
Pocket Park (<0.4ha) - 300 
Natural/Semi -
natural green 
space  2.0 20 2000 for 20ha>  
300 for <20ha  
Allotments  0.07  0.7 1000 straight line  
8.5.10  The
se standards are used to inform the open space requirements for new housing 
developments as set out in Policy DC5.  The calculation of the amount of open space 
needed should not include areas such as street planting/verges or inaccessible areas 
such as permanent water storage facilities.  The required layout of any new open space will depend on the nature of the propose d development.  However, any areas 
provided on site should be able to function effectively as open space and be accessible, safe, overlooked and strategically located within the site and, where 
possible, well integrated into the wider green infrastructure network.  It is 
particularly important for biodiversity net gain, climate change adaptation , the 
creation of wetland habitat and access to nature that the large strategic 
development areas make provision for natural/semi- natural green space.   In some 
cases  the open space(s) provided may need to be designed and laid out in a way 
that would contribute towards flood risk mitigation and management in accordance 
with Policy ENV2 .  
8.5.1 1 Th
e requirements for open space are in addition to any requirements for outdoor 
sports facilities such as playing pitches.  Any requirement for outdoor sports 
provision that arises from new residential development will be  addressed separately 
in accordance wi th Part (5) of Policy DC5 .  Similarly any requirement for indoor 
sport and recreation provision will be assessed in accordance with Part (6) of Policy DC5.  
8.5.1 2 T
he provision of playing pitches is considered in the separate Playing Pitch Strategy . 
The s tudy provides a clear understanding of facility needs locally, taking into 
consideration all the provision that currently exists in Warrington (supply) and cross
-refer
encing this with the current and future needs of the B oroughs population 
(demand ) up to 2 027.   It also provides strategic framework/action plan for the 
maintenance and improvement of existing sports pitch provision in Warrington.  
8.5.1 3 T
he assessment identifies and assesses the provision of the following sports pitch 
types:  
•Footb
all pitches  (including 3G AGPs)
•Cricket pitches
•Rugby union pitches
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
134•Rugby league pitches
•Hockey/Artificial grass pitches (AGPs)
•Third generation turf pitches (3G pitches)
8.5.1 4 Some  p
laying pitches will be located within open spaces protected as wider green 
infrastructure under Policy DC3; but their function in terms of meeting identified 
sporting need and any development proposals affecting their provision as such would be assessed under Policy DC5.  
8.5.1 5 The
 provision of built sports facilities is considered in the Sports Facilities Strategic 
Needs Assessment (2014)(SFSNA), which provides a clear understanding of facility 
needs locally, taking into consideration all the provision that currently exists in Warrington (supply) and cross
-refere
ncing this with the current and future needs of 
the B oroughs population (demand).  It also provides an Action Plan for addressing 
any identified deficiencies on a B orough wide basis for specific facility types.  The 
Action Plan focuses only on sports facilities currently owned by the Council, many of which are currently operated by external organisations through management arrangements.  The assessment identifies and assesses the provision of the following sports facility types:  
•Indoo
r swimming pools
•Sports halls
•Health and fitness suites
•Tennis facilities
•Cycling facilities
•Athletics facilities
8.5.1 6 T he
 Council has used a threshold of 40 dwellings for on -site pu
blic open space 
contributions for a number of years, since the adoption of the UDP in 2006.  This 
has worked well in practice and there is no more recent evidence indicating that the threshold should be changed.
  The threshold of 40 dwellings is also appropriate 
having regard to the limi ted number of occupants that smaller developments would 
have and the limited size of on -site provision that would be justified to meet their 
needs.  
8.5.1 7 Th
e Open Space Audit records the existing levels of provision of all the open space 
typologies on a Ward basis.  The level of provision varies ac ross the B orough 
dependent upon the type of open space .  There  are significant deficits of equipped 
play and informal play provision B orough wide .  Whilst, there is a deficit of the parks 
& gardens typology of o pen space in approximately 50% of the wards th ere is a 
large surplus overall B orough wide.  There is a deficit of the natural/semi -natural 
typology of open space in approximately 70% of the wards but there i s only a small 
deficit overall B orough wide . 
 8.5.18 Wher
e new development would result in a deficiency of open space in the locality, 
or be in a location where a deficiency already exists, it will be expected to include new, expanded or enhanced open space provision in accordance with Policy DC5.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
135The Council’s Planning Obligations SPD outlines the process for determining if 
equipped play and open space provision or contributions will be required for new 
residential development.   The Council’s Town Centre SPD  recognises that in the 
Town Centre of Warri ngton, where significant growth is being proposed at higher 
densities than elsewhere in the borough that it might not be possible to meet the 
adopted standards for equipped play and open space provision and that if such circumstances a financial contributi on towards the provision of off- site open space 
and public re alm improvements  would enable the delivery of more strategic green 
space.  
8.5.1 9 T
he Playing Pitch Assessment Report does not identify an oversupply of playing 
pitches .  The existing position for all pitch sports is that either demand is being met 
or there is a shortfall.  The future position shows exacerbation of current shortfalls  
and as such existing playing field land must be protected and any new development will be required to make provision  for the additional demand  it generate s.  
8.5.20  A 
good proportion of shortfalls expressed could be  met by improving pitch quality, 
allowing  access to existing unused pitches such as at school sites and re-using sites 
where use has lapsed .  In te rms of improving the quality of the provision the report 
identified a need for improvements to changing facilities and pitch drainage in particular.  The role of lapsed and disused sites in helping to address deficiencies is 
also explored within the Playin g Pitch Strategy and associated Action Plan.  This may 
also be an appropriate method of meeting the additional demand generated by a new development. Where this is considered to be the case financial contributions will be sought in lieu of on- site provisio n.  It is anticipated a combination of all three 
methods will be required and this is set out in the Action Plan.  
8.5.21 T
he Council’s SFSNA indicates that the current total quantity of swimming pool 
provision is just about meeting the curre nt level of  demand for casual/recreational 
swimming provision.   However, there  are large waiting lists for junior swimming 
lesson provision  and the proposed levels of growth will put pressure on the quantity 
of provision, in particular within the south  and west  neigh bourhood area s, where 
the highest levels of population growth are forecast.  In addition, the quality of 
swimming pool provision across Warrington is mixed , with a number identified as 
being of poor quality based on non -technical assessments.  
8.5.22  In t
erms of sports hall capacity t he current total quantity of provision is meeting 
current total demand with some space capacity available, meaning that d espite 
projected population growth it is anticipated the level of supply of sports hall provision will meet the future needs of the population up to 2020.   However, 
beyond this the levels of growth proposed will result in a deficit in supply and new facilities will be required, particularly in the south and west neighbourhood area s, 
where the highest levels of population growth are forecast .  Other specialist sports 
facilities, such as tennis and athletics are well catered for but Warrington does not currently have a specialist, traffic free, cycling facility.   Cycling is a sport with one of 
the highest level s of latent demand across the Borough and much of this latent 
demand derives for the south and west neighbourhood areas, where the highest 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
136levels of the growth are proposed.   Consultation with British Cycling has suggested 
that there is a potential need fo r a road or track facility to serve the southern part of 
the North West region, which could be located in Warrington. 
8.5.2 3 The
 overall picture across the spectrum of open space, sport and re creation 
facilities within the Borough is that provision is eit her just about meeting demand or 
there are deficits in existing levels of provision.  Therefore, there is a need to 
protect existing provision from being los t to other land uses.   Any development 
proposals that would result in the loss of open space, playing pitches or built sports and recreational facilities will be assessed in accordance with national planning policy (paragraph 99 of the NPPF)  and Sport England’s Exception Policy E4. 
Key Eviden
ce 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Sports Fac ilities
 Strategic N eeds As sessment (2014)
•Warrington Playing Pitch Strategy Updated A
ssessment Report (2019)
•Warrington Playing Pitch Strategy and Action Plan (2020)
•Open Space 
Audit (2016)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
(2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Other Planning Documents  
•WBC Design and Construction SPD (2010)
•Planning Obligations SPD (2017)
•Town Centre SPD (2021)
Council Wide Strategies  
•Active Warrington Strategy (2017 – 2020)
•The Corporate  Strategy (2020 -2024)
•Warrington Health and Wellbeing Strategy (201 9 – 2023 )
•Warrington Playing Pitch Strategy  Update  (and Action Plan)  (2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Livewire
•Public sector
•Private Sector
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1378.6 Warrington’s Quality of Place  
 
8.6.1  High Quality design is fundamental to making places more attractive, sustainable, safe and accessible. High quality design is not just about how a development is visually perceived but also whether it is successful in its context, functions well and contributes towards broader sustainability objectives.  
 8.6.2  The way buildings and spaces are de signed has a direct impact on both the built and 
natural environment, and in turn users of that environment.  Good design can help 
reduce and mitigate the impacts of climate change, promote healthier lifestyles, create safer places and make high quality and attractive places that create pride amongst resi dents and encourage further investment.  
 
Policy DC6 - Quality of Place  
 
Good design should be at the core of all development proposals having regard to the 
following principles:  
 
1. Design and Layout  
 
a. Respect, sustain and make a positive contribution to  local character and distinctiveness 
within the surrounding area, and where appropriate the landscape setting,  having regard to 
density,  street layouts, scale, height  and massing;  
b. Contribute positively to the public realm and avoiding unnecessary street clutter;  
c. Provide for new open space and landscaping, including the provision of street trees,  which 
enhances and/or provides mitigation against loss of biodiversity and assists w ith the physical 
and visual integration of new development  in accordance with Policies DC3 to DC5;  
d. Maximise the benefits of any waterfront locations, optimising views and natural 
surveillance of the waterfront and opportunities for public access to it  (subject to complying 
with Policy ENV2 Flood Risk and Water Management) ;  
e. Encourage  innovative design solutions that are appropriate to the local context;  
f. Ensure there is no unacceptable adverse impact on the amenity of neighbouring 
occupants or adjacent land users, including by reason of overlooking;  
g. Not result in unacceptable conditions for future users and occupiers of the development 
in accordance wi th Policy ENV8 ; and  
h. Provide adequate and carefully designed secure storage for bins and recycling containers.  
i. Encourage the principles of crime prevention through environmental design;  
j. Make provision for the efficient delivery of goods and access  for service and emergency 
vehicles; and  
k. Maximise the use of permeable surfaces and encourage water efficiency measures 
including water saving and recycling measures to minimise water usage.  
 
2. Materials  
 
a. Use a palette of high quality materials which are appropriate to the local context in all 
respects including: type, colour, texture, element size and laying pattern and avoid 
unnecessary and excessive patterning;  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
138b.Where contemporary materials are appropriate, use these in manner which respects the
established character of the locality; and
c.Wherever practical, use low embodied energy materials, including materials that are
sourced locally or involve the appropria te reuse of existing resources through the
conversion of existing buildings or reuse of demolished structures.
3.Movement and Accessibility
a.Incorporate and promote sustainable , safe  methods of transport, including cycle routes,
walking routes and good links to public transport;
b.Design places which are not dominated by vehicular access or parking.
c.Be inclusive and accessible to all and promote permeability by creating places that
connect with each other and with existing services and are easy to move through.
d.Design places that meet the principles of ‘Active Travel’ and promote a healthy active
lifestyle .
4.Energy Efficiency
a.Encourage the introduction of environmental design principles and climate change
adaptation features in the orientation of buildings and spaces and other detailed design;
b.Reduce energy and water use through appropriate design;
c.Include the provision of renewable/low carbon technology in accordance with Policy
ENV7 .
5.Security
a.Minimise the incidence and fear of crime through the design of site layout s and buildings ,
the promotion of well -defined routes, overlooked streets and communal spaces, high levels
of activity , well-designed security features , hard and soft landscaping design, boundary
treatments and appropriate use of materials ;
b.Ensure that new open space is accessible, safe, benefits from natural surveillance  and is
strategically located within the site;
c.Incorporat e Secured by Design principles  through the careful consideration of, access and
movement, safe routes, structure, lighting, private space, surveillance, ownership, physical
protection, activity and management and maintenance , whilst ensuring  that these are
adequately b alanced against other design principles and do not undermine the quality of
development; and
d. Pr omote civil resilience and mitigate the risk of potential terrorist attacks through
recognised urban and landscape design solutions .
6.The Council expects masterplans and design codes to be used for larger sites and areas, in
particular for proposed urban extensions, to ensure that a holistic approach is taken to the
design and layout of new or existing areas.  Such masterplans and/or des ign codes may be
formally adopted as supplementary planning documents.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1397. The Council will support, wherever possible, adaptations to existing buildings, subject to 
balancing this with any other important policy imperatives.   New buildings should be 
designed from the outset with all users in mind. 
 
8. The Council has adopted special design and planning guidance for the town centre which 
is contained in  the Warrington Town Centre Supplementary Planning Document.  This sets 
out the expectations of the Council for development proposals coming forward in this area  
and all planning proposals in the town centre should adhere to this guidance.  
 
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 8.6.3  The National  Planning Policy Framework ( 2021) emphasises the importance of good 
design in all development .  Within the three overarching objectives of the planning 
system, paragraph 8(b) identifies a ‘well -designed, beautiful  and safe places , with 
accessible services and open spaces’ as a key part of the delivery of sustainable development . 
 8.6.4  Chapter 12 of the NPPF, ‘Achieving well -designed places’ provides more detailed 
guidance on design.  Paragraph 12 7 states that plans should set out a clear design 
vision and expectations so that applicants have as much certainty as possible about what is likely to be acceptable.  The use of design guides and design codes is also 
referred to in order to provide maximum clarity.  
 
8.6.5  Warrington has a distinctive character and sense of place and it is important that new development responds positively to it.   High quality design should be the focal 
point of all those involved in the development process and should, therefore, consider the wider character in addition to that of the site and its immediate context, to ensure that it reinforces the area in which it  is located. Where there is 
opportunity to improve the area, the design should secure a positive new character, enhancing both its appearance and the way it functions.  
 8.6.6  Development should have due regard to the site and wider setting in respect to layout, movement and connections, scale and height, landscape character, townscape character and in their appearance both in terms of architectural quality and materials.   Development should also ensure high levels of passive surveillance 
of streets, spaces and parking through the arrangement and design of buildings, streets and spaces and the activity within them. Boundary treatments and hard surfaces are equally important to successful design.  
 8.6.7  In rural areas,  particular attention should be paid to la ndscape character, these will 
vary considerably within Warrington and new development should be designed with a distinctive sense of place in mind.  
 8.6.8  The choice of materials is important to any new development, including extensions and alterations to existing buildings. The choice of materials, their colour, texture and pattern of use has a major impact on the way a development looks and can 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
140help articulate and communicate a sense of quality and belonging. A limited and 
carefully selected palette of materials appropriate to the locality is most effective and the use of high quality durable materials will lead to the most sustainable and successful develo pments.  
8
.6.9 The Council will encourage and expect developers to proactively use ‘Places Matter’ design review when designing schemes for significant and sensitive development within the Borough.  This will be particularly important for the Town Centre and 
Waterfront development areas.  
8
.6.10 Ease of access, movement and layout are fundamental parts of the design process 
and the achievement of sustainable development.  In particular the promotion and priority of spaces and places that maximise sustainable methods of transport such 
as cycling and walking are key in supporting healthier lives and lifestyles.  In line with the NPPF design guidance the Council wishes to see design which promotes 
health and well -being with a high standard of amenity . 
8.
6.11  Designing out crime and designing in community safety should be central to the 
planning and delivery of new development, as emphasised in paragraph 130(f) of 
the NPPF.   Section 17 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 requires all local 
authorities t o exercise their functions with due regard to their likely effect on crime 
and disorder, and to do all they reasonably can to prevent crime and disorder.  
8
.6.12 One tool in helping to achieve this is ‘Secured by Design’ (SBD).   SBD is an initiative 
manage d by the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC) on behalf of the UK 
police services which awards this accreditation to schemes which are designed and laid out to address a range of crime prevention initiatives.  
8.
6.13 Paragraph 128 of the NPPF indicates that to provide maximum clarity about design 
expectations at an early stage, local planning authorities should prepare design guides or codes consistent with the principles set out in the National Design Guide and National Model Design Code, and which reflect local character and design 
preferences.   Paragraph 129 advises that Design guides and codes can be prepared 
at an area -wide, neighbourhood or site -specific scale, and to carry weight in 
decision -making should be produced either as part of a plan or as s upplementary 
planning documents.  
8
.6.14 The Equality Act 2010 requires service providers to make reasonable adjustment where disabled customers or potential customers would otherwise be at a substantial disadvantage compared with non -disabled p eople.  This can include 
making changes to the structure of a building to improve access and to provide auxiliary aids and services and making use of optional Building Regulations 
Requirement M4(2) and M4(3), Building for Life 12, or any updated standard i n this 
regard.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1418.6.1 5 The Local Plan envisages that substantial brownfield re -development will take place 
in the town centre with new residential property increasing the town centre’s 
population.  It is important to ensure that attractive liveable enviro nments are 
created for new and existing residents in what will be higher density developments and that residents, business and visitors can co -exist happily together.  To properly 
meet the Council’s ambitions for the town centre’s regeneration a Warrington  Town 
Centre Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) has been produced.  Developers and those bringing forward planning application for sites and property in the town 
centre will be expected to meet the guidance as set out in the SPD.  
 
 Key Evidence  
• National Plan ning Policy Framework ( 2021) 
• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• National Design Guide (Oct 2019)  
• National Model Design Code (Jun 2021)  
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 Other Planning Documents  
 
• Design and Construction SPD (2010)  
• Warrington Town Centre SPD  (2021)  
 Council Wide Strategies  
 
• Conservation Area Management Plans  
• Public Art Strategy  
• Local Transport Plan 4 ( LTP4) (2019)  
• First and Last Mile Transport Masterplan (FLMTM)  (2020)  
 
 Delivery Partners  
 
• Cheshire Constabulary  
• Private Sector Stakeholders  
• Public Sector Stakeholders  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1429 Policies Relating to Objective W6
Objective W6 : To minimise the impact of development on the environment through the 
prudent use of resources and ensuring development contributes to  reducing carbon 
emissions, is energy efficient, safe and resilient to climate change and makes a positive 
contribution to improving Warrington’s air quality.  
9.1 W
aste  Management  in Warrington  
9
.1.1 As a single Unitary A uthority, waste arisings  in Warrington are significantly lower 
than other sub- regional areas in the North West region.  However, Warrington has 
been a major importer of substantial quantities of municipal and commercial and 
industrial wastes from outside the Borough for many  year s due to its location 
between the major conurbations of Merseyside and Greater Manchester  and the 
presence of a number of strategic landfill sites.  
9
.1.2 These s trategic landfill sites have been used for the disposal of wastes transported 
by road.  This has been detrimental to the quality of life of residents of the B orough 
and the Council is committed to reducing the volume of imported waste into 
Warrington whilst supporting the principles of regional waste management self -
sufficiency.   
9
.1.3 The Council commissioned a Waste Needs Assessment (Waste Arisings and Capacity Requirements Report, Urban Vision 2017)  as part of its Local Plan Review, which 
provides estimates of the amount of waste likely to be generated in the Borough 
over the plan per iod; review ed the capacity of existing  and planned waste 
treatment facilities; confirmed cross boundary movements of waste;  and provided 
an estimate of  future gaps in waste management capacity.  
9
.1.4 The report provides a detailed assessment of the need f or future waste 
management capacity  up to 2037  for a number of recycling and growth options for 
the following waste streams:  
•L
ocal Authority Collected Waste (LACW);
•Commercial and Industrial (C&I) Waste;
•Construction, Demolition and Excavation (CD&E) Waste;
•Hazardous Waste;
•Agricultural Waste;
•Low Level (Non -Nuclear) Radioactive (LLR) Waste; and
•Water Waste/Sewage Sludge.
9
.1.5 Policy ENV 1 sets out a clear approach and gives guidance on how development 
should respond to waste  issues across the Borough . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
143Policy ENV 1 - Waste  Management  
 
General Principles  
1. The Council will promote sustainable waste management in accordance with the Waste 
Hierarchy .  In working towards the prevention of waste, Warrington will seek to achieve a 
reduction in the a mount of waste produced in the B orough and treat waste at as high a level 
of the waste hierarchy as practicable by; requiring waste reduction in all aspects of 
planning/development, including the construction, design (using recycled materials) and 
operation stag es; and  providing appropriate and sustainable sites and/or areas for the 
management of waste.  
 
Proposals for Waste Management Development    
2. Dependant on the type of waste , proposals for waste facilities should be located: 
 
a. on redundant farm land (in  the case of green waste and/or biological waste); or  
b. on demolition and construction sites, where the inert waste materials are to be used on 
the construction project on that site; or  
c. at existing permitted waste management sites or co -located with ot her waste 
management development; or  
d. adjacent to or within the curtilages of Waste Water Treatment Works (in the case of 
biological waste); or  
e. at mineral and landfill sites where waste material is used in conjunction with restoration 
or proposed waste operations are temporary and linked to the completion of the 
mineral/landfill operation; or  
f. on areas of Previously Developed Land; or  
g. in employment areas that are existing or allocated in the Local Plan for general industry 
(B2)  and storage an d distribution (B8) uses.  
Any proposals that come forward on land use types not identified above will be assessed on 
their merits, based on the other policies in the Local Plan.  Such locations will be considered 
less favourably than those set out within t his Policy.  
 
Built Facilities  
3. Proposals for new built waste facilities should be focused on industrial estates and 
employment areas and will be required to meet the following criteria:  
 
a. Demonstrate the need for the facility, if there is clear conflic t with other policies of the 
Local Plan;  
b. All waste processes an d operations must be contained  and manage d within buildings 
unless there are acceptable operational reasons why these processes cannot be contained 
within buildings;  
c. Proposals must accord  with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection 
of the environment , public amenity and sustainable transport . 
Where necessary, mitigation measures should be identified to ameliorate any negative 
impacts to an acceptable level . 
 
Open Facilities  
4. Proposals for new open waste facilities will be required to meet the following criteria: 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
144a.Demonstrate the need for the facility, if there is clear conflict with other policies of the
Local Plan;
b.proposals must accord with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection
of the environment , public amenity and sustainable transport .
Cumulative Impacts  
5.Planning permission will be granted for waste management developments where the
cumulative impact would not result in significant adverse impacts on the environment of an
area or on the amenity of a local community, either in relation to the collective effect of
different impacts of an individual proposal, or in relation to the effects of a number of
developments occu rring either concurrently or successively.
Restoration and Aftercare  
6.Applications for waste management facilities that involve landfill/landraising will be
permitted where the  applicant can demonstrate that the site can be restored in a phased
manner to a beneficial after use, with aftercare arrangements in accordance with the
requirements of Policy ENV6 .
Safeguarding Waste Uses  
7.When determining applications for non -waste development, the Council will have regard
to the potential adverse impact the  proposed development might have on the future of a
waste facility or waste allocation as a location for waste management  in accordance with
Policy INF3 .
W
hy we have taken this approach  
9
.1.6 The National Planning Policy for Waste  (NPPW)  (Paragraph 2)  states that when 
preparing their Local Plans, waste planning authorities should, to the extent 
appropriate to their responsibilities:  
•e
nsure that the planned provision of new capacity and its spatial distribution is
based on robust analysis of best available data and information, and anappraisal of options (avoiding spurious precision);
•work jointly and collaboratively with other planning authorities to collect andshare data and information on waste arisings, and take account of:
i. waste arisings  across neighbouring waste planning authority areas;
ii. any waste management requirement identified nationally, including theGovernment’s latest advice on forecasts of waste arisings and theproportion of waste that can be recycled; and
•ensure that the need for waste management facilities is considered alongside
other spatial planning concerns, recognising the positive contribution that wastemanagement can bring to the development of sustainable communities.
9
.1.7 Paragraph 3 requires Waste planning authorities, when preparing Local Plans, to identify sufficient opportunities to meet the identified needs of their area for the management of waste streams.  Whilst. Paragraph 4, indicates that Waste planning 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
145authorities should identify, in their Local Plans, sites and/or areas for new or 
enhanced waste management facilities in appropriate locations.  
 9.1.8  In respect of the planned level of growth, the Waste Needs Assessment
1 identified 
that there is a surplus in capacity for recycling facilities for LACW and C& I Waste 
throughout the plan period, meaning that no additional facilities are required to process these wastes.  However, Warrington’s Waste Disposal Authority has identified that there will be a need for a Waste Transfer Station (WTS) to reduce the 
relian ce on the existing transfer facility in the neighbouring Borough of Halton.  The 
proposed facility will predominantly enable the collection and bulking of residual 
municipal solid waste (MSW), dry mixed recyclates (DMR) and commercial and industrial (C&I) waste as well as potentially green wastes, as well as road sweeper and gully clearing waste.  Its development will meet an established need for a 
localised transfer facility, thereby removing the current reliance on waste to be transported outside of Warrington to the neighbouring B orough of Halton .  The 
Council is  in the process of seeking to identify a site for a WTS from land within our 
own ownership.  If a site cannot  be found from this source  then the Council will look 
to identify a site from existing or proposed employment allocations.  
 9.1.9  The Council has undertaken a review of its Community Recycling Centres ( CRC), 
which has identified a need for additiona l capacity in the south of the B orough.  It is 
proposed to meet this need by closing the existing facility in Stockton Heath and 
providing a replacement facility in the new South East Warrington Urban Extension 
that will have sufficient capacity to cater for the increased capacity require d. 
 
9.1.10  The Waste Needs Assessment also identified a small requirement for additional treatment capacity for LACW, C&I and C&D wastes that cannot be recycled during the plan period.  However, it is difficult to assess the exact requirements as a number of facilities accept more than one type of waste and the small gap could be 
met by surplus treatment capacity that is currently available for CD&E waste should this be capable of meeting the need.  This requirement will be kept under review.  
 9.1.11  A requirement has been  identified for a facility to process and treat LACW and C& I 
Waste to produce RDF (or Solid Recovered Fuel (SRF)) for use in energy recovery.  RDF/SRF is currently exported and used as a fuel outside the plan area.  There are a number of un -built Energy -from- Waste facilities with planning permission and this 
requi rement will be kept under review to assess to what extent these permitted 
sites are being built and able to meet any need.  
 9.1.12  There is an identified requirement for hazardous waste landfill during the plan period although it is anticipated that this w aste will continue to be exported out of 
the area.  In addition, there is an identified capacity requirement for non- hazardous 
landfill from 2018 and for inert landfill from 2031.  
 
1 Waste Arisings and Capacity Requirements Report ( Urban Vision, 2017)  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1469.1.13  The extent  of exports of these waste streams to landfill are outline d in the Waste 
Needs Assessment.  However, the requirements for landfill capacity are not 
considered to be significant and the Council has liaised with other authorities under 
the DtC and all the authorities who receive elements of these waste streams have  
confirmed that they do not consider the quantities to amount to a strategic issue  
that require s on-going discussions or that if they are considered to amount to 
movements of a strategic scale that they can be easily catered for within the consented capaci ty of the recipient facilities.  
9.
1.14  Warrington Borough Council takes an active role in the North West Waste Network (NWWN) and will continue to work  in partnership with its neighbours in the region 
through this group to ensure that any cross boundary m ovements of waste can be 
accommodated.  
Assessment Criteria – Built facilities/Open facilities  
9.1.15  With the exception of a WTS to  screen and bulk up LACW  and a replacement CRC in 
the south of the B orough there is no specific need identified for waste management 
facilities  in the B orough .  Therefore, it is proposed to meet any future requirement 
for waste management facilities through a criteria based policy for both built and open (landfill) types of facilities should a need be identified.  
Cumulative Impacts  
9.1.16  Impacts from one development in any particular area may give rise to impacts that when controlled by mitigation are acceptable and do not give rise to any unacceptable adverse impacts.  However, two or more developments of a similar nature within close proximity to each other may act together to cause impacts that are not acceptable, even with mitigation incorporated into the design for each development.  
9.
1.17  Proposals likely to have a significant effect on internationally important wildlife sites, will need to be assessed through consideration of the possible effects of any other plans and projects, as well as the minerals and/or waste development proposed.  
9.
1.18  The above policy requires cumulative impacts to be considered when two or m ore 
developments are potentially capable of causing significant effects on the 
environment (including climate change), biodiversity interests or on the amenity of 
the local community.  It is also relevant where a new development may affect communities or t he environment cumulatively with existing developments.  
Restoration and aftercare  
9.1.19  Paragraph 8 of NPPW requires that land raising or landfill sites are restored to beneficial after uses at the earliest opportunity and to high environmental standards .  The requirements for restoration and aftercare are essentially the same 
for waste sites as they are for mineral sites.   Policy ENV6 addresses this issue.  
Safeguarding Waste Uses  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1479.1.20  The NPPW requires waste planning authorities to ensure that the impact of 
proposed, non- waste related development on existing waste management facilities, 
and on sites and areas allocated for waste management, is acceptable and does no 
prejudice the implementation of the waste hierarchy and/or the efficient operation of such facilities.  The encroachment of non -compatible development near waste 
management facilities has the potential to result in future difficulties regarding the operating of a waste site.   Policy INF3  addresses this issue.  
  
Key Evidence 
 
• National Plan ning Policy Framework ( 2021) 
• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• National Planning Policy for Waste ( Oct 2014) 
• Waste Management Plan for England ( Jan 2021) 
• Waste Arisings and Capacity Requirements Report (201 7) 
• Waste Study and Policy Review (2017)  
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 Delivery Partners  
 
• Private Sector  Stakeholders  
• Public Sector  Stakeholders  
• Environment Agency  
• United Utilities  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1489.2 Flood Risk  and Water Management  in Warrington 
9
.2.1 Water is a defining feature of Warrington’s landscape, from the River Mersey 
flowing close to the Town Centre, to the man- made Canals and smaller 
watercourses that drain towards it.  Within Warrington, the management of water 
resources is therefore a necessary part of everyday life.   
9
.2.2 Flooding can threaten life, disrupt the local economy and cause substantial damage 
to proper ty in both urban and rural communities. Although flooding cannot be 
wholly prevented, the risk of flooding can be reduced and its impacts can be 
mitigated through good planning and management.  
9
.2.3 Effective land use management has become one of the most important ways to 
manage flood risks and improve community resilience. Sustainable development in 
the right locations can help reduce the quantity of water entering our river and drainage networks, improve water quality within the Borough and provide opportunities to enhance biodiversity, health and recreation.  
9
.2.4 Policy ENV 2 Flood Risk and Water Management sets out a clear approach and gives 
guidance on how development should respond to flood risk  and water management  
issues across the Borough.  
Policy ENV2  - Flood Risk and Water Management  
General Principles  
1.Development should be focused towards areas at the lowest risk of flooding  from all
sources .
2.Sustainable water management measures must be integrated  into developments to
reduce flood risk across the Borough and to avoid adverse impacts on water quality and
quantity.
3.New development should not result in increased flood risk from any source , or cause
other drainage problems, either on the development site or elsewhere.
4.No development should take place within 8m of the top of the bank of a watercourse
either culverted or open, or within 8 metres of a raised flood defence, such as a flood wall
or a flood embankment, unless  this approach is supported by the Environment A gency and
Warrington Borough Council as the Lead Local Flood Authority.
Development proposals  
5.The Council will only support  development proposals where the risk of flooding has been
fully assessed, understood and justified, with the implementation of appropriate mitigation
measures  where necessary .
6.A site specific Flood Risk Assessment is required for:
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
149a. development proposals of 1 hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1;  
b. any development  proposals  within Flood Zone 1, which has critical drainage problems (as 
notified to the Local Planning Authority by the Environment Agency);  
c. all proposals for new development  (including minor development and change of use) in 
Flood Zones 2 & 3;  and 
d. development  proposals  or a change of use to a more vulnerable class that might be 
susceptible to other sources of flooding.  
 
7. The Flood Risk Assessment should also address, if required, the Sequential and Exceptions 
tests as set out in National Planning Policy , and should take into account all sources of 
flooding identified in the Warrington  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) .  
 
8. The Council will require development proposals to:  
 
a. provide safe and clear access and egress routes in the event of a flood;  
b. manage surface water runoff to ensure that flood risk is not increased;  
c. use Sustainable Drainage Systems  that reflect the principles set out in the adopted 
Warrington Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Design and Technical Guidance , unless it 
can be demonstrated that such techniques are impractical or would present an 
unacceptable pollution risk;    
d. provide compensatory storage where development is pro posed in undefended areas of 
the floodplain;   
e. ensure that the layout and design of a site is considered to provide the opportunity to 
provide flood resilience measures and reduce flood risk within the development;  
f. apply a sequential approach at a site level to minimise risk by directing the most 
vulnerable development to areas of lowest  risk; 
g. avoid the use of culverting and building over watercourses and where practical to re -open 
existing culverts;  
h. ensure that appropriate mitigation is included within the design of the development to 
make it safe for the future users of the site without adversely affecting others;   
i. ensure that developers have considered the impacts of climate change to ensure that the 
future users of the development are not put at additional danger of flooding, which may be 
exacerbated by climate change over the  lifetime of the development.  Climate Change 
allowances should be in accordance with the latest Government guidance ; 
j. Consider the connectivity and condition of watercourses within the development and 
make improvements where required ; 
k. Make an assessment of downstream watercourse to ensure their suitability and 
effectiveness ; and  
l. have regard to the Sankey Catchment Action Plan when assessing flood risk and any 
appropriate mitigation measures.  
 
9. In addition, in areas identified by the Counci l as being at intermediate and high risk of 
surface water flooding, development proposals that are greater than 0.5 hectares should be 
supported by a Flood Risk Assessment which considers information in Warrington's Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment and Preliminary Flood Risk Assessment to demonstrate that the 
development : 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
150a.is not at risk from existing drainage systems or overland flows;
b.will make a positive contribution to managing or mitigating flood risk; and
c.will not adversely affect existing flo oding conditions.
10. The Council will expect surface water to be discharged in the following order of priority:
a.An adequate soakaway or some other form of infiltration system.
b.An attenuated discharge to surface water body.
c.An attenuated discharge to public surface water sewer, highway drain or another
drainage system.
d.An attenuated discharge to public combined sewer.
11. Applicants wishing to discharge to public sewer will need to submit clear evidence
demonstrating why alternative op tions are not available. The expectation will be for only
foul flows to communicate with the public sewer.
12. Applicants will be expected to conform to the following discharge requirements unless
site-speci fic policies indicate otherwise:
a. On greenfield sites, applicants will be expected to demonstrate that the current natural
discharge solution from a site is at least mimicked.
b.On previously developed land, applicants will also be expected to follow the surface
water hierarchy.
c.Thereaf ter, any proposal based on a proposed reduction in surface water discharge from
a previously developed site should target a reduction to greenfield run- off rate. A reduction
of at least 30% will be sought on previously developed land, rising to a minimum o f at least
50% in Critical Drainage Areas (as defined in Warrington’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment)
or in areas susceptible to intermediate or high risk surface water flooding. In demonstrating
a reduction, applicants should include clear evidence of ex isting positive operational
connections from the site with associated calculations on rates of discharge.
13. Development proposals will be expected to incorporate sustainable drainage systems in
accordance with the requirements of national planning poli cy. The preference will be for
new development to incorporate infiltration based systems and thereafter surface level
sustainable drainage systems with multi- functional benefits as opposed to underground
tanked storage systems for the management of surface  water. Applicants will need to
submit clear evidence where surface level sustainable drainage features are not proposed.
14. Any development proposal which is part of a wider development / allocation should
demonstrate how the site delivers foul and surface water drainage as part of a wider
strategy having regard to interconnecting phases of development. It will be necessary to
ensure the drainage proposals are part of a wider, holistic strategy which coordinates the
approach to drainage between phases, between developers, and over a number of years of
construction. Applicants will be expected to include details of how the approach to foul and
surface water drainage on a phase of development has regard to interconnecting phases
within a larger site. Infras tructure should be sized to accommodate flows from
interconnecting phases and drainage strategies should ensure a proliferation of pumping
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
151stations is avoided on a phased development. This will ensure a comprehensive  approach to 
drainage and that any early phases of development provide the drainage infrastructure to 
meet the needs of any later interconnecting phases of development. In delivering drainage 
as part of a wider strategy, applicants will also be expected to ensure unfettered rights of 
discharge between the various parcels of development within a wider development to 
prevent the formation of ‘ ransom situations ’ between separate phases of development.  
 
15. Approved development proposals will be expected to be supplemented by appropriate 
maintenance  and management regimes for surface water drainage schemes.  
 
16. Applicants will need to consider and maximise  the contribution landscaping proposals 
can make to reducing surface water discharge. This should  include hard and soft landscaping 
such as permeable surfaces to reduce the volume and rate of surface water discharge.  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 9.2.5  The NPPF  (2021) and the accompanying NPPG ‘Planning Guidance on Flood Risk and 
Coastal Change’ indicate that development should be directed to areas at the lowest risk of flooding. This sequential approach to the location of development aims to avoid, where possible, flo od risk to people and property and to manage any 
residual risk, taking account of the impacts of climate change. To inform this approach, the Council has prepare d a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) to 
support its Local Plan, drawing on information on  all potential sources of flooding 
from the Environment Agency, the Lead Local Flood Authority for  Warrington (WBC)  
and United Utilities.  
 9.2.6  Warrington is at risk from many different sources of flooding including, main rivers, ordinary watercourses, surface water runoff, sewer flooding and the residual risks associated with artificial water bodies such as the Bridgewater Canal, the Manchester Ship Canal and reservoirs.  The canal effectively provides a floodwater 
bypass channel for Warrington.   
 9.2.7  The majority of Warrington is built on the floodplain of the River Mersey, with about three quarters of the urban area lying between 5 and 12 metres above sea level (AOD). The main source of flooding is the River Mersey and its five key tributaries, which flow through the centre of the Borough. The Manchester Ship 
Canal plays a vital role in managing fluvial flood risk along the Mersey. Although principally a navigation canal, the canal provides a floodwater bypass channel for Warrington, which significantly reduces the incidence of flooding from fluvial flows.  
 9.2.8  Surface water flooding is also a key flood risk consideration in Warrington. Surface water flooding includes surface water runoff (pluvial flooding), sewer flooding and flooding from groundwate r. Whilst pluvial flooding from heavy rain fall can occur 
anywhere in the Borough, there are certain locations in Warrington where the 
probability and consequences of these mechanisms are more prominent.   
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1529.2.9  As a Local Planning Authority, Warrington Borough Council will use the flood risk 
evidence collected through the SFRA and the Council’s Surface Water Management 
Plan (SWMP)  to avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding by 
directing development away from areas at highest risk . Where  development is 
necessary,  it should be made safe without inc reasing  flood risk elsewhere. This 
should be carried out through the planning process, specifically during the 
development of the Local Plan.  
9.
2.10  Warrington Borough Council is working in part nership with the Environment 
Agency, Healthy Rivers Trust, Halton and St Helens Council as part of a catchment based approach, to produce the Sankey Catchment Action Plan.  
9.
2.11  This has the aims of reducing the reactive nature of the catchment by “Slowing the 
Flow” in the rural headwaters and filtering agricultural run -off; improving water 
quality and wildlife habitat , addressing issues in the urban areas of the catchment 
such as wrong connections and removing pinch- points that can contribute to poor 
water quality and localised flooding. Riparian development can make a significant contribution to slowing the flow by tem porarily attenuating flood water.   
K
ey Evidence 
•N
ational Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC SFRA Level 1 & 2 (2018)  & Addendum (2021)
•WBC Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Design and Technical Guidance
(2017)
•WBC Pre liminary Flood Risk Assessment  (2017)
•Sankey Catchment Action Plan (2018)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
C
ouncil Wide Strategies  
•W
arrington Means Business
D
elivery Partners  
•P
rivate Sector  Stakeholders
•Public Sector  Stakeholders
•Environment Agency
•United Utilities
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1539.3  Planning for Warrington’s Mineral Resources  
 
9.3.1  The mineral resources of Warrington have been broadly grouped into the following categories in accordance with British Geological Survey (BGS) Report CR/05/090N:  
 
• Superficial Deposits including glaciofluvial sand and gravel, river terrace sand 
and gravel,  and sub -alluvial sand and gravel;  
• Peat;  
• Salt; and  
• Coal  
 
In addition to these broad categories of mineral resource identified by the BGS, 
there are also known to be some clay and sandstone reserves.  However, these only occur in isolated pockets; are of variable quality and thickness and hence are not mapped as a resource.  
 9.3.2  Sand and gravel deposits within Warrington tend to be confined to superficial drift deposits of glacial origin in the Devensian period.  Whilst, the deposits are fairly 
extensive, partic ularly in the east of the Borough  and s and and gravel have  been 
extracted in the past  in this part of the B orough  there are no working quarries at 
present.  
 9.3.3  In Warrington, planning permission was granted in 1995 for an extension to a permission  to extract peat from waste deposited during the construction of the 
M62 at Frank’s Farm, Culcheth.  However, there have been no recent planning permissions for primary peat extraction.  
 9.3.4  Salt resources are found in the east of Warrington and occur within the Triassic 
Mercia Mudstone Group (Northwich Halite Formation).  Although salt is extracted from this formation in nearby Cheshire, it is not currently exploited in Warrington.  
  9.3.5  The South Lancashire Coalfield lies concealed under much of Warrington.  Coal 
seams are associated with Westphalian (Pennine Coal Measures) deposits but 
resources are generally buried beneath deposits of sandstones, up to 50m in depth in the north of the Borough and up to 1200m in depth in the south. Coal was previous ly extracted from beneath Warrington in workings that extended outwards 
from colliery complexes whose pitheads and surface development were located in 
the adjoining  Borough of St  Helens.   There are no active collieries any more but 
there is an active coalbed methane site within Warrington associated with coal deposits.  
 9.3.6  Historically Warrington has played only a minor role in mineral production in the North West region  and current minerals activity is fairly limited.  The only quarry 
producing aggregat e is a sandstone quarry at Southworth (Croft), which produces 
crushed rock aggregate.  There is also some clay extract ion in the Rixton area in the 
east of the B orough .  There is an operational coalbed methane site where gas 
extraction is taking place at D oe Green  in the west of the borough.  In addition, Peel 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
154Holdings have permitted development rights for sand dredging on the Manchester 
Ship Canal.  
9
.3.7 Warrington  is covered by a total of five Petroleum Exploration and Development 
Licences (PEDL).  These licences (Numbers: 145, 193, 253, 273 and 276) cover the 
majority of the Borough. 
Mi
neral Safeguarding 
9
.3.8 Minerals are finite resources and their conservation and waste minimisation are important planning considerations.  In order to conserve miner al resources every 
effort must be made to ensure that where practicable mineral bearing land is not sterilised by development and the value of mineral is identified for appropriate end uses.  The Council’s Mineral Resource Study ( 2017 ) sought to define the  broad 
extent of Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs)  and mineral processing, management 
and transporting facilities . 
F
igure 14  – Mineral Safeguarding Areas  
9
.3.9 In determining whether prior extraction is feasible an assessment of the mineral resource including detailed site investigations should be undertaken to identify the quality, quantity and extent of the resource, the economic viability of prior extraction a nd the proportion of the mineral to be used on- site and saleable 
aggregate.  The assessment should also take account of the size, nature and need 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
155for the (non- minerals) development as well as the proposed phasing of operations 
and construction of the non -mineral development.  
 
9.3.10  Important mineral related infrastructure will also be safeguarded.  Key mineral 
infrastructure sites are shown on the Minerals Key Infrastructure Diagram  (Figure 
15).  These include storage, handling and processing facilities (i ncluding facilities 
processing waste into aggregates).  Applications for a non -mineral related use will 
be expected to demonstrate that the site has no realistic potential for the 
development of mineral related infrastructure or no longer meets the needs o f the 
minerals industry.  Identification of these areas does not imply that any application 
for the working of minerals within them will be granted planning permission.   Non -
minerals development within the specified distance of an existing site or minerals  
related infrastructure should be required to demonstrate that it would not 
adversely affect the future use of the mineral or site/infrastructure.  
  Figure 15 - Key Minerals Infrastructure  
 
  9.3.11  Not all forms of development will result in the sterilisation of minerals, and the 
sterilisation effect of some development is considered minor.  For example, urban 
areas have not been excluded from the MSA as larger redevelopments, areas of new development a nd urban extensions may present opportunities  for mineral 
extraction ; whereas an extension to an existing dwelling house would not.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1569.3.12  Non -mineral development which is exempt from the requirements of safeguarding 
in Policy ENV3  are listed in the Table  8. 
Table 8  - Non -mineral development exempt from the requirements of 
safeguarding 
Types of development exempt from safeguarding  
i)Applications for Householder development.
ii)Applications for alterations or extensions to existing buildings and for change of
use of existing development which do not fundamentally change the scale and
character of the building/use.
iii) Applications that are in accordance with the local plan where the plan took
account of prevention of unnecessary mineral sterilisation and d etermined that
prior extraction should not be considered when development applications in a
Mineral Safeguarding Area came forward.
iv)Applications for Advertisement Consent.
v) Applications for reserved matters including subsequent applications afte r
outline consent has been granted.
vi)Prior notifications (telecommunications; forestry’ agriculture; demolition).
vii) Certificates of Lawfulness of Existing or Proposed Use or Development (Section
191) and Certificates of Lawfulness of Proposed Use or Development (Section
192).
viii)Applications for works to trees.
ix)Applications for temporary planning permission.
x)Applications for Conservation Area Consent.
xi)Applications for Listed Buildings Consent.
xii) Development within the urban area is excluded from a requirement to consider
the MSA, except where the development is larger than 5ha.
Policy ENV3 - Safeguarding of Minerals Resources  
Safeguarding Mineral Resources  
1.Mineral Safeguarding areas (MSAs) are defined on the Policies Map.
2.Sand , gravel  and shallow  coal resources  and sandstone and brickclay workings  within the
Minerals Safeguarding Areas will be protected from permanent sterilisation by other
development .
3.Planning permission will be granted for non -mineral development within a Mineral
Safeguarding Area, as defined on the Pol icies  Map , where it is demonstrated that:
a.the mineral is not of economic value or potential value, or does not exist; or
b.that extraction of the mineral would not be physically viable or practicable; or
c.the mineral can be extracted satisfactorily prior to the non -minerals development taking
place without adversely affecting the viability or deliverability of the non -minerals
development; or
d.the development is of a temporary nature that can be completed and the site returned to
a condition that would not prevent future mineral extraction; or
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
157e. material considerations indicate that the need for the development overrides  the 
presumption for mineral safeguarding such that sterilisation of the mineral can be 
permitted following the exploration of opportunities for prior extraction; or 
f. it constitutes development that is exempt from miner al safeguarding policy (See the lis t of 
exempt criteria in Table 8 ). 
 
4. Planning applications for development within the mineral safeguarded areas defined on 
the Polices Map will need to demonstrate  that impacts, e.g. noise, dust, light and air 
emissions, that may legitimately arise from the activities taking place in the safeguarded 
areas would not be experienced to an unacceptable level by occupants of the proposed 
development and that vehicle acce ss to and from the area would not be constrained by the 
development proposed.  
 
Safeguarding Minerals Infrastructure  
5 Existing minerals infrastructure is identified on the Policies Map (and in Fig.15).  Planning 
permission will only be granted for development that is incompatible with safeguarded 
minerals transportation, handling  or processing  facilities , both existing and new (including 
above ground infrastructure associated with energy mineral exploration and production) , 
where it is demonstrated that eit her:  
 
a. it constitutes exempt development as set out in Table 8 ; or 
b. it has been demonstrated that the capacity of the facility to be lost is not required; or  
c. replacement capacity, of the similar type, is available at a suitable alternative site, wh ich 
is at least equivalent or better than that offered by the facility that it is replacing; or  
d. the development proposed would not prevent or unduly restrict the continued operation 
of the protected infrastructure ; or 
e. material considerations indicate  that the need for development overrides the 
presumption for safeguarding . 
 
6. Planning applications for development within 250m of safeguarded infrastructure  will 
need to demonstrate that impacts, e.g. noise, dust, light, vibration  and air emissions, that 
may legitimately arise from the activities taking place at the safeguarded sites would not be 
experienced to an unacceptable level by occupants of the proposed development and that 
vehicle access to and from the facility would not be constrained by the development 
proposed.  
 
Why we have taken this approach  
 
9.3.13  Paragraph 2 10(c) of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires  that 
MPAs should identify Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSA s) and Mineral Consultation 
Areas (MCAs )1 and adopt appropriate policies in their Plans  so that known locations 
of specific mineral resources of local and national importance are not sterilised by non-mineral development wherever possible .  In addition to safeguarding mineral 
resources which may become of economic importance, paragraph 2 10(e) of the 
NPPF requires the council to safeguard existing, planned and potential minerals 
1 Only a requirement in two tier areas of local government.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
158infrastructure such as; rail heads and wharfs; sites for the manufacturing of 
concrete and concrete products; and permanent facilities for the processing and distribution of substitute, recycled and secondary aggregate material.  
 Furthermore,  
paragraph 2 15(a ) of the NPPF requires Mineral Planning Authorities to plan 
positively for the three phases of oil and gas development.  Therefore, it is 
considered appropriate to also protect above ground infrastructure associated with the exploration and production of energy minerals.  
9.
3.14  The p lanning policy guidance explains that safeguarding mineral resources should 
be defined in designated areas and urban areas where necessary to do so.  For example, safeguarding of minerals beneath large regeneration projects in brownfield land areas can enable suitable use  of the mineral and stabilisation of any 
unstable land before non -minerals development takes place.  Applying the MSA 
based on the geological occurrence of minerals only would cover a significant portion of the main urban area of Warrington north of the Manchester Ship Canal.  
Whilst, a significant amount of development is proposed within the existing urban area of Warrington, including a few large sites, analysis of the resources reveals that much of it has already been built on and sterilised by urban dev elopment in the 
areas where deposits occur.  
9.
3.15  Also, identifying the full extent of resources available and requiring prior extraction may place onerous requirements on developers and the Council to provide/assess 
data on mineral resources when applications for non -mineral development are 
made in the urban area when the housing and employment development is one of 
Warrington’s priorities.  
9.
3.16  Therefore, in order to remove this burden, the policy only requires those proposed developments on sites of greater than 5ha within the urban area to undertake a mineral resource assessment.  Other, smaller, developments within the urban area will not be required to consider prior extraction, although this does not preclude prior extraction should a developer consider this appropriate.  
9.
3.17  Non-minerals development near a resource can result in sterilisation of that 
resource even where the development does not overlie the mineral.  Therefore, in 
order to ensure that all identified mineral resources are safeguarded from proximal development, a buffer has been applied around the MSAs to ensure that proposals 
for non -minerals development within a specified distance of a mineral resource 
must consider the potential for the sterilisation of the mineral occurring a nd the 
associated impacts.  The following buffer zones have been included in the MSA 
boundaries identified in the Council’s Mineral Resource Study (2017) and shown on 
the Policies Map :
  
T
able  9 – Mineral Resource Buffer Zones  
Resource  Area to Safeguard  Buffer (metres)  
Aggregates  Sand and Gravel  Superficial deposits:  
Sub-alluvial river terrace 
deposits  250 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
159  Resource  Area to Safeguard  Buffer (metres)  
Glaciofluvial deposits  
Sandstone  Southworth Quarry  500 
Other  Clay Clay workings near Rixton  250 
Shallow coal  Shallow Coal resource  250 
 
9.3.18  In addition, paragraph 18 7 of the NPPF requires that existing businesses and 
facilities should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of 
development permitted after they were established. Where the operation of an 
existing business o r community facility could have a significant adverse effect on 
new development (including changes of use) in its vicinity, the applicant (or ‘agent of change’) should be required to provide suitable mitigation before the development has been completed.  Therefore, a buffer has also been applied 
around existing mineral extraction infrastructure and transportation, handling and processing facilities to ensure that proposals for new non- mineral related 
development within a specified distance must consider the  potential for it to have 
significant adverse impacts requiring unreasonable restrictions to be placed on the existing operations.  Where specific criteria are not met or it cannot be demonstrated that the proposed development would not unreasonably restri ct the 
operations of the protected infrastructure then planning permission would be refused.  
 
9.3.19  Clay is currently extracted at a site ‘West of Moat Lane’ and planning permission 
exists for the future working of a site at Omrod Farm, both in the Rixton  area, 
although the wider clay resource is not identified as a mineral resource by the BGS due to the fact that other outcrops are of variable quality and thickness.  Therefore, the plan does not seek to safeguard clay as a general resource, but does safeg uard 
the existing clay workings near Rixton.  
  9.4 Meeting Future Aggregate Requirements and Provision of Non -Aggregates  
 9.4.1  The MPAs of Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Halton and Warrington have co -
operated as a single sub -region for the purpose of aggregates supply, reflecting 
their status as a single aggregate apportionment sub- region under MASS.  The latest 
LAA published in January 2019 (using data for the period 1
st Jan 2018 to 31st Dec 
2018 ) indicates that the total reserves of crushed rock were 17.50  million tonnes at 
the end of 201 8.  This would provide for a total of 2 9.16 years of sales based on the 
average sales over t he most recent 10 -year period.  However, the land bank for 
sand and gravel is estimated to have fallen below 7 years for the third year in 
succession, with a total reserves of 1.2 million tonnes, representing 4.4 years of sales based on the average sales over the most recent 10 year period.  
 9.4.2  Whilst, no new specific sites which are suitable for mineral extraction have been 
identified (albeit that one site was promoted  but when assessed found not to be 
suitable) , BGS mineral resource information identifies fairly significant deposits of 
sand and gravel in the B orough.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1609
.4.3 Industrial minerals  extraction , in the form of c lay, takes place in the east of the 
Borough.  Permission exists at three sites in this area ‘West of Moat Lane’, ‘Omrod 
Farm’ and ‘Moss Hall Farm’, all operated by Collier Industrial Waste Ltd  (See Figure 
15).  Clay extracted from these sites is restricted to use as feedstock to the Cheshire 
Brickmakers factory.  Significant reserves remain at ‘West of Moat Lane’ and 
‘Omrod Farm’,  however, the permitted reserves at ‘Moss Hall Farm’ have been 
worked out.  Clay is currently extracted at the ‘West of Moat Lane’ site only.  
Adjacent to these workings is Chapel Lane Quarry, which is permitted to extract clay under an Interim Development Order (IDO) although it is not currently being 
worked.  
Policy ENV4  – Primary Extraction of Minerals  
Aggregate Extraction within Mineral Safeguarding Areas  
1.Applications for the extraction and/or processing of sand, gravel or sandstone/gritstone
within the MSAs  identified on the Policies Map will be permitted where:
a.The mineral is required to meet the required landbank of: i) at least 7 years for sand and
gravel; or ii)  at least 10 years for crushed rock ; and
b.the site contains adequate resources of the mineral, in terms of quality and quantity for
extraction to take place; and
c.The p roposal accord s with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection
of the e nvironment , public amenity and sustainable transport or demonstrates that other
material considerations outweigh any policy conflict .
Aggregate Extraction outside Mineral Safeguarding Areas 
2.Planning permission will be permitt ed for the extraction of aggregates outside Mineral
Safeguarding Areas provided that:
a.The developer can provide evidence to support the need for departure from the Mineral
Safeguarding Areas identified: and
b.the proposal meets the requirements  of (a) to (c) above for extraction within Mineral
Safeguarding Areas .
Non -Aggregates 
3.Proposals for the development of non- aggregate minerals will be permitted provided
that:
a.The p roposal accords with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection
of the environment, public amenity and sustainable transport or demonstrates that other
material considerations outweigh any policy conflict ; and
b.there  are adequate resources of the mineral on site  in terms of quality and quantity for
extraction to take place.
Windfall Sites 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1614.Favourable consideration may also be given to proposals that can be demonstrated to be
more sustainable than any available alternative, including:
a.borrow pits to meet a specific demand  not easily met from else where;
b.building stone quarries, including their need for stone to match the conservation and
repair of heritage assets and also for local vernacular building;
c.areas already subject to minerals extraction where the additional working will enable
comprehensive exploitation of the reserves, or where the proposal achieves a more
sustainable afteruse or a better restoration of the area.
W
hy we have taken this approac h 
Meeting future requirements  
9.4.4  Paragraph 2 13 of the NPPF states that MPAs should plan for a steady and adequate 
supply of minerals and use the length of the landbank  in its area as an indicator of 
when new permissions for aggregates extraction are likely to be needed.  The 
minimum landbank for sand and gravel is 7 years and for crushed rock is 10 years.  A landbank below these levels suggests that additional resources  will need to be 
permitted, if acceptable applications are submitted.  
9
.4.5 The NPPF introduced a requirement for MPAs to prepare an annual Local Aggregates Assessment (LAA) based on a rolling average of 10 years sales data and 
other relevant local information and an assessment of all supply options.  National 
Planning Practice Guidance explains that mineral planning authorities should also look at average sales over the last 3 years in particular to identify the general trend of demand as part of the cons ideration of whether it might be appropriate to 
increase supply.  
9
.4.6 In addition, paragraph 2 14 requires MPAs to plan for a steady and adequate supply 
of industrial minerals by ensuring that stocks of permitted reserves are provided to support investment in new and existing plant that utilise industrial minerals.   National policy requires that a stock of permitted reserves of 25 years be provided for each works using brick clay.  Significant reserves remain at ‘West of Moat Lane’; ‘Omrod Farm’ and Chape l Lane Quarry to provide feedstock to the Cheshire 
Brickmakers factory.  Therefore the Local Plan does not include allocations for additional reserves.  
9
.4.7 There are no identified sources of indigenous building stone within the Borough, 
however, Policy ENV4  allows for their extraction should any sources be identified. 
Assessment Criteria – All Mineral Development  
9.4.8  Most minerals developments are temporary but may be there for many years. Whilst these developments are essential for the community as  whole, local 
communities close to them, or to their lorry routes, need to be protected from unacceptable impacts. This is also the case for environmental and heritage assets. Paragraph 2 10(f) of the  NPPF states that MPAs should set out environmental 
crite ria, in line with policies of the NPPF, against which planning applications will be 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
162assessed so as to ensure that permitted operations do not have unacceptable 
adverse impacts on the natural and historic environment or human health.  
9.4.9  With
 regard to shale gas operations a large amount of waste water requiring 
treatment is often generated from these type of sites because of the limited drainage systems in the areas where they are located.  This can result in a large number of vehicle movements transpor ting waste water.  Any assessment of traffic 
generation and access arrangements should take account of these movements.  
9.4.10  The lo
cation of mineral extraction areas is determined by the existence of the 
resource and is thereby restricted in achieving more sustainable transport options.  In addition, minerals are a high bulk, low value commodity which generally restricts their use to locally based markets accessed by road based transport and the 
transportation of minerals by rail and water is generally only economic over longer distances and is dependent on network capacity and adequate loading and reception facilities.  
9.4.11  Warri
ngton is well served by the national rail network and the Manchester Ship 
Canal runs through the middle of the Borough.  Much of the mineral resource is 
located in close proximity to these sustainable modes of transport.  Therefore, in order to minimise the impact of large volumes of HGV movements, mineral related development should look to exploit opportunities for the use of these sustainable 
modes of transport.  
9.4.12  Polic
y ENV4 ad dresses this requirement by requiring mineral related development 
both  within and outside of MSAs to comply with all other policies of the Local Plan 
relating to the protection of the environment, public amenity and sustainable 
transport.  
9.5 Energy Mi
nerals  
9.5.1  Petr
oleum Exploration and Development Licences (PEDL) allo w for the pursuit of a 
range of oil and gas activities, subject to planning permission and other consents. The majority of Warrington is covered by a total of five PEDL (Numbers: 145, 193, 253, 273  and 276).  It is not proposed to safeguard hydrocarbons  themselves as 
their exact locations will only be determined through detailed exploration and  
because the surface development associated with their extraction is f lexible 
regarding its location.  
9.5.2  A small 
area of shallow coal resource is identified in th e north west of the Borough 
(See Figure 14).  Coal is a nationally important resource and it is therefore proposed to safeguard the shallow coal resource.  
Policy ENV5  – Energy Minerals  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1631.Proposals for energy minerals developments will be supported subject to the following
criteria:
Exploration and appraisal of hydrocarbons 
2.Planning permission will be granted for proposals for exploration and appraisal of oil and
gas resources, within areas benefiting from a Petroleum Development Licence (PEDL),
provided that:
a.the site and equipment is sited at a location where it can be demonstrated that it will
accord with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection of the
environment, public amenity and sustainable transport; and
b.the timely restoration and subsequent aftercare of the site  is secured , whether or not oil
or gas is found.
Commercial exploitation of hydrocarbons 
3.Planning permission will be granted for proposals for commercial exploitation of oil and
gas, provid ed that:
a.a full appraisal programme for the oil or gas field has been completed;  and
b.the proposed location is the most suitable, taking into account environmental, geological
and technical factors;  and
c.the cumulative landscape and visual impacts of the development of the oil or gas field and
essential associated infrastructure have been assessed; and
d.proposals accord with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection of
the environment, public amenity and sustainabl e transport.
4.Combined planning applications for more than one phase will only be considered if all
relevant information, including environmental information, to support the full extent of the
application is provided.
Coal 
5.Planning applications for coal extraction will only be granted where;
a.the proposal is environmentally acceptable; or
b.can be made so by planning conditions or obligations; or, if not
c.provides national, local or community benefits which clearly outweigh the likely impacts
to justify the grant of planning permission.
6.For underground coal mining, potential impacts to be considered and mitigated for will
include subsidence and the disposal of colliery spoil.  Provision of sustainable transport will
be encouraged, as will C oal Mine Methane capture and utilisation.
Peat 
7.The B orough’s peat resources will be protected.  In line with national policy planning
permission  for new or extended sites for peat extraction will not be approved.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1649.5.3  Paragraph 2 15(a) of the NPPF requires that Local Plan policy clearly distinguishes 
between and plans positively for the three different phases of oil and gas 
development.  Thus Policy ENV5  provides separate criteria for the exploration and 
appraisal phases, compared to the exploitation phase.  
9.5.4  Paragrap
h 215 (c) requires that Local Plan policy indicate any areas where coal 
extraction and the disposal of colliery spoil may be acce ptable.  Whilst, paragraph 
215(d ), encourages the capture and use of methane from coal mines in active and 
abandoned coalfield areas.  
9.5.5  In a
ddition, paragraph 2 11(d) of the NPPF states that planning permission for peat 
extraction should not be granted.  
Figure
 16 – Peat Resources  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Plan ning Policy Framework ( 2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Minerals Resource Study and Policy Review (2017)
•Joint Local Aggregate Assessment (Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Halton and
Warrington) (201 9)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Why we have taken this approach  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
165Delivery Partners  
 
• Neighbouring Authorities  
• Private Sector Stakeholders  
• Public Sector Stakeholders  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1669.6 Restoration and Aftercare of Mineral and Waste Sites  
9.6.1  It 
is particularly important that temporary development sites such as quarries, 
mineral working sites and waste landfill/landraising sites are properly restored and 
the measures taken to achieve this are appropriate.  One of the key objectives of the Plan is to minimise the impact of development on the environment.  Mineral extraction and processing and subsequent landfilling can have a significant impact on the natural environment.  Nevertheless, the future use and aftercare of sites that 
have been extracted for their mineral resource and/or used for waste disposal can 
be restored and put to beneficial use once operations ha ve ceased.  
Policy ENV6 – Restoration and Aftercare of Mineral and Waste Sites  
1.Applications for mineral extraction and/or landfill/landraising of waste sites  will be
permitted where they are accompanied by appropriate proposals for site restoration and
aftercare.  This should include the following:
a.Details of the final restoration scheme a nd proposed future land use;
b.Details of timescales for completion of restoration including details of completion of
individual phases of restoration where a progressive restoration scheme is proposed;
c.Details of aftercare arrangements that are to be put in place to ensure the maintenance
and management of the site once restoration is complete; and
d.Details of community liaison measures to be put in place during the operation of the site
including mineral extraction (and/or landfilling/landraising), restoration and final land use.
2.In defining the future land use for the site, restoration should be geared towards
improvement of final land use and should:
a.Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority that the proposal is in
accordance with all other policies of the Local Plan in relation to the protection of the
environment,  flood risk,  public amenity and sustainable transport;
b.Take account of the pre -working character of the site and its landscape setting where
appropriate; and
c.Where land is to be restored for agricultural or forestry, use appropriate restoration
techniques to ensure that the land is capable of supporting  such  uses in the long term.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
9.6.2  Paragrap
h 210(h) of the NPPF  requires that planning policies ensure that land is 
reclaimed at the earliest opportunity, taking account of aviation safety and that high quality restoration and aftercare of mineral sites takes place.  Therefore, in respect of proposals for mineral extraction the MPA will request details of the restoration and aftercare of the site.  
9.6.3  The 
effective restoration of a site will often depend upon the identification and 
proper management of soil resources, prior to operations taking place, as well as during the restoration and aftercare phases.  To establish the quality and quantity of 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
167the soil resource the findings of a detailed survey will be required with an 
application, where appropriate.  
 9.6.4  To facilitate the earliest possible restoration and limit operational impacts, mineral workings should be subject to progressive extraction and restoration, wherever possible.  The phased sequence of extraction and/or restoration should be provided at the application stage.  The aim should be to achieve phased restoration to minimise the area of land disturbed and the total period of mineral working and/or 
landfill operations.  
 
9.6.5  Following the final restoration of any land it should be placed in aftercare.  The statutory minimum time for an aftercare period is 5 years but the MPA will seek to 
negotiate longer periods where this is necessary.  Aftercare measures are required to ensure that the restoration is sustained and the site is returned to a beneficial use. These measures involve improving the structure,  stability and nutrient value of 
soils, ensuring adequate drainage is available, maintenance of public rights of way, and securing the establishment and management of newly seeded and planted areas together with such other maintenance as may be necessary t o bring the land 
back to its approved after -use. 
 9.6.6  The restoration of mineral workings provides an opportunity to return land either to its original use, or an alternative use of benefit to the local or wider community.  A 
wide range of possible optio ns exist for suitable after -uses following the completion 
of mineral working activities.  These include:  
 
• creation or enhancement of biodiversity and geodiversity;  
• improvements to the landscape;  
• provision of recreational facilities and public open space;  
• creation of new woodland, including community woodlands;  
• creation of new water environments;  
• improved public access, including new public footpaths and bridleways; and  
• agriculture and food production.  
 
9.6.7  Paragraph 174 of the NPPF requires planning policies to contribute to and enhance 
the natural and local environment, in particular by minimising the impacts on and providing net biodiversity gains.  The restoration of mineral extraction sites offers significant opportunities to secure a net- gain in biodi versity and address past losses.  
 9.6.8  Paragraph 146 of the NPPF  encourages LPAs to take opportunities to upgrade the 
landscape and provide for recreation and wildlife around towns and cities through the National Forest Strategy and Community Forests .  In Warrington, the local 
Community Forest is The Mersey Forest.  Woodlan ds have a wide range of benefits 
recognised in the Government’s 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment (A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment, DEFRA Jan 2018),  which 
supports the creation of a new Community  Forest crossing the country, using the 
M62 corridor as its spine.  Restoration proposals have the opportunity to support 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
168the existing partnership of Community Forests and the Woodland Trust to 
accelerate and fu rther develop the Mersey Forest.  
9.6.9  To 
achieve satisfactory restoration to agricultural or forestry uses, topsoil and 
subsoil in sufficient quantities are required.  In cases where insufficient soils exist on site, the applicant will need to make provision to ensure that adequate soils or soil making materials are available to restore the site satisfactorily. The manner in which soil materials are handled is also a key element of successful restoration, and details 
of the management of soils, including storage methods, timing and means of soil 
movements, and machinery to be used will be required.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•National Planning Policy for Waste (Oct 2014)
•Minerals Resource Study  and Policy Review (2017)
•Waste Study and Policy Review (2017)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Delivery
 Partners  
•Private 
Sector Stakeholders
•Public Sector Stakeholders
•Environment Agency
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
169 
9.7 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Development  in Warrington  
 9.7.1  The Government has taken a number of steps to limit the UK’s emissions of greenhouse gases through legally binding targets, both now and in the future.  As 
part of an international effort the UK has been signed up to the Kyoto Protocol since 1995 and in 2016 ratified the Paris Agreement.  The 2008 Climate Change Act commits the Government to reducing targeted UK greenh ouse gas emissions by at 
least 80% in 2050 from 1990 levels.   In April 2021 the Government announced its 
sixth Carbon Budget and its plan to cut emissions by 78% by 2035 (and to net -zero 
by 2050).  
 9.7.2  The Council declared a Climate Emergency in 2019.  The Council’s Climate 
Emergency declaration pledges to make Warrington a net zero carbon area. This will 
involve both an inward looking focus and an outward looking focus.  The latter involves working with partners across the town and region to deliver this  goal.  
 9.7.3  The Council’s Green Energy Strategy outlines our intentions for our own estate, the 
emissions of our Borough and how we will look to adapt to climate change.   To try 
to reduce the potentials effects of climate change we need to focus on ensuring we reduce our carbon emissions and protect our natural environment.   One way of 
helping to achieving this goal is to ensure that new development is as energy 
efficient as possible and to support the provision of renewable and low carbon energy inf rastructure.  
 9.7.4  Policy ENV7  sets out a clear approach and gives guidance on how development 
should respond to energy issues across the Borough.  
 
Policy ENV 7 - Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Development  
 
Renewable/Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure  
1. Proposals for dev elopment that would produce , store  and/or distribute low carbon or 
renewable energy , including the retrofitting of infrastructure to existing 
development/buildings,  will be permitted provided that they satisfy the requirements of 
other relevant Plan policies and would  not result in unacceptable harm to the local 
environment.  The Council will have  regard to any environmental, social and/or economic 
benefits that the proposals would provide, and their num ber, scale, siting, design and any 
cumulative impact in conjunction with other proposals.  
 
2. In assessing low carbon and renewable energy proposals, the Council will give positive 
weight to initiatives which are community -led or where there are direct ben efits to the local 
community through their involvement.  
 
Renewable/Low Carbon Energy in New  Development    
3. Proposals for new development for housing, employment or other uses will be required 
to minimise carbon emissions.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1704.Major development in all locations outside of the strategic allocations will be required to
meet at least 10% of their energy needs from renewable and/or other low carbon energy
source(s) or to reduce their carbon emissions by at least 10% when measured against the
Building Regulation  (Part L)  requirements at the time that the application is submitted.
5. In the strategic housing and employment allocations as defined in Polices MD1 to MD6
and OS1 to OS6  and identified on the Key Diagram/Polices Map development should seek to
reduc e carbon emissions and maximise opportunities for the use of decentralised energy
systems that would use or generate renewable or other forms of low carbon energy.  In
these locations all development will be required to establish, or connect to an existing ,
decentralised energy network unless this is shown not to be feasible or viable, in which case
development will be required to;
a. make provision to enable future connectively in terms of site layout, heating design and
site-wide infrastructure design; and
b.ensure that at least 10% of their energy needs can be met from renewable and/or other
low carbon energy source(s) ; or
c. to reduce their carbon emissions by at least 10% when measured against the Building
Regulation (Part L) requirements at the time that the application is submitted .
6.Large scale schemes that would generate a significant source or demand for heat should
be supported by evidence considering the feasibility of serving the development by means
of a district heating s ystem.
Why we h
ave taken this approach  
Renewable/Low Carbon Energy Infrastructure  
9.7.5  One of the core principles of the National Planning Policy Framework is to support 
the transition to a low carbon future in a changing climate and encourage the use of 
renewable and low carbon energy resources (Paragraph 1 52).  It indicates that 
planning has a key role to play in the delivery of new renewable and low carbon 
energy infrastructure in locations where the local environmental impact is acceptable.  
9.7.6  Paragrap
h 155 of the NPPF states that to help increase the use and supply of 
renewable and low carbon energy and heat, plans should:  
•have a
 positive strategy to promote energy from renewable and low carbon
sources that maximises the potential for suitable development, whilst ensuringthat adverse impacts are addressed satisfactorily, including cumulativelandscape and visual impacts;
•consider identifying suitable areas for renewable and low carbon energy sources
and supporting infrastructure, where this would help secure the development of
such sources ;
•identify opportunities where development can draw its energy supply from
decentralised, renewable or low carbon energy supply systems and for co -
locating potential heat customers and suppliers.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
171 
9.7.7  Whilst, paragraph 15 6 indicates that local planning authorities should support 
community -led initiatives for renewable and low carbon energy, including 
deve lopments outside such areas being taken forward thr ough local plans or other 
strategic policies that are being taken forward through neighbourhood planning.  
 9.7.8  Increasing the amount of energy from renewable and low carbon technologies will 
also help to  make sure the UK has a secure energy supply, reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions to slow down climate change and stimulate investment in new jobs and businesses.  
 9.7.9  Proposals for renewable energy related development can in some instances  have a 
significan t effect on the local area.  For example, large scale renewable energy 
developments are likely to be prominent in the landscape.   In such cases the Council 
will carefully weigh up the environmental, social and economic benefits of the proposals against any effects on the local area, such as impacts on  landscape  
character; heritage assets or the Green Belt, contained in other policies in the Plan .  
The NPPF recognises that many forms of renewable and low carbon energy related developments will constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt, requiring the developer to demonstrate that very special circumstances  exist in 
order f or projects to be allowed.  The wider environment benefits associated with 
increased production of energy from renewable sources may constitute one  such 
benefit to the environment ( Paragraph 151). 
 9.7.10  Planning permissions for renewable energy schemes w ill, in most cases, be 
conditioned to require the removal of infrastructure and reinstatement of the development site should the development cease to be operational and where it is not feasible for the infrastructure to be re -used thereafter.  
 
Wind Energy  
9.7.11  National planning guidance indicates  that proposals involving one or more wind 
turbines should not be considered acceptable unless they are in an area identified as suitable for wind energy development in a Local or Neighbourhood Plan and (following  consultation) it can be demonstrated that the planning impacts identified 
by the affected local community have been fully addressed and the proposal has their backing.  
 9.7.12  Policy ENV7  has been informed by an evidence based study prepared for the 
Liverpool City Region (The Liverpool City Region Renewable Energy Capacity Study , 
ARUP  2010), which assessed the potential for various forms of renewable energy 
across the sub -region and invest igated the spatial opportunities and constraints in 
the individual local authority areas.  Although it identified some areas of search for large scale wind energy development, none of these were in Warrington  Borough.  
Therefore, no areas for wind energy d evelopment have been designated in this 
Plan.  The Council acknowledges , however , that some forms of wind energy 
development may be acceptable within the Borough.   In such cases the applicant 
would need to demonstrate that their development is technically feasible and 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
172acceptable taking into account factors such as wind speed, environmental and 
landscape designations and proximity to sensitive receptors such as residential properties and heritage assets. All proposals will be expected to comply with all relevant criteria set out in other policies of this Plan and national policy .  In 
particular there will be a need to demonstrate that any wind turbine development would not adversely affect the operational integrity or safety of Manchester Airport or Mancheste r Radar in accordance with Policy INF6 . 
Use of low carbon and renewable energy in new housing and employment sites  
9.7.13  To support the transition to a low carbon economy it is necessary to encourage the 
greater use of renewable and low carbon energy in new development.  
9.7.14  For t
his reason Policy ENV7 encourages use of renewable and low carbon energy as 
appropriate in all new major development proposals.  It requires that at least 10% 
of energy needs in major schemes in all locations should be met from renewable and/or other low carbon energy source(s) .  However,  major development also has 
the option reduce their carbon emission  rates by at least 10% above the 
requirements of Part L of the Building Regulations at the time that an application is submitted.  This is  in recognition of the fact that many commercial /employment  
schemes  have low electricity demands but often have higher heating and cooling 
demands that are often better met by improved energy efficiency measures in the building fabric.  
9.7.15  In r
espect of Warrington the  Renewable Energy S tudy  (footnote)  identified 
combined heat and power and district heating networks as the most suitable and viable solutions for achieving significant reductions in CO
2 emissions as there are 
relatively small but identifiable heat loads with potential for others to come forward in the future during the plan period.  In addition the study identified that, as the 
Building Regulations are progressively tightened, developers will be dependent upon having access to decentralised energy networks in order to achieve the low carbon targets.  These are generally more viable and feasible in larg er 
developments.  
9.7.16  The 
long -term ambition is to deliver a strategic district heating network across the 
Borough.   The Council recognises that the opportunities for installing such a 
network across existing communities , is for the most part, beyond the scope of 
planning.  Therefore, Policy ENV7  requires the strategic allocations  to install their 
own network, which can later be connected up to a larger network, where it can be demonstrated that this is the most feasible an d viable renewable or low carbon 
energy option.  Alternatively, development can be designed to be able to connect to 
a scheme once such a network is in place and to be designed to be compatible with future networks, in terms of site layout, heating and site- wide infrastructure design  
and to provide at least 10% of a schemes energy demands from renewable and/or 
other low carbon energy source(s).  
9.7.17  Devel
opers will be required to undertake detailed work to assess the feasibility of 
opportunities for dece ntralised energy networks in the  strategic locations identified 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
173in the strategic policies and on the key diagram.   Some types of development such 
as some manufacturing operations can generate a significant amount of heat as a 
by-product or ha ve a need for a significant amount of heat .  Schemes that would 
generate a significant source or demand for heat should be supported by evidence considering the feasibility of serving the development by means of a district heating system.  
 Key Evidence 
 
• National Planning Policy Framework (20 21) 
• Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)  
• Liverpool City Region - Renewable Energy Capacity Study (2010 ) 
• Landscape Character Assessment ( 2007 ) 
• Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
• SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21) 
 
Council Wide Strategies  
 
• WBC Green Energy Strategy (20 19) 
• Declaration of Climate Emergency (2019)  
 Delivery Partners  
 
• Private Sector  Stakeholders  
• Public Sector  Stakeholders  
• Developers promoting sites for residential development  
• Environment Agency  
• United Utilities  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1749.8 Environmental and Amenity Protection in Warrington  
9.8.1  Exces
sive lev els of air, land, noise , vibration, light  and water pollution have the 
potential to have an adverse impact on environmental quality, health and 
wellbeing. It is ther efore essential to ensure that, wherever possible, all forms of 
pollution are  considered,  managed  and m itigated against as part of the 
development process . 
9.8.2  The 
Council , thro ugh its various strategies and action plans, is committed to 
delivering  environmental and amenity improvements across the Borough.  The Local 
Plan plays a key role in implementing  these improvements, ensuring that the 
environment and both  existing  and future residents/occupiers  are not, as far as 
possible, affected by major existing or potential sources of pollution.  
Policy ENV 8 - Environmental and Amenity Protection 
General Principles  
1.The Council requires  that all development is located and designed so as not to result in a
harmful or cumulative impact on the natural and built environment , and/ or general  levels of
amenity.
2.Development proposals, as appropriate to their  nature and scale, should demonstrate
that environmental risks have been evaluated and appropriate measures have been taken
to minimise the risks of adverse impacts to air, land and water quality, whilst assessing
vibration, light and noise pollution both during their construction and in their operation.
Air Quality  
3.The Council will seek to ensure that proposals for new development will not have an
unacceptable negative impact on air quality and will not further exacerbate air quality in  the
Council ’s designated  Air Quality Management Areas ( AQMAs ); or will contribute to air
pollution in areas which may result in further areas  being  designated .
4.The main allocations ( Policies  MD1 to MD6) and the smaller settlement allocations,
which line the M62 corridor ( Policies OS1, OS2 and OS6) and all other new development
that exceeds the thresholds for requiring a Transport Assessment, as specified in the
Council’s Transport SPD, will be required to consider air quality impacts on the Manchester
Mosses Spec ial Area of Conservation (SAC).  Any proposals that would result in increased
traffic flows on the M62 past the Manchester Mosses SAC of more than 100 vehicles per day
or 20 Heavy Goods Vehicles (HGVs) per day must  devise a scheme -specific range of
measure s to reduce reliance on cars, reduce trip generation and promote ultra -low emission
vehicles.
5.Development  proposals  for sensitive end uses (including but not limited to residential,
schools, nurseries, hospitals) are not desirable where they are located in areas of poor air
quality  including AQMAs,  unless a suitable assessment, review and identification of
mitigation to  lessen the effects on future site users  is provided .  An air quality assessment
will be required where a development may place new sens itive receptors in areas of poor
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
175air quality; and/or that may lead  to a deterioration in local air quality resulting in 
unacceptable effects on human health and/or the environment.  
 
Land Quality  
6. The Council will ensure that any development proposals on  or adjacent to potentially 
contaminated land ; unstable  ground or that have a sensitive end use, are suitable for their 
intended use.  The effects (including cumulative effects) of pollution on health, the natural 
environment or general amenity, and the po tential sensitivity of the area or proposed 
development to adverse effects from pollution, should be taken into account.  
 
7. Development proposals on land that is (or suspected to be) affected by contamination; 
unstable  ground or has a sensitive end use must include an assessment of the extent of the 
issues and any possible risks.   Development will only be permitted where the land is, or can 
be made suitable for the proposed use.  
 
8. Development proposals will need to demonstrate  that any loss of the B orough’s best and 
most versatile agricultural land  will be minimised.  
 
Water Quality  
9. Development  proposals  will not be permitted where it would have an adverse effect on 
the quality or availability  of groundwater resources , watercourses or water bodies.  
 
10. Any proposals for new development within Groundwater Source Protection Zones must 
accord with central government guidance set out in its Groundwater Protection guides, or 
any subsequent iteration of the guidance.  New development within Groundwater Source 
Protection Zones will be required  to: 
a. be planned so as to mitigate the risk of pollution to the public water supply and the water 
environment;  
b. undertake a risk assessment and mitigation strategy with respect to groundwater 
protection to manage th e risk of pollution to public water supply and the water 
environment ; and  
c. produce a Construction Management Plan to identify the potential impacts from all 
construction activities on both groundwater, public water supply and surface water and 
identify appropriate mitigation measures necessary to protect and prevent pollution of 
these waters.  
 
Noise Pollution  
11. The Council encourages consideration for noise and acoustic mitigation during early 
stages of design, having regard for  layout, siting and internal features .  
 
12. Developments which ar e noise sensitive end uses near to busy roads or noisy existing 
businesses will need to demonstrate  with any application  that appropriate mitigation can be 
employed and implemented to prevent adverse impacts on health and quality of life for 
future site users.  Such developments need to consider and implement the ‘agent of change’ 
principle in accordance with in the NPPF.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
17613.New developments should not place unreasonable restrictions  on existing businesses or
business activities  through the restriction of activities, prohibition of works or otherwise .
14.Development proposals generating noise which is likely to create significantly adverse
impacts on health and quality of life and which cannot be mitigated and/or controlled
through the use of conditions or through pre -existing effective legislative regimes, will not
be permitted.
General  Amenity Protection  
15.Where development is considered to be appropriate but may  still have impact s on the
following  environmental considerations , in addition to those detailed above,  the Council will
consider the use of conditions or planning obligations to ensure any appropriate mitigation
or compensatory measures are secured:
a.Levels of odours, fumes, dust,  smoke,  insects, litter accumulation , and refuse
collection/storage;
b.Levels of light pollution and impacts on the night sky;
c.The need to respect living conditions of existing neighbouring residential occupiers and
future occupiers of new housing schemes in  relation to overlooking/loss of privacy, outlook,
sunlight, daylight , overshadowing, noise, vibration and disturbance;
d.The need to prote ct existing occupiers and operators in the surrounding area from new
development and its potential impacts ;
e.The e ffect and timing of traffic movement to, from and within the site and car parking
including impacts on highway safety;
f.The ability and the effect of using permitted development rights to change use within the
same Use Class (as set out in the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
Development Order) without the need to obtain planning consent.
16.Detailed assessments  may be required to address any of the  above criteria and will need
to be submitted to the Council for approval.   Where necessary information from
assessments is absent to enable consideration of a specific matter, conditions may be
recommended or the application refused based on lack of supporting information.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
9.8.3  The
 National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) emphasises the importance of 
protecting the environment and human health through the planning system and by 
minimising pollution and other adverse effects on the local and natural environment.  
9.8.4  The 
NPPF ( 2021) states  that in preparing plans to meet development needs, the aim 
should be to minimise pollution and other adverse effects on the  local and natural 
environment .  Paragraph 17 4 states that planning policies should seek to  enhance 
the natural and local environment by : 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
177•Preventing n ew and existing development from contributing to, being put at
unacceptable risk from, or being adversely affected by, unacceptable levels of
soil, air, water or noise pollution or land instability ; and
•Remediating and mitigating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated and
unstable land, where appropriate.
9.8.5  The
 Council is committed to reducing the exposure of people in Warrington to poor 
air quality in order to improve  the health and wellbeing of all residents.  Whilst the 
majority of Warrington has good air quality, there are areas close to the major road s 
and the Town C entre  that have raised pollution levels and are of concern.  We 
continue to review pollution levels and will designate AQMAs where there is a risk 
that national limits may be exceeded . The latest air quality data and the information 
on AQMAs are contained within the Council’s  Annual Status Reports (ASRs). 
Development should consider and support, the measures and objectives set out in the Council’s A ir Quality Action Plan  (AQAP).  Details of Warrington’ s AQMAs, ASRs 
and AQAP can b e found on the Council ’s website www.warrington.gov.uk/airquality
 
The Council’s approach and advice for developers in dealing with air quali ty 
requirements is set out within the Council’ s Environmental Protection SPD . 
9.8.6  Th
e Manchester Mosses Special Area of Conservation (SAC) has been identified as 
being at risk of harm from increased air pollution caused by traffic.  For this reason, all proposals for development that would cause an increase in traffic levels that 
would exceed one or both of the thresholds in clause 4 of Policy ENV8 must be accompanied by sufficient evidence to enable the effects upon the SAC to be assessed. Any significa nt effects would need to be addressed in line with Policy DC4 . 
9.8.7  Warrin
gton has a rich industrial heritage which has provided the foundations for its 
economic development.  The legacy of past manufacturing, engineering and industrial processes has res ulted in the potential for residual contamination of sites 
across the Borough.  Certain types of contamination are known to be hazardous to 
human health, property and the wider environment.   Typical causes of land 
contamination include previous industrial o r commercial usage, mining, and the 
landfilling of wastes. Land may also become contaminated due to its close proximity to contaminated areas.  Contaminating substances include metals, organic 
substances, ground gases and high/low pH.   The Council’s approa ch and advice for 
developers in dealing with contaminated land and remedial requirement s are set 
out within the Council’s Environmental Protection SPD.   
9.8.8  Im
provements in water quality and control of water pollution are the responsibility 
of the Environment Agency (EA) and United Utilities (UU).  The Council is 
responsible for managing development likely to have a detrimental effect on the 
Borough's watercou rses and other water features, and it can support measures to 
raise water quality standards.  The Council will work closely with the EA and UU 
where necessary to ensure the protection of these w ater resources.  
9.8.9  Gro
undwater is a vital resource, supplying around one third of mains drinking water 
in England.  A large part of the borough lies within Groundwater Source Protection 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
178Zones .  Therefore, it is important that an appropriate risk assessment and mitigation 
strategy in resp ect of groundwater pro tection is undertaken, along with careful site 
master planning and the management of construction activities.  
9.8.10  The ri
sk assessment should be based on the source -pathway -receptor methodology  
and should identify all possible contaminant sources and pathways for the life of the 
development and provide details of measures required to mitigate any risks to 
groundwater and public water supply during all phases of the development.  Within 
Groundwater Source Protection Zone  1 the mitigation measures sh ould  include the 
highest specification design for the new foul and surface water sewerage systems (pipework, trenches, manholes, pumping stations and attenuation features)  to 
ensure that leakage from sewerage systems is avoided .  Any development should be 
carefully plann ed in terms of site design and layout to mitigate the risk of pollution 
to public water supply and the water environment.  For example, open space should be designed so it is closest to any boreholes so as to minimise the potential impact 
on groundwater.  In addition, an appropriate management regime will be required  
for open space features in the groundwater protection zone .  Construction 
Management Plans will be required to identify the potential impacts from al l 
construction activities on both groundwater, public water supply and surface water and identify appropriate mitigation measures necessary to protect and prevent pollution of these waters.  
9.8.11  Nati
onal guidance sets out what levels of noise are considered acceptable  within  
the Noise Policy Statement for England (NPSE) .  Further information , including 
reference to relevant British Standards, can be found in the Council ’s Environmental 
Protection SPD.  Noise and acoustic mitigation should always be  designed into 
developments from the outset considering layout, siting and internal design.  
Sensitive development near to significant noise sources or in noise mapped areas or 
important areas (noise)  will often require acoustic mitigation to be implemente d 
fully prior to use, where this is acknowledged from the outset of the design stage 
the implementation is often easier and less costly . 
9.8.1 2 Addi
tional guidance to support the implementation of this policy is provided in the 
Design and Construction  SPD.  Specific guidance on noise, air, odour and general 
amenity and how these matters should be considered in the design of new properties and conversions of existing property in the town centre is set out in the 
Warrington Town Centre SPD as the  needs of ne w residents and businesses will 
need to be assessed alongside those of existing users and activities.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National Plann
ing Policy  Framework (2021)
•Planning Policy Guidance (PPG)
•Noise Policy Statement for England (NPSE)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
179Other P
lanning Documents  
•WBC 
Design and Construction SPD
•Warrington Town Centre SPD
•Environmental Protection SPD
Counci
l Wide Strategies  
•Air Qualit
y Annual Status Report
•Air Quality Action Plan
•Draft Local Transport Plan  (LTP4)
•Contaminated Land Inspection Strategy
Deliver
y Partners  
•Private
 Sector Developers
•United Utilities
•Environment Agency
•HSE
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
180SITE 
ALLOCATIONS  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
18110 Main Development Areas and Site Allocations 
10.1  Warrin
gton Waterfront  
10.1.1  Wa
rrington Waterfront, extending from the south west of the Town C entre to the 
Manchester Ship Canal,  will be developed as a new urban quarter of Warrington, 
taking advantage of its waterside setting .  It will provide  around 1,335  new homes 
of which 1,070 will be delivered  in the Plan Period.  
10.1.2  Th
e new residential community will be supported by  a new primary school and a 
local centre comprising local shops, a new health facility and other community 
facilities.  
10.1.3  Ho
mes in the Waterfront will be built at a relatively high density r eflecting the 
proximity of the Town C entre and easy access to  public transport services  and 
Warrington’s wider Green Infrastructure Network .  This will make the area 
attractive to young people and young families who are looking for their first home.   
The provision of local services  and the new local centre  will also  make it suitable for 
supported housing for older people.  
10.1.4  Th
e Waterfront  will be designed to support walking and cycling for local trips.   It will 
benefit from the new Western Link for access by road . Improved walking and cycling 
links to the town centre will give access to public transport  at Bank Quay Railway 
station .  
10.1. 5 Dev
elopment will preserve and enhance the setting of nearby heritage assets, in 
particular it will contribute to the enhancement of the Bank Quay Transporter 
Bridge.  
10.1. 6 The
 development concept diagram provides a definitive boundary of the site 
allocation and illustrates some of the key development principles set out in the allocation Policy.  
10.1.7  Th
e final form of development will be determined through the preparation of a 
comprehensive Development Framework  to include a more detailed masterplan for 
the allocation  and a strategy to ensure the timely delivery of supporting 
infrastructure.  
10.1. 7 Deve
lopment cannot come forward until the funding and the programme for the 
delivery of the Western Link have been confirmed.   This means the first homes are 
anticipated to be completed in 2027/28.  
10.1. 8 Th
e Waterfront will be delivered in two phases.  The first phase  will comprise the 
western part of the site and will be completed in full by the end of the Plan period 
in 2038.  The second phase to the east will not be completed until beyond the plan 
period.   Community infrastructure will be required early in the plan period to ensure 
new residents  have access to essential local services.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
182Policy MD 1 - Warrington Waterfront  
MD1.1 Key Land Use and Infrastructure Requirements  
1.Warrington Waterfront  will be allocated as a new urban quarter to deliver around  1,335
new homes  of which 1,070 will be delivered in the plan period .
2. In order to facilitate development, a small portion of the southern section of the site ,
adjacent to the proposed Western Link, will be removed from the Green Belt.
3.The n ew residential development will be supported by the following  range of
infrastructure :
a.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes, including affordable homes and a residential
care home (Use Class C2) providing a minimum of 80 bedrooms .
b.A two form entry primary school
c.A mixed use local centre providing
i.health facility and
ii.local sh ops and community facilities of an appropriate scale .
e.Provision of public open space, including a range of smaller areas of open space within
the residential development to serve the new community in accordance with the Council’s
open space standards.
f.Provision of playing pitches (either on -site or a contribution towards off -site provision).
g.A comprehensi ve package of transport improvements  including supported bus services .
h.A contribution towards additional secondary school places
i.A contribution towards built leisure facilities
j.A contribution towards strategic transport infrastructure (The Western Link)
k.Landscape buffers and ecological mitigation and enhancement
l.Flood mitigation and drainage including  exemplary  multi- functional sustainable drainage
systems (SuDS)  with only foul flows connecting to the existing public sewer.
MD1.2 Delivery and Phasing  
4.Prior to the commencement of any development the Council will require the preparation
of a Development Framework  for the entire site including a delivery strategy and phasing
plan in order to ensure comprehensive and coordinated development.
5.The Development Framework  must conform to the requirements of this policy and be
subject to consultation with statutory consultees and the local community.
6.The Development Framework  will provide the basis for subsequent planning applications
for individual phases of development.
7.No development will be permitted until funding has been secured  and a programme of
delivery  has been confirmed for the Western Link.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
1838.Full details of the programme and funding for delivery of the primary school, health
centre, public open space and other necessary infrastructure will need to be agreed by the
Council before the first phase of the development is permitted to come forward.
MD1.3 Detailed Site- specific Requirements  
New Homes  
9.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes , as identified in Policy DEV2 , should be
provided  in order to ensure development contributes to meeting the B orough’s general and
specialist housing needs.
10. In accordance with Policy DEV2  a minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable.
11.The new urban quarter  should  provide a range of homes to meet different needs . Higher
density  and larger scale  development  should create an attractive waterside frontage.   New
homes may be particularly suitable for young er people and young families, whilst a
proportion of  homes should be provided as supported housing suitable  for older people .
12.Specific provision should be made for a residential care facility providing a minimum of
80 bed spaces.   This should be located within or in proximity to the local centre.
13.In accordance with Policy DEV1 to reflect the site’s urban location and proximity to the
Town C entre,  the residential development should be constructed to an  average minimum
density of 5 0dph , with opportunities for higher densities throughout the site.
Community Facilities  
14.The residential development will be required to deliver  a new two form entry primary
school to meet the need for school places that will be generated from the development .
15.Residential development will be expected to make a contribution towards the provision
of additional secondary school places through expansion of existing or planned new
secondary schools.
16.A new local centre will provide a focal point for the new community and should be
located in an accessible  position within the site .
17.The specification and delivery of the health facility within the local centre will need to be
agreed with the NHS as part of the delivery strategy.
18.Other small scale local shops up to 500 sq.m  in total  and other local community facilities
will be supported in the Local Centre in order to provide for day to day needs.   Any proposal
for additional retail floorspace will require a retail needs assessment and be subject to the
sequential assessment set out in Policy DEV 5.
Open Space and Recre ation  
19.A green infrastructure  strategy will be required as part of the Development Framework
in order to ensure the provision of an accessible, comprehensive and high quality network
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
184of multi -functional green spaces .  Green Infrastructure within the Waterfront should 
connect into the wider Green Infrastructure network in south Warrington,  including the new 
Arpley Meadows Country Park  and the Trans -Pennine Trail, in order to enhance the 
ecological, visual and recreational value of the network as a whole and to improve access to 
and throughout the wider network.  
20.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standards in  accordance with Policy DC5.
21.The development should ensure the long term management arrangements for the green
space network within the Waterfront.
22.The development will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing
existing or planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitch provision (either on-site or a
contribution towards off -site provision)  that will serve residents of the urban extension.
Green Belt  
23. The Western Link will define the southwestern boundary of the site with the Green Belt.
Natural Environment  
24.The Green Infrastructure Strategy will need to demonstrate how development within
the urban quarter will protect and enhance existing wildlife corridors and provide new
corridors to link the site into Warrington’s wider ecological network.  It will need to ensure
that the layout takes account of existing landscape features, including watercourses,
woodlands and significant hedgerows; ensure the site contributes to the wider objectives of
the Mersey Forest; and have regard to sites identified in policy DC4 (Ecological Network)
which should be protected in line with policy DC4 and national guidelines.
25.In accordance with Policy DC4 d evelopment within the allocation site will be required to
evidence that it will not have any adverse impacts on the integrity of the Me rsey Estuary
Special Protection Area.  If habitats within the allocation site or on adjacent land are suitable
to support significant populations of qualifying species of wintering birds, avoidance
measures and mitigation will be required and any planning application may need to be
assessed through project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment .
26.A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of a metric supported by Natural England and provided for all development parcels that
come forward for planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be
allowed if shown to be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy.
Transport and accessibility  
27.A comprehensive package of tran sport improvements will be required to support the
Waterfront allocation .
28.Required improvements to support the new residential development will include:
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
185a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site as a whole and for individual
phases of  development.
b.Improved cycling and walking routes well related to the green infrastructure and
waterside network;  Arpley  Meadows C ountr y Park, Bank Quay Station  and Warrington Town
Centre.
c.Provision of waterside walkways  and cycleways .
d.Providing public transport improvements  and services to connect the new community
with Warrington Town Centre; and other major employment areas  in Warrington and
Daresbury.
e.Other necessary network improvements or measures as identified by an appropriate
Transport Assessment.
29.The layout of the Waterfront  should maximise the potential for walkable
neighbourhoods, with a legible hierarchy of routes, providing new footpaths and cycleways
that link to existing networks beyond the site.   In particular, co nnections should be made to
the Trans -Pennine Trail (national cycle route)  to provide links to adjoining B oroughs to
support cross boundary commuting by bike.
30.The residential development should  take advantage of its river frontage location and
provide riverside walkways to connect into the existing pedestrian and cycle network.
31.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops w ithin the site are accessible by pedestrians and cyclists via
effective footpaths and cycle routes.
32.The development should be supported by an area -wide travel plan, encompassing the
needs of all site users.  This area -wide travel plan should replace the need for a series of
individual travel plans .
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
33.A site -wide  foul and  surface water strategy is required across the Waterfront  as a whole,
incorporating exemplary and multi- functional Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)
and flood alleviation measures.   It will be important for this to be integrated with the site’s
green infrastructure network in order to maximise ecological and potentially recreational
benefits.   Development proposals will be expected to in corporate infiltration SuDS and SuDS
with multi- functional benefits in preference to traditional underground storage systems.
34.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.   A site wide clean water
strategy will also be required.
35.These  strategies must demonstrate co -ordination between any phases of development,
ensure unfettered rights between various parcels and outline a timeline for the delivery of
on-site infrastructure.  Submitted drainage strategies should ensure a proliferation o f
pumping stations are avoided.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
18636.Development within the Waterfront  must not i nhibit  the operation of the existing gas
pipeline, power line, water and wastewater infrastructure, including a high pressurised
sludge main  and sewage works , which  are on or adjacent to the site.   Development layouts
will be expected to be designed to take these into account.  Access to this infrastructure
should be maintained within the proposed development layouts.   The Development
Framework  must take full account  of the proximity to the sewage works, be informed by
appropriate impact assessments (odour and noise) and include mitigation measures if
identified as necessary .  Applicants may be required to submit a management plan and
details of any protection provisi ons to ensure the integrity of the utility assets are
maintained both during and after construction.
37.The Waterfront  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient  and water efficient  as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy
needs from renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
38.The design of development within the Waterfront  must incorporate appropriate
measures to mitigate any noise and air quality impacts from the future Western Link and the
railway line  and the sewage works .
39. Development proposals may be required to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment and incorporate appropriate mitigating measures  in accordance with Policy
ENV8.
40.Within the COM AH Zones of the existing industrial uses in proximity to the allocation
site, development will be restricted in accordance with the Health & Safety Executive’s
requirements.
41. The development will be required to mitigate air quality impacts on the Manchester
Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
Historic Environment  
42.Development will be required to preserve and enhance  the historic environment,
heritage assets and their  setting .
43.Development proposals will be required to be in accordance with the Waterfront
Heritage Impact Assessment including the proposed mitigation and enhancement measures.
44.Development proposals will need to demonstrate how they  will safeguard and sustain
the future of the Bank Quay Transporter Bridge (Grade II*) which is currently on the
Heritage at Risk Register.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.1. 9 The 
Waterfront is a key regeneration priority for the Council, the principle of which 
has been established in previous Local Plans.   The Council’s Town  Centre masterplan 
envisages the Waterfront  as an extension to Warrington Town C entre,  providing a 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
187high quality riverside environment and taking advantage of the proximity of Bank  
Quay station.  
10.1.10 T
he Western Link provides the opportunity to open up the Waterfront area  that is 
otherwise not accessible.   It will enable higher density residential development 
within the existing urban area, thereby reducing the level of Green Belt land 
required to meeting Warrington’s housing need.  
Figur
e 17  – Illustrative Development Concept for Warrington Waterfront 
10.1.11  The 
Waterfront is of a sufficient scale to provide a range of services to support a 
new residential community in this part of Warrington, including a local centre, primary school, health facility and a network of open spaces.  Its location will also 
ensure residents will have good access to Warrington Town C entre and major 
existing and proposed employment areas  in the wider Warrington area . 
10.1. 12 Th
e allocation Policy will ensure that development comes forward in a 
comprehens ive manner with phasing of development linked to the provision of 
infrastructure.  
10.1.13 T
o meet the requirements of Policy MD1 regarding protection of the ecology on the 
site, the applicant will be required to provide evidence that the development will not result in an adverse effects both alone and in combination with other plans and projects on the integrity of the Mersey Estuary SPA through loss of functionally 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
188linked habitat and disturbance from both construction and operation of the 
development.  
10.1.14  To demo
nstrate this, a survey will be required to determine habitats and current 
use of the site to support a significant population1 of qualifying birds associated 
with the protected site.  Where habitats are considered functionally linked to the SPA, non -breeding bird surveys will be required to determine if the site and 
neighbouring land constitute a significant area of supporting functionally linked land 
(FLL).  Surveys will be required to be undertaken during autumn, winter and spring.  
If habitat within the site or adjacent land are considered FLL and identified to support significant populations of qualifying bird species avoidanc e measures and 
mitigation will be required and the planning application will need to be assessed through a project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure that the development does not result in adverse effects on integrity of the Mersey estuary  
SPA.  
10.1.15  The propo
sed residential are as within the allocation site do not currently have 
suitable vehicle access  and some are also constrained by  the River Mersey and the 
West Coast mainline .  This means it is essential that development is coordinat ed 
with the delivery of the Western Link.  
10.1.16  The Coun
cil who are promoting the allocation are commitment to ensuring a 
comprehensive form of development  and are supportive of the preparation of a 
Development Framework  for the Waterfront.  
10.1.17  The Counci
l is confident that the programme for the Western Link will enable the 
first homes in the urban extension to be completed in 202 7/28.  The first phase of 
the new urban quarter will be completed in full by the end of the Plan period in 
2038 with the second phase commencing towards the end of the 6 -10 year period 
but not being completed until beyond the plan period. 
Key Evidence
 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Multimodal Transport Model (2 021)
•Warrington Waterfront Heritage
 Impact Assessment (2021)
•Habitat Regulation 
Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
(2021)
•SA Report:
 Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
1 A significant population is classified as a site that is regularly used by 1% or more of the population of 
qualifying bird species.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
189•Requirement for future Masterplan for Warrington Waterfront
Council Wide Strategies  
•Warrington Means Business  (2020)
•WBC  Local Transport Plan (LTP4 ) (2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Warrington & CoOther Planning Documents  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
19010.2  South East  Warrington Urban Extension  
10.2.1  The S
outh East Warrington Urban Extension will be developed as a sustainable 
urban extension to the south east of the mai n urban area of Warrington. It will 
create an attractive, well -designed and distinctive place set within a strong 
landscape framework of open spaces. The Urban E xtension will be well served by 
new community infrastructure and a network of sustainable transport links 
maximising travel by walking, cycling and public transport.  
10.2.2  The S
outh East Warrington Urban Extension will deliver around  4,200 homes  of 
which around 2,400  will be delivered within the plan p eriod .  It will enable 
development to be comprehensively planned with new homes phased in 
accordance with the delivery of wide ran ging supporting infrastructure.  
10.2. 3 The S
outh East Warrington Urban Extension  will mostly occupy land that was 
owned by the former New Town Commission, now owned by Homes England, and will effectively extend and grow the existing communities of Grappenhall Heys and 
Appleton Cross / Pewterspear.  The allocation will also extend sout h towards the 
M56 to include land to the south and east of Stretton.  
10.2.4 T
he new residential community will be supported by  new social infrastructure 
including two new primary schools; a new secondary school; new leisure and health 
facilities; local shops and other local community facilities .  
10.2.5 T
he Urban  Extension will provide a range of housing types with a particular focus on 
family housing, homes for older people  and the provision of affordable housing . 
10.2.6  New
 development will be designed to support walking and cycling for local journeys 
within the Urban E xtension itself  and to other local destinations. Improved public 
transport services will provide access to the T own Centre  as well as the South East 
Warrin gton  Employment Area and other employment locations  in the wider 
Warrington area.  
10.2.7  The
 development will be supported by a new strategic link  connecting the allocation 
site with the A49 and easing congestion at the Cat & Lion junction.   Additional 
connections will be made to the A49 at Lyons Lane and Longwood Road  junctions  as 
well as a link to the A50  to the east , via a new connection to Grappenhall Lane .  The 
development will also contribute to wider transport mitigation measures to o ffset 
the impact o n Junctions 10 of the M56 and Junction 20 of the M6, in agreement 
with Highways England.  
10.2.8  The
 proposed allocation takes into account Warrington’s wider vision for future 
transportation in the borough as set out in LTP4, which seeks  to deliver a future 
mass transit public transport scheme and a possible further crossing of the Ship 
Canal.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
19110.2.9  The development of the South East Warrington Urban Extension will ensure  the 
permanence of the revised Green Belt boundaries whilst preserving and enhancing  
important ecological and heritage assets within the site . 
10.2.10 K
ey development requirements and principles, are set out in the allocation p olicy 
below.  
10.2.1 1 The
 development concept diagram has been informed by a masterplanning 
exercise, working with  principal landowners  and taking into account representations 
made to previous Local Plan consultation s.  
10.2.12 P
rior to the submission of any planning applications for the development of the 
South East Warrington Urban Extension, a Development Framework will be 
prepared and approved by the Council to guide development in accordance with the 
allocation policy .  
10.2.13  The
 Development Framework will be prepared by the principal landowners, in 
consultation with the Council, key statutory consultees and the local community.  To ensure a holistic approach to the delivery of the Urban Extension, the Development Framework will provide a comprehensive spatial masterplan that identifies primary development parcels and the location of key physical, social and environmental infrastructure, alongside a phasing strategy and trajectory, which 
identifies when key infrastructure is required, how it will be funded and the 
mechanism for delivery . This is important given the existing constraints on transport 
and community infrastructure in South Warrington.   
10.2.14  The
 Development Framework will establish a range of paramet ers for the 
development of the Urban Extension, including, but not limited to: development areas (reflecting a mix of land uses including residential, retail and community i.e. schools), densities, strategic movement linkages, road network typologies and strategic blue and green infrastructure .   It will be important for the Development 
Framework to be sufficiently flexible and kept under review throughout the delivery of the Urban Extension, to react to changing circumstances where necessary.  
10.2.15  Takin
g into account the need to prepare the Development Framework and the 
initial required infrastructure improvements , the Council anticipates the first homes 
being completed in 2025/26.  Of key importance prior to further residential 
development in this area is  the delivery of a scheme to address existing congestion 
at the Cat & Lion junction.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
192Policy MD 2 - South East Warrington Urban Extension 
MD2.1 Key Land Use and Infrastructure Requirements  
1.Land to the south east of Warrington, extending from Grappenhall Heys in the north, to
the M56 in the south, as defined on the Proposals Map, will be removed from t he Green
Belt and allocated as the South East Warrington Urban Extension .
2.The South East Warrington Urban Extension will deliver a minimum of  4,200 homes  in
total of which around 2 ,400 homes will be delivered within the Plan Period.
3.The Urban Extension will be supported by a wide range of infr astructure as follows:
a.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes, including affordable homes,  custom and self -
build plots and supported and extra c are housing.
b.Two 2 form e ntry primary s chools, capable of expansion to 3 forms of entry
c.A new  secondary s chool  to provide a minimum of 4 forms of entry .
d. A new leisure facility  incorporating health provision .
e. Local shops and other community facilities of an appropriate scale.
f.An e xtensiv e green infrastructure  network .
g.Playing pitches.
h.A range of smaller areas of open space within the residential development to serve the
new community.
i.A Community Recycling Centre .
j.A comprehensive package of transport improvements , for both on -site and off- site works .
k.Compensatory green belt improvements  and ecological mitigation and enhancement .
l.Flood mitigation and drainage including  exemplary  sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) .
MD 2.2 Delivery and Phasing  
4.The principal  landowners and developers  will be required  to prepare a comprehensive
Development Framework for the South East Warrington Urban Extension. The Development
Framework will accord with the site -specific requirements of this policy and wider Local Plan
requirements.  The Framework will be subject to c onsultation with statutory consultees and
the local community before being finalised.
5.The Development Framework will be agreed with the Council in advance of planning
applications being submitted.  The Development Framework will be a material consideration
in the determination of planning applications across the Urban Extension; planning
permissions will only be granted where they are consistent with the Development
Framework.
6.To ensure a coordinated approach to new development across the whole of the Urban
Extension allocation, the Development Framework will provide:
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
193a.A comprehensive spatial masterplan for the entire Urban Extension,  based on the
principles and requirements  set out in this policy and  reflecting site opportunities 
and constraints;  
b.A comprehensive delivery strategy for the Urban Extension comprising:
i. a residential phasing plan and trajectory
ii. an infrastructure delivery plan, with details on phasing, delivery triggers and
delivery responsibilities  
c.An allocation wide approach to infrastructure funding, including planning obligations .
7.No residential deve lopment will be permitted to commence until t he funding and the
programme for the delivery  of a highway scheme to relieve the A49 London Road/B5356
Stretton Road junction has been confirmed and works have commenced on site .  A limit of
housing completions will be set until such a scheme is complete and operational .
8. Any development adjacent to the allocation boundary must not undermine the integr ity
or the delivery of the South East Warrington Urban Extension .
MD2.3 Detailed Site -specific Requirements  
New Homes  
9.The Urban Extension will provide residential development across a series of new
neighbourhoods , each comprising an appropriate mix of housing in accordance with Policy
DEV2 , including a minimum of 30% provision of affordable housing.
10.Supported housing  for older people  will be required  within t he Urban Ext ension .  The
precise nature of this will need to be agreed with the Council based on need and the
Council’s broader strategy to encourage independent living.
11.Specific provision should be made for self -build/custom -build plots in the Urban
Extension , subject to demand as demonstrated by the Council’s self -build register.
12.To ensure the efficient use of land and to reflect the area’s urban fringe location,
residential development will be constructed to an average minimum net density of 35dph.
Community Facilities  
13.The Urban Extension will be required to deliver two new 2 form e ntry primary schools,
capable of expansion to 3 forms of entry  and a new secondary school  providing a minimum
of 4 forms of e ntry.
14.The new secondary school should be located centrally within the overall allocation site,
whilst the new primary schools should be located to ensure all homes are within easy
walking distance of a primary school, taking into account the location of existing primary
schools in the area.
15.The Urban Extension will be required to deliver a new leisure facility  including  flexible
space for health  care . The Council will support the co -location of this facility  with the new
secondary school.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
19416.The Urban Extension should also include local shops, a supermarket, and other
appropriate local services and community facilities.   Any proposal for retail development
above 2,500 sq.m. will require a retail needs assessment and be subject to the sequential
assessment set out in Policy DEV5 .
Green Infrastructure Network 
17.The Development Framework  will define a green infrastructure network to ensure the
provision of an accessible, comprehensive and high quality network of multi -functional
green spaces  which connect the  different parts of the  Urban Extension and provide links
into Warrington’s wider green space network .
18.In accordance with Policy DC5 a  range of types and sizes of open space  will be required
in line with the Council’s open space standards .  This should include provision of local parks
and gardens; natural and semi- natural greenspace;  equipped and informal play areas ; sports
pitches;  and allotment plots.
19.The long term management and maintenance arrangements for the green infrastructure
network within the Urban Extension must be secured.
Natural Environment  
20. Development within the Urban Extension will be required to protect and enhance
existing wildlife corridors and provide new corridors to link the site into Warrington’s wider
ecological network and the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area.
21.The layout  of new development must take into  account existing landscape features,
including watercourses, woodlands, significant hedge rows and contribute to the wider
objectives of the Mersey Forest and have regard to sites identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological
Network) which should be protected in accordance with the requirements of Policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
22.In accordance with Policy DC4 d evelopment within the allocation site will be required to
evidence that it will not have any adverse impacts on the integrity of the Mersey Estuary
Special Protection Area.  If habitats within the allocation site or on adjacent land are su itable
to support significant populations of qualifying species of wintering birds, avoidance
measures and mitigation will be required and any planning application may need to be
assessed through project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment .
23.A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt Boundary  
24.The Green Belt boundary is defined by Stretton Road and the M56 to the south and
Broad Lane, the southern edge of Grappenhall Heys and then broadly following Lumb Brook
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
195Road and Green Lane to the east.   Where this boundary consists of field boundaries , these 
will need to be strengthened to create a new recognisable and permanent Green Belt 
boundary . 
25. Development at the south west edge of the allocation will be required  to respect the
Green Belt boundary and the character of the washed over Green Belt settlement of
Stretton to the west of the A49.
26.A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required.  The improvements should be made in
the immediate vicinity of the Urban Extension  where possible .  Financial contributions will
be considered where this would help ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and Accessibility  
27.A comprehensive package of transport improvements will be required to support the
Urban Extension.  Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site as a whole and for individual
development parcels.
b.Improved cycling and walking routes well related to the green infrastructure network;
connecting the new  and existing residential areas and the South East Warrington
Employment Area.
c.Providing public transport enhancements to connect the new community with the South
East Warrington Employment Area ; Stockton Heath; Warrington Town Centre and
employment opportu nities within the wider Warrington area.
d.providing additional connections to the A49  to alleviate the A49 London Road/B5356
Stretton Road junction as well as improved junctions on the A49 at Lyons Lane  and
Longwood Road .
e. providing an improved connection from the allocation site to the A50.
f.a proportionate contribution to improvements to increase capacity at Junctions 10 of the
M56 and  Junction 20 of the M6.
g. On site safeguarding of potential mass transit routes.
h. A contribution towards the delivery of a connection across the Bridgewater Canal and/or
Ship Canal.
i.Other network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport Assessment.
28.The layout of development should maximise the potential for walkable neighbourhoods,
with a legible hierarchy of routes, providing new footpaths and cycleways that link to
existing networks beyond the site.
29.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops within the site are accessible by pedestrians and cyclists via
effective footpaths and cycle routes.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
19630.The Urban Extension  should be supported by an area -wide travel plan, encompassing
the needs of all site users.  This area -wide travel plan should replace the need for a series of
individual travel plans.
31.The Urban Extension  should contribute to the Council’s wider aspiration of enhancing
the Bridgewater Canal as a recreational resource and for the Canal’s tow path to provide a
cycle and pedestrian link across the Borough .
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
32.A site-wide  foul and  surface water strategy will be required across the Urban Extension
as a whole, incorporating appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood
alleviation measures.   The surface water strategy will be required to improve on green field
run-off rates.  Development proposals will be expected to incorporate infiltration SuDS and
SuDS with multi -functional benefits in preference to traditional underground storage
systems.
33.The surface water strategy should be integrated with the site’s green infrastructure
network  in order to maximise ecological and potentially recreational benefits.
34.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.   A site wide clean water
strategy will also be required.
35.Development within Urban Extension must not impact on the operation of the existing
gas pipeline which crosses the site.
36.A Communi ty Recycling Centre to serve the Urban Extension and the wider south
Warrington area should be provided within the allocation boundary .
37.The Urban Extension should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate cha nge; be
as energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
38. Development proposals may be required to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment and incorporate appropriate mitiga ting measures.
39.The design  and layout  of the Urban Extension must incorporate appropriate measures to
mitigate any noise and  air quality impacts from the  M56 and  A49.
40.Development within the Urban Extension will be required to mitigate air quality impacts
on the Manchester Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4) .
Historic Environment  
41.Development  within the Urban Extension will be required to be designed in order to
ensure that heritage  assets  and their settings are conserved and, where appropriate,
enhanced within the context of the  overall development, through appropriate mitigation
measures, having regard to the South East Warrington Urban Extension Heritage Impact
Assessment .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
197Why we
 have taken this approach  
10.2.16  T
he South East Warrington Urban Extension performed well in terms of the 
assessment against the objectives of the Local Plan, the requirements of the 
Government’s National Planning Policy Framework and the Local Plan’s  
Sustainability Appraisal.  
Figu
re 18  – Illustrative Development Concept for South East Warrington Urban 
Extension  
10.2.17  F
igure 18 details the amended Green Belt boundary and shows how the Urban 
Extension coul d be implemented. It is for illustrative purposes  only.  The definitive 
boundar y of the allocation is shown on the Policies Map.  
10.7.18  Th
e South East Warrington Urban Extension is of a sufficient scale to provide a wide 
range of services to support a new residential community in this part of Warrington, including a secondary schoo l, new primary school provision , health and leisure 
facilities and a network of open spaces.   Its location will also ensure good access to 
the surrounding urban area including Grappenhall, Stockton Heath District  Centre , 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
198Warrington Town centre and the proposed South East Warrington Employment 
Area. 
10.2.1 9 The
 ability to make such a significant and sustainable contribution towards meeting 
Warrington’s long term development needs provides the exceptional circumstances 
required to justify the removal of  the South East Warrington Urban Extension from 
the Green Belt.  
10.2. 20 The
 Allocation Policy will ensure that development comes forward in a 
comprehensive manner with phasing of development linked to the provision of infrastructure.  
10.2.2 1 It will 
also provide a strong Green Belt boundary in this part of Warrington and will 
ensure that development preserves and enhances the built and natural environment.  
10.2. 22 Giv
en the scale of development within the South East Warrington Urban Extension , 
development will continue beyond the plan period.   This will ensure that land is 
available for Warrington’s future development needs and maintains the long term permanence of the Green Belt.  
10.2.23  Th
e Council, working with the Principal Landowners , will be  taking a leading role in 
coordinating the delivery of the South East Warrington Urban Extension . 
10.2.2 4 The
 Principal Landowners  have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a 
comprehensive form of development and their support of the build rates  which 
have informed the development trajectory.   They are su pportive of the preparation 
of the  Development F ramework  for the South East Warrington Urban Extension and 
the delivery of the wide range of infrastructure that is required to s upport its  
delivery. The cost of the required infrastructure will be shared on a proportionate 
basis between  developers.  
10.2.2 5 Th
e allocation Policy , together with the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan,  set 
out the key infrastructure requirements  to support  the South East Warrington 
Urban Extension.  
10.2. 26 To me
et the requirements of Policy MD 2 regarding protection of the ecology on the 
site, the applicant will be required to provide evidence that the development will not result in an adverse effects both alone and in combination with other plans and projects on the integrity of the Mersey Estua ry SPA through loss of functionally 
linked habitat and disturbance from both construction and operation of the development.  
10.2.27 To de
monstrate this, a survey will be required to determine habitats and current 
use of the site to support a significant population1 of qualifying birds associated 
1 A significant population is classified as a site that is regularly used by 1% or more of the population of 
qualifying bird species.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
199with the protected site.  Where habitats are considered functionally linked to the 
SPA, non -breeding bird surveys will be required to determine if the site and 
neighbouring land constitute a significant area of supporting functionally linked land (FLL).  Surveys will be required to be undertaken during autumn, winter and spring.  If habitat within the site or adjacent land are considered FLL and identified to support significant populations of qualifying bird speci es avoidance measures and 
mitigation will be required and the planning application will need to be assessed through a project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure that the 
development does not result in adverse effects on integrity of the Mer sey Estuary 
SPA.  
Key Eviden
ce 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Local Housing N eeds Assessment (20 21)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (20 16) 
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Green Belt Site Assessment - Garden Suburb Options (2021)
•Infrastructure D
elivery Plan (2021)
•EDNA (2021)
•Retail S tudy Update (2021)
•WBC Transport Model (2 021)
•South East Warrington Urban Extension Development Vision (2021)
•South East Warrington Urban Extension Heritage Impact Assessment (2021)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan 
(2021)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)  
Council Wide Strategies  
•Warrington Means Business
•WBC Local Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
•WBC Housing Strategy (2018)
Delivery Partners  
•Landowners and Developers promoting land within the Urban E xtension
•United Utilities
•Natural England
•Local Nature Partnership
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
20010.3  Fiddlers Ferry  
10.3.1  Lan
d at the former  Fiddlers Ferry Power Station is a mixed -use opportunity site that 
will be developed to creat e a sustainable , well- designed and distinctive place.  It will 
offer an attractive location for new businesses as well as well as supporting a new 
residential community. It will be served by new community infrastructure and will maximise travel by walking, cycling and pu blic transport.  Over half of the allocation 
site will be devoted to parkland and recreational space.  
10.3.2  The
 former power station site  is located to the south of A562 Widnes Road. 
Together with associated land, the site comprises a total of 324ha, exte nding south 
beyond the St Helens Canal and  the Widnes to Warrington Railway Line  to the River 
Mersey.  
10.3.3  Land
 at Fiddlers Ferry will deliver around  1,800 homes , of which around  1,300 will 
be delivered in the plan period,  and approximately  101 ha of employment land.  
10.3.4  The 
part of the site which housed the former power station provides  a major 
brownfield opportunity for new employment uses  and will make a significant 
contribution to meeting Warrington ’s future employment land needs.  It will have 
the potential to comprise distribution, logistics, industrial uses and low carbon  
energy projects, benefiting from its accessibility to the regional road network and its 
established grid infrastructure.  
10.3.5  To 
the east of the former power station is an area of land proposed to be removed 
from the Green Belt for a minimum of 860 homes. This will create the first phase of 
a new residential community and  is also important in enabling the remediation of 
the former power station site itself.  
10.3.6  The lan
d to the south of the railway line and canal comprises a number of large 
lagoons which were associated with  the cooling operation of the power station and 
for storage of fly ash deposits. This land provides for a second phase of 
development  that will start later in the plan p eriod . The western section  of this area 
will be removed from the Green Belt for a minimum of  900 homes, whilst the 
remaining lagoons and their setting will be enhanced to provide an ecological and major new recreational resource.  
10.3.7 The 
new  mixed -use community will be supported by  new social infrastructure 
including a new primary school; a health facility, open space and recreational facilities and local shops.  
10.3. 8 The 
development will provide enhanced pedestrian and cycle facilities along the 
A562 to connect to existing communities and the wider active travel routes in Penketh and to the west in Widnes, within the Borough of Halton . The development 
will further benefit from improved public transport services and will contrib ute to a 
number of other wider transport and highway improvements in Warrington and Halton  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
20110.3.9  Ke
y development requirements and principles are set out in the allocation policy 
below . 
10.3.10
 The development concept diagram  has been informed by a  masterplanning 
exercise , working with the landowner.  It provides:  
•a defini
tive boundary of the Fiddlers Ferry development site
•a definitive new Green Belt boundary
•the boundary of the employment allocation
•locations of the two residential neighbourhoods
•illustrative leisure and green infrastructure network including parklands and
green links
10.3.11
 The final form of development will be determined through the preparation of a comprehensive Development Framework , to be approved by  the Council prior to 
the submission of any planning applications for the development  of the site . The 
Development Framework will be prepared by the landowners, in consultation with the Council,  Halton Council,  key statutory consultees and the local community.  
10.3.12
 The Development Framework will include a more detailed masterplan for the area and a strategy to ensure the timely delivery of supporting infrastructure.  This is 
important given the existing constraints on transport and community infrastructure in the surrounding area, both in Warrington and Halton.  
10.3.13
 Taking into account the need to pr epare the Development Framework, the 
demolition of the Power Station and  initial required infrastructure improvements, 
the Council anticipates  development will commen ce in 2025/26.  
10.3.14
 The Development Framework, including  infrastructure requirements , will be kept 
under review throughout the duration of the build out of the Fiddlers Ferry 
development site .  The detailed infrastructure requirements for the second phase of 
development will be confirmed through future formal reviews of the Local Plan.  
Policy  MD3 – Fiddlers Ferry  
MD3.1 Key Land Use and Infrastructure  Requirements  
1.Land at the former Fiddlers Ferry Power Station site will be allocated to deliver a mixed -
use development  comprising approximately 101ha of employment land and a minimum of
1,760 new homes,  of which 1,310 homes  will be delivered in the plan period .
2. The allocatio n will include the removal of 82  ha of land from the Green Belt to
accommodate a minimum of 860 new homes on land to the north of the railway line and a
further 900 homes to the south of the railway line  (450 homes in the plan period ).
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2023.The al location will be supported by the following  range of infrastructure :
a.A range of h ousing tenures, types and sizes, including affordable  homes,  custom and self -
build plots  and supported and e xtra care housing .
b.A new 1 form entry primary school, with  room for expansion to 2 form s of entry .
c.Local shops and other community facilities of an appropriate scale .
d.Space within the development for a potential branch GP surgery.
e.A contribution towards additional secondary school places .
f.A contribution towards built leisure facilities .
g.Three new parks and  an extensive green infrastructure  network.
h.A range of smaller areas of open space within the residential development to serve the
new community.
i.Playing pitches.
j.A comprehensive  package of transport improvements .
k. Compensatory green belt improvements  and ecological mitigation and enhancement.
l.Flood mitigation and drainage including  exemplary  sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) .
MDA3.2 Delivery and phasing  
4. The first phase of development at Fiddlers Ferry will include the employment site and the
northern residential parcel to the north of the railway line.  Development to the south of the
railway line will fall into the second phase of development in the latter part of  the plan
period and beyond.
5.The landowner  will be required  to prepare a comprehensive Development Framework for
the Fiddlers Ferry development site .  The Development Framework will accord with the site -
specific requirements of this policy and wider Local Plan requirements. The Framework will
be subject to consultation with statutory consultees and the local community before being
finalised.
6.The Development Framework will be agreed with the Council in advance of planning
applications being submitted.  The Development Framework will be a material consideration
in the determination of planning applications across the allocation site ; planning
permissions will only be granted where they are consistent with the Development
Framework.
7.To ensure a coordinated approach to new development across the allocation site , the
Development Framework will provide:
a.A comprehensive spatial masterplan for the entire development site , based on the
principles and requirements set out in this policy and  reflecting site opportunities 
and constraints;  
b.A comprehensive infrastructure delivery strategy for the development site  with details
on phasing, delivery triggers and delivery responsibilities ; and
c.An allocation wide approach to infrastructure funding, including planning obligations .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2038. The Development Framework will be reviewed and updated alongside future reviews of
the Local Plan.  This process  will confirm the infrastructure requirements for the second
phase of development.
MD3.3 Detailed Site- specific Requirements  
New Homes  
9.The residential development parcels  will provide two new neighbourhoods , each
comprising an appropriate mix of housing in accordance with Policy DEV2, including a
minimum of 30% provision of affordable housing.
10.Supported housing for older people should be provided within t he allocation site
boundary. The precise nature o f this will need to be agreed with the Council based on need
and the Council’s broader strategy to encourage independent living.
11.Specific provision should be made for self-build/custom -build plots , subject to demand
as demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
12.To ensure the efficient use of land and to reflect the area’s urban fringe location,
residential development will be constructed to an average minimum net density of 35dph.
Employment Area 
13.The employment area will deliver around 101 hectares of employment land to meet
strategic and local employment needs on land allocated in Phase 1 of the development area.
14.The employment land is allocated for dist ribution and industrial uses (B8, B2 and related
ancillary uses) and for low carbon  energy projects utilising the sites established power
infrastructure.
Community Facilities  
15.The development will be required to deliver  a new 1 form entry primary school, capable
of expansion to 2 forms of  entry.   The primary school should be located within the northern
residential parcel  immediately adjacent to the local centre.
16.The d evelopment will be required  to make a financial contribution towards the provision
of additional secondary school place s through the expansion of existing  secondary schools .
17.The new local centre  within Phase 1 of the development should provide a focal point for
the new community  and should include local shops and other appropriate local services . A
small local centre will also be provided within the residential development within Phase 2.
Any proposal for retail development above 500 sq.m. will require a retail needs assessment
and be subject to the sequential assessment set out in Policy DEV5 .
18.The specification and delivery of flexible space for a satellite GP surgery will need to be
agreed with the NHS as part of the delivery strategy.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
204Green Infrastructure Network 
19.The Development Framework will define a green infrastructure network to ensure the
provision of an accessible, comprehensive and high quality network of multi -functional
green spaces which connect the  different parts of the  development site and provide links
into Warrington’s wider green space network.
20. In accordance with  Policy DC5 a  range of types and sizes of open space  will be required
in line  with the Council’s open space standards.  This should include provision of local parks
and gardens; natural and semi- natural greenspace; equipped and informal play areas; sports
pitches; and allotment plots.
21. T he long term management and maintenance arrangements for the green infrastructure
network within the development site must be secured .
Natural Environment  
22. Development within the allocation  site will be required to protect and enhance existing
wildlife corridors and provide new corridors to link the site into Warrington’s wider
ecological network and the Mersey Estuary Special Protection Area.
23. The  layout  of new development must take into  account existing landscape features,
including watercourses, woodlands, significant hedgerows and contribute to the wider
objectives of the Mersey Forest and have regard to sites identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological
Network) which should be protected in accordance with the requirements of Policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
24. In accordance with Policy DC4 d evelopment within the allocation site will be required to
evidence that it will not have any adverse impacts on the integrity of the Mersey Estuary
Special Protection Area.   If habitats within the allocation site or on adjacent land are suitable
to support significant populations of qualifying species of wintering birds , avoidance
measures and mitigation will be required and any planning application ma y need to be
assessed through project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment.
25. A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt 
26.The Green Belt boundary to the northern development parcel will be formed by Widnes
Road and an area of new parkland.  To the east the Green Belt Boundary currently consists
of Marsh Lane and the limits of existing development and would require strengthening to
ensure permanence of the Green Belt in the long term.
27. The southern development parcel will further create a new Green Belt boundary to the
east along the line of the Vyrnwy  Aqueduct which also represents a recognisable and
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
205permanent boundary.   The St Helens Canal and the railway further provide a robust partial 
boundary to the north of the southern parcel.  
28.A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be requir ed to be provided.  These will form part of
the comprehensive range of ecological and recreational enhancements proposed on land
that will remain in the Green Belt.
Transport and Accessibility  
29.A comprehensive package of transport improvements will be required to support the
development . Required improvements will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site as a whole and for individual
phases of development.
b.Improved cycling and walking routes well related to the green infrast ructure network and
connecting to the Trans Pennine Trail.
c.Providing public transport enhancements to connect the new community with Warrington
Town Centre  and neighbouring Widnes Town Centre.
d.Other necessary improvements  or mitigation measures to local and strategic highway
networks  as identified by an appropriate Transport Assessment.
30.The layout of the development site  should maximise the potential for walkable
neighbourhoods, with a legible hierarchy of routes, providing new footpaths and cyc leways
that link to existing networks beyond the site.
31.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops within the site are accessible by pedestrians and cyclists via
effective footpaths and cycle routes.
32. Development within the allocation site should be supported by an area -wide travel plan,
encompassing the needs of all site users.  This area -wide travel plan should replace the need
for a series of individual travel plans.
33.The development should contribute to the Council’s wider aspiration of enhancing the
Trans Pennine Trail and the St Helens Canal  as a recreational, tourism, heritage and
environmental resource as well as important  cycle and pedestrian link across the Borou gh.
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
34.A site -wide  foul and  surface water strategy will be required across the allocation site as a
whole, incorporating appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood alleviation
measures.   The surface w ater strategy will be required to improve on greenfield run -off
rates.  Development proposals will be expected to incorporate infiltration SuDS and SuDS
with multi- functional benefits in preference to traditional underground storage systems.
35.The surfa ce water strategy should be integrated with the site’s green infrastructure
network  in order to maximise ecological and potentially recreational benefits.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
20636.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.   A site wide clean water
strategy will also be required.
37.Development at Fiddlers Ferry must not impact on the operation of the existing
infrastructure services which cross or run close to the site including The V yrnwy  Aqueduct,
the Grangemouth /Stanlow pipeline  (and its associated COMAH zones) and any overhead
power lines .
38.Development within the allocation site  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of
climate change; be as energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its
energy needs from renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
39. Development proposals may be requir ed to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment and incorporate appropriate mitigating measures.
40.The design and layout of development  must incorporate  appropriate measures to
mitigate noise and air quality imp acts from the A56 2 Widnes  Road  and railway line .
41. Development within the allocation site  will be required to mitigate air quality impacts on
the Manchester Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4) .
Historic Environment  
42. Development within the allocation site will be required to be designed in order to
ensure that heritage assets and their settings are conserved and, where appropriate,
enhanced within the context of the overall development, through appropriate mitigation
measures, having regard to the Fiddlers Ferry He ritage Impact Assessment.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.3.15  The Fi
ddlers Ferry development site  performed well in terms of the assessment 
against the objectives of the Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s 
National Planning Policy Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal. The development proposals make use of a brownfield site whilst creating a mixed -
use sustainable community in an accessible location.  
10.3.16  The p
roposal is of a sufficient scale to provide a range of services to support a new 
residential community in this part of Warrington, including a local centre, a primary 
school, healthcare provision  and a network of open spaces.  Its location will also 
ensure good access to Warrington Town Centre  and neighbouring Widnes.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
207Figure 19 – Illustrative Concept Plan for Fiddlers Ferry Development Site  
10.3.17  Th
e ability to  re-use the former power station site  and the ability of the wider site to 
make  such a significant and sustainable contribution towards meeting Warrington’s 
development needs provides the exceptional circumstances required to justify the 
removal of part of the site  from the Green Belt.  
10.3.18  By
 requiring the preparation of a Development Framework, the allocation policy will 
ensure that development comes forward in a comprehensive manner whilst 
enhancing the built environment and preserving the  natural environment. Phasing 
of development will be linked to the provision of infrastructure.  
10.3.19  The
 Green Belt in this part of Warrington is of key significance ensuring the 
separation of West Warrington and Widnes .  It is therefore imperative tha t 
development provide s a strong Green Belt boundary.  
10.3.20  The
 landowner has  confirmed their  commitment to ensuring a comprehensive form 
of development, their support of the build rates which have informed the development trajectory and is supportive of  the preparation of a Development 
Framework  for the mixed -use development site .  
10.3.21  The
 programme for demolition of the power station and wider site clearance  will 
enable the first homes to be completed on site  in 2025/26, with employment 
development  and 1,310 homes being delivered by the end of the plan period in 
2038. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
20810.3.22  The allocation Policy, together with the Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan, set  
out the key infrastructure requirements to support the Fiddlers Ferry allocation . 
10.3.23 To meet the requirements of Policy MD 3 regarding protection of the ecology on the 
site, the ap plicant w ill be re quired t o provide e vidence that t he development w ill 
not r esult in an adverse effects b oth a lone and in c ombination with other plans a nd 
projec ts on the i ntegrity of the Me rsey E stuary S PA th rough loss o f functionally 
linke d habitat a nd disturbance from bo th construction and opera tion o f the 
development.  
10.3.24 To demonstrate this, a survey will be required to determine habitats and current 
use of the site to support a significant population1 of qualifying birds associated 
with the protected site.  Where habitats are considered functionally linked to the SPA, non -breeding bird surveys will be required to determine if the site and 
neighbouring land constitute a significant area of supporting functionally linked land (FLL).  Surveys will be required to be undertaken during autumn, winter and spring.  If habitat within the site or adjacent land are considered FLL and identified to support significa nt populations of qualifying bird species avoidance measures and 
mitigation will be required and the planning application will need to be assessed through a project specific Habitats Regulations Assessment to ensure that the development does not result in adverse effects on integrity of the Mersey Estuary 
SPA.  
Key E vidence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•Fiddlers Ferry Re generation Vision ( 2021)
•Fiddlers Fe rry Heritage Impact Assessment (2021)
•WBC 
Green Belt Assessment (20 16)
•WBC Green
 Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt rele ase (2021)
•Green Belt Site Assessment - Fiddlers Ferry (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Information submitted 
in support of ‘Call for Sites’  by landowner
•Habitat
 Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
(2021)
•SA R
eport: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
Other P lanning Do cuments 
•Halton Local Plan
1 A significant p opulation is  classified as a site t hat is  regularly used by 1% o r more o f the p opulation of 
qualifying bird s pecies. •WBC Local Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
•WBC SuDs Guidance
Delivery P artners 
•Landowner and developersCouncil Wide Strategies  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
20910.4   Land at Peel Hall  
10.4.1  The P
eel Hall site is a large g reenfield site in the north of the Borough covering 
approximately 69 hectares.   It is within the existing urban area , bounded to the 
north by the M62 Motorway , with residential development to the east, south and 
west . The A49 Winwick Road also runs  parallel to the west ern side of the site.   
10.4.2  Dev
elopment of the Peel Hall site will deliver a new sustainable community of up to  
1200 new homes . 
10.4.3  The 
new community will be supported by:  
•A range o
f community facilities within a Local Centre, including a new primary
school, residen tial care home and local shops;
•Extensive highways and transport improvements;
•Extensive open s pace  and recreation provision, including relocated and
improved playing fields and associated facilities .
10.4.4  The 
development  will be designed to support walking and cycling for local trips. It 
will benefit from improvements and new linkages to the Local Road Network and 
improved public tra nsport to enable access to the T own Centre  and other key 
destinations .  
10.4.5  Com
munity and transport infrastructure  will need to be phased according to the 
requirements of the development  and impact on the surrounding transport 
network . This will ensure that new residents have access to essential local services 
and facilities and that pressure on existing facilities in north Warrington is 
alleviated .  
10.4.6  The
 existing road network cannot accommodate the level of growth proposed for 
the site  without  significant  mitigation measures .  This means that no development 
will come forward until such a time as a scheme of highway mitigation measures and timetable for implementation have been agreed by the Council and Highways England.   
10.4.7  The
 final form of development  across the site  will be determined through the 
preparation of a Development Framework  to include a more detailed masterplan 
for the area and a strategy to ensure the timely delivery of supporting infrastructure .  
Policy MD4  - Land at Peel Hall  
MD 4.1 Key Land Use and Infrastructure Requirements  
1.Land comprising approximately 69 hectares  at Peel Hall  will be allocated to deliver a new
sustainable community  of up to  1200 new homes, supported by the following range of
infrastructure:
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
210a.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes, including affordable homes, custom and self-
build  plots and a  residential care home (Use Class C2)
b.A one form entry Primary School  with additional operational land to allow the expansion
to a two form entry Primary School;
c.A further contribution to provide an additional half form entry of primary school capacity
off-site;
d.A mixed use Local Centre providing local shops and other appropriate local services ;
e.Junction improvements and n ew highway connection s linking the development to the
Local Road Network,  and highway works to  the Strategic Road Network , as agreed by the
Council and Highways England ;
f.Providing bus priority features such as bus gates to ensure that the internal site layout
allows efficient servicing by bus services with good access to key facilities and direct links to
the external network ;
g.An internal cycling and walking network (with links to the external network) which helps
to create accessible neighbourhoods which minimi ses the need to drive to key facilities such
as shops and schools ;
h.The provision of a Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS), in accordance with the Council’s
adopted  (or subsequent updated guidance)  Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Design and
Technical Guidance (December 2017) ;
i.A contribution towards additional secondary school places ;
j.A contribution to ‘off site’ Health Care provision within the defined catc hment area of the
site;
k.A contribution to  deliver bus service s to connect to the develo pment  to the Town Centre
and other key destinations;
l.Provision of a comprehensive network of open spaces within the development to serve
the new community and the wider north Warrington area in accordance with the  Council’s
open space standards; and
m.The provision new  sports pitches and ancillary changing facilities , including the relocation
of existing pitches at Mill Lane .
MD 4.2 Delivery and Phasing  
2.The landowners  will be require d to prepare a Development Framework  for the
development of the site, to include  a delivery strategy and phasing plan in order to ensure
the comprehensive and coordinated development  of the site  as a whole .
3.The Development Framework  must confirm to the requirements of P olicy MD 4, and be
agreed by the Council. It should also be subject to consultation with statutory consultees
and the local community .
4.The Development Framework  will provide the basis for subsequent planning applications
for individual phases of development.
5.No development will be permitted until a package of highway works have been agreed
with the Council and Highways England  that mitigate the transport impacts of the
development .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2116.The replacement playing pitches must be operational before any development can
commence on the existing Mill Lane playing fields site.
7.Full details of the programme and funding for delivery of the primary school and other
necessary community infrastructure will need to be agreed by the Council before the first
phase of the de velopment is permitted to come forward.
MD 4.3 Detailed Site Specific Requirements  
New Homes  
8.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes, as identified in Policy  DEV2, should be
provided in order to ensure development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and
specialist housing needs, to include  housing for  families and older people.
9.In accordance with P olicy DEV2 a minimum of 30% Affordable Housing  shall be provided
on site .
10.Specific provision should be made for a residential care facility providing a minimum of
80 bed spaces.   This should be located within  the Local Centre boundary  or in proximity to
the Local Centre.
11.Specific provision should be made for self -build/cust om-build plots, subject to demand
as demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
12.To reflect the site’s urban fringe location adjacent to established residential
development, the development will be constructed to an average minimum net density of
35dph.
Community Facilities  
13.The development will be required to provide a new one form entry primary school, with
additional operational land to allow the expansion to a two form entry Primary School.
14.In order to fully meet the need f or primary school places, the development will be
required to contribute to the expansion of an existing primary school  to provide capacity for
an additional half form of entry.
15.Development will be expected to make a financial contribution towards the  provision of
additional secondary school places through the expansion of existing or planned new
secondary schools .
16.The primary school should be located within or immediately adjacent to the local centre.
17.The new local centre should provide a focal point for the new community and should be
located in a central position within the site.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
21218.Local shops and services  will be supported in the Local Centre in order to provide for day
to day needs.
19.Any proposal for retail floorspace  in excess of 500 sq.m. will require a retail needs
assessment and be subject to the sequential assessment set out in Policy DEV5.
20.Development will be expected to make a financial contribution to the delivery of a new
health care facility within the catchment area of the site.
Transport & Accessibility  
21.A comprehensive package of transport improvements will be required to support the
urban extension. Required improvements will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access and egress arrangements for the site as a whole and for
individual phases of development , with no access and egress from  and to  Poplars Avenue ,
except for public transport, active travel, emergency services and a minimal number of
dwellings fronting the access links ;
b.Junction im provements and new highway connections linking the development to the
Local Road Network, and highway works to the Strategic Road Network, as agreed by the
Council and Highways England ;
c.Improved cycling and walking routes well related to the green infrastructure network;
connecting to the wider network and Warrington Town Centre ;
d.Providing public transport enhancements to connect the new community with
Warrington Town Centre and key destinations including the employment areas of
Birchwood  and Omega ; and
e.Other necessary network improvements  to the Local and Strategic Road Network  as
identified by an appropriate Transport Assessment .
22.The layout of the urban extension , including the location of key facilities,  should
maximise  the opportunities for walkable neighbourhoods  which would mirror the low traffic
characteristics of the neighbouring urban area of Hulme and Blackbrook.  This would include
a legible internal hierarchy of footpaths and cycle ways  that also provide direct  links to
existing n etworks beyond the site.
23.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops within the site are accessible via effective footpaths and cycle
routes.
24.Development should not introduce a level of vehicular activity into the existing
surrounding neighbourhoods which would change the character of these established
residential areas.
25.The creation of a Transport Steering Group (TSG) is required to co -ordinate the efficient
delivery of sustainable transport measures serving the site (including the travel plan) and to
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
213ensure the required network efficiency and safety measures on the wider  network are 
delivered as and when appropriate.  
Open Space and Recreation  
26.A Green Infrastructure Strategy should be prepared as part of the Development
Framework  in order to ensure the provision of an accessible, comprehensive and high
quality networ k of multi -functional green spaces.
27.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space In line with
the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5, in addition to the
replace ment  of the existing pitches from Mill Lane .
28.There should be a major new park as part of the development to provide a proportion of
the open space and recreational needs of the development as well as providing a wider
resource for north Warrington .
29. A scheme for measurable Biodiversity Net Gain through the use of the Defra Metric will
be required. Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to be
necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy
30.Smaller areas of open space should be provided  across all of the residential areas
throughout the development .
31.The development will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing
existing or planned built leisure facilities that will serve residents of the development.
Natural En vironment  
32.The Green Infrastructure Strategy should demonstrate how development within the
urban extension will protect and enhance existing wildlife corridors and provide new
corridors to link the site into Warrington’s wider ecological network.
33.The layout of the urban extension should take account of existing landscape features,
specifically Radley Plantation, as well as including watercourses, woodlands and significant
hedgerows.
34. A Mineral Resource Assessment should be undertaken to identify the quality, quantity
and extent of mineral resource on the site in order to determine if its prior extraction is
feasible in accordance with Policy ENV3.
35. The impact of the development on the Manchester Mos ses Special Area of Conservation
must be considered as part of the Air Quality Assessment of the development, with
mitigation required to address any significant effects on ecological interests  in accordance
with Policy ENV8.
Environmental Protection  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
21436.The design of the urban extension must incorporate measures to mitigate air quality and
noise impacts from the M62 and the A49.
37.No residential dwellings, care homes, children’s nurseries or schools shall be permitted
within 50 metres of the M62  Air Quality Management Area  unless a detailed air quality
assessment  (supported by on -site monitoring ), concludes that current and future air
pollutant levels within 50 metres of the M62 will not have a risk of exceedance of the
relevant national objectiv es for these uses .
38.Any residential development within the vicinity of Peel Hall Farm Boarding Kennels will
need to ensure that  the living conditions of future occupiers would not be adversely
affected by the existing business. Residential development  will also need to ensure that it
does not have an adverse impact on the operation of Peel Hall Farm Boarding Kennels.
39.An assessment for potentially contaminated land should be carried out to demonstrate
that the site is, or could be made suitable for use should it be found to be contaminated.
Further work, including a site investigation, may be required at a pre -planning stage,
depending on the nature of the site.
Utilities 
40.A site -wide surface water strategy is required across the development  as a whole,
incorporating appropriate Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood alleviation
measures.  It will be important for this to be integrated with the site’s Green Infrastructure
Strategy in order to maximise ecological and recreational benefits.
41.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.
42.In accordance with Policy INF3 , development within the site must not inhibit the
operation  of the existing National Grid gas pipeline to the northern boundary of the site, or
the United Utilities sewage works located off Elm Road.
43. Development should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.4.8  The P
eel Hall site performs well in terms of the assessment against the Objectives of 
the Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal.  
10.4.9  Pee
l Hall presents an opportunity to del iver a high quality, sustainable residential 
development within the existing  urban area of the Borough.  The development is of 
sufficient scale to provide a range of services to support a new residential 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
215community in this part of Warrington, including  a Primary School, Local centre , 
Open Space  and mitigation measures to the Local Road Network.  
Figur
e 20  – Illustrative Concept Plan for Peel Hall 
10.4.10  Acc
ess and egress to the site is currently dependent on the Local Road Network, and 
this cannot accommodate the full scale of develop ment proposed through Policy 
MD4. This means that it is essential that development is coordinated with the 
delivery of a new road connecting the development to the Local Road Network.  
10.4.11  As t
here is no agreed pac kage of transport mitigation measures, the Council has re -
classified the Peel Hall site from ‘deliverable’ to ‘developable’ in its Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). The Council has not therefore not 
included any completions from the site within the first 5 year period of the Plan’s 
housing trajectory.  
10.4.12 I
n considering a previous application on the Peel Hall site, the Council accepted the 
principle of a Local Centre providing a range of local retail and service provision,  
justif ied through a retail impact assessment,  together with employment floorspace, 
including:  
•A food s
tore (Use Class A1) up to 2000 square metres
•Up to 600 square metres, with no single unit more than 200 square metres of
Financial and professional services, restaurants and cafes, drinking
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
216establishments, hot food takeaways (Use Classes A2 -A5 inclusive) and units 
within Use Class D1 (non -residential institution)  
•Family restaurant/pub up to 800 square metres (Use Class A3/A4)
10.4.13  The
 Council’s  Mineral Resource Study (2017) identified the type and broad extent of 
mineral resources across the Borough.  The site of the Peel Hall allocation is 
identified as an area where there are deposits of sand and gravel.  Policy ENV3 requires an assessment to be undertaken on sites of over 5ha in size to determine if there is any viable resource worth extracting prior to the development of the site and if any viable resource is identified to outline how it will be extracted.  
10.4.14 B
y requiring the preparation of Development Framework, the Allocation Policy will 
ensure that development comes forward in a comprehensive manner and preserves and enhances the built and natural environment.  Phasing of the development will 
be linked to the provision of infrastructure.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National 
Planning Policy Framework (20 21)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment ( 2020 )
•Local Housing Needs Assessment (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model (2021)
•Peel Hall Heritage Impact Assessment (2019)
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•Warringto
n Means Business
•Local Transport Plan (LTP4  2019)
•WBC Sus tainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Design and Technical Guidance
(December 2017)
Delivery
 Partners  
•Private 
Sector Stakeholders
•Public Sector Stakeholders
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
21710.5  Thelwall Heys  
10.5.1 Land to 
the east of Grappenhall and south of The lwall bounded by the A50, A56, the 
Bridgewater Canal and Cliff Lane  will be allocated for residential development, 
providing a minimum of 300 homes.   The development will provide a high quality 
residential setting with good  access to local services and facilities in Stockton Heath, 
Grapp enhall and Thelwall and employment opportunities in the Town Centre and 
South East Warrington Employment Area.  
10.5.2 The n ew d
evelopment will preserve and enhance the heritage assets within the 
allocation site  and will be designed to respect heritage assets in the surrounding 
area.  
10.5.3  Deve
lopment is expected to come forward quickly on the adoption of the plan.  This 
means the first new homes are anticipated to be completed in 2024/25, with the 
development completed in full within the first 10 years of the plan . 
Policy MD5 - Thelwall Heys  
1.Land to the east of Grappenhall and south of Thelwall will be removed fro m the Green
Belt and allocated for residential development for a minimum of 300 homes.
New Homes  
2.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and specialist housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older and younger people and
for younger people looking to purchase their first home.
3.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable in accordance with Policy DEV2.
4.Specific  provision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand
as demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
5.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside and to respect and
sustain the setting of Thelwall Heys  House (Grade ll)  within the site, development will be
constructed to an average minimum net density of 30dph.
Community Facilities 
6.The development will be required to make a contribution towards the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that
will be generated from the development.
7.Development will be required to make a contribution towards the provision of
additional primary care capacity.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
218Open Space and Recreation 
8. A green infrastructure strategy will be required for the site in order to ensure the
provision of an accessible, comprehensive and high quality network of m ulti-functional
green spaces.
9.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line
with the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5.
10. Proposals will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing
or planned built leisure facilities and playing pitch provision that will serve the new
residents of the development.
Natural Environment 
11.The layout of the development should take account of existing landscape features,
including trees and significant hedgerows and ensure the site contributes to the wider
objectives of the Mersey Forest.  Particular regard should be given to sites identified in
Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
12.A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated th rough the
use of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown
to be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accorda nce with the
requirements of Policy DC4.
13. The Bridgewater Canal runs along part of the southern border of the site .  This is a
Green Infrastructure opportunity and development proposals should integrate and
support measures that maximise and reinforce the environmental and socio -economic
benefits of linkage to the canal corridor and its environs for both current and future
residents.
Green Belt 
14.The southern and eastern boundaries of the allocation  will clearly define the new
Green Belt boundary.   A landscape scheme will be required that retains and enhances the
trees and hedgerows along these Green Belt boundaries, particular reference should be
given to the boundary along Cliff Lane and the Bridgewater Canal.
15. A scheme of compensatory improv ements to the environmental quality and
accessibility of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial
contributions will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of
compensatory improvements can be max imised by providing them in the most
appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility 
16. A package of transport improvements will be required to support the development.
Required improvements will include:
a. Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
219b.Provision of cycling and walking routes within the site which connect into the wider
existing footway network around the site (in particular footpath no.12 that abuts the
eastern boundary of the site, footpath no.21 that abuts t he southern boundary of the site
and the Trans -Pen nine Trail that abuts the  northern boundary of the site ) and provide
connectivity with the existing community.
c. Other necessary network improvements or travel plan measures as identified by an
appropriate Transport Assessment.
17. The development will be required to make a contribution towards the delivery of
improved cycle links to employment opportunities in the Town Centre and the South East
Warrington Employment Area and across wider south Warrington.
18. Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops on Knutsford Road and Stockport Road are accessible for
pedestrians through safe and attractive footpath links .
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
19.A site -wide surface water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood alleviation measures.
20.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring
that surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.
21.The development should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon  sources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
22. Development within the allocation site will be required to mitigate air quality impacts
on the Manchester Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
Historic Environment 
23. Development  will be required to preserve and enhance the historic environment,
heritage assets and their setting s.
24.Development proposals will be required to be in accordance with the Heritage Impact
Assessment for Thelwall Heys; including the proposed mitigation and enhancem ent
measures.
Why we have taken this approach  
10.5.4 The si
te performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal.  The Local Plan Green Belt 
Assessment determined that the site only makes a weak contribution to the 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
220objectives of the Green Belt.   The removal of the site from the Green Belt will 
provide new strong and defensible boundaries to the Green Belt.  
10.5.5 The 
site is well served by existing cycle, walking and public transport routes.  Its 
location will ens ure good access to services in Stockton Heath  District Centre and 
Grappenhall  and Thelwall local centres  and major existing employment areas in 
Warrington Town Centre and the proposed South East Warrington Em ployment 
Area. 
10.5.6 The 
Allocation Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastructure provision will be sec ured to ensure that Grappenhall’s infrastructure/services can 
support the level of population growth.  
10.5.7 The gr
eenfield and relatively unconstrained nature of the land will enable the site to 
be deli vered in the early part of the P lan period.  Develop ers promoting the site 
have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a high quality and comprehensive 
form of development and their support of the build rates which have informed the development trajectory.  
Figure
 21 – Thelwall Heys Site Boundary  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
221Key Evidence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Mode
l (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for Thelwall Heys (2021)
•Information submitted in support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting
the allocation
•Habitat
 Regulation
 Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (20 21)
•SA Report: Proposed S
ubmission Version Local Plan (2021)
Other Planning Documents 
•Planning Obligations SPD
Council Wide Strategies  
•WBC Local Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Developers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
22210.6 South East Warrington Employment Area 
10.6.1 The Sout
h East Warrington Employment Area  will be a major new employment 
location  of 137 hectares  strategically located  at the junction of the M6 and M56 , 
adjacent to the existing Appleton Thorn/Barleycastle Industrial Estates.   
10.6.2 The Emplo
yment Area will make a significant contribution to meeting Warrington’s 
future employment land needs  at both a local and strategic level. It will comprise 
large scale distribution, logistic s, industrial uses  and ancillary offices,  benefiting 
from its accessibility to the motorway network .  
10.6.3 Transpo
rt mitigation measures will be identified to offset the impact of traffic 
generated by the employment development on Junction 20 of the M6. This will be 
in agreement with Highways England, with funding streams and trigger points 
identified for the delivery of the required works to enable development to come forward in the early years of the Plan period.  
10.6.4 The Emplo
yment Area will provide new green infrastructure, ensure the 
permanence of revised Green Belt boundaries and will preserve and enhance the setting of heritage assets within and close to the site.
  
10.6.5 To ensure the coordinated approach to the delivery of the allocation, the principal landowners  will be required to prepare a Development Framework to address the 
site wide requirements of the policy, relating to access, transport improvements, 
green infrastructure and utilities. The Development F ramework will need to be 
agreed with the Council and key stakeholders, including Highways England, prior to 
development coming forward. Once agreed, the development framework will enable individual development proposals to come f orward within the allocation in a 
coordinated manner.   
10.6.6 T he full 
extent of the Employment Area will be built out and completed by the end 
of the Plan period in 2038 . 
Policy MD 6 – The South East Warrington Employment Area  
MD6.1 Key Land Use and Infrastructure Requirements  
1.The South East Warrington Employment Area, situated at the junction of the M6 and M56
will be removed from the Green Belt and allocated for employment development to deliver
around 137 hectares  of employment land to meet strategic and local employment  needs .
2.The employment land is allocated for distribution and industrial uses (B8 and B2  and
related ancillary uses ).
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
223MD6.2 Delivery and phasing 
3. The principal  landowners and developers  will be required  to prepare a Development
Framework for the employment allocation to address site -wide requirements of this policy
and wider Local Plan requirements.
4.The new employment development  will not  be commenced  until the funding and the
programme for the delivery of the improvements  at Junction 20 of the M6 have been
agreed with key stakeholders, including Highways England and the Local Highway Authority.
MD6.3 Detailed Site -specific Requirements  
Green Infrastructure  
5.The Development Framework will include a green infrastructure strategy for the
allocation site in order to ensure the provision of an accessible and appropriate level of
green spaces to support the employment area.
6. The long term management and maintenance arrangements for the green infrastructure
network within the allocation site must be secured.
Natural Environment  
7.Development within the allocation site will be required to  protect and enhance existing
wildlife corridors and provide new corridors to link the site into Warrington’s wider
ecological network and the Great Manchester Wetlands Nature Improvement Area.
8.The layout of new development must take into account exis ting landscape features,
including watercourses, woodlands, significant hedgerows and contribute to the wider
objectives of the Mersey Forest and have regard to sites identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological
Network) which should be protected in accordance with the requirements of Policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
9.A scheme for measurable Biodiversity Net Gain through the use of the Defra Metric will
be required. Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to be
necessary by appli cation of the mitigation hierarchy.
Green Belt  Boundary  
10. The Green Belt boundary is defined by Grappenhall Road to the northern boundary, the
M6 to the east and the M56  and Bradley Brook to the south .
11.A scheme of compensatory improvements to the  environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required.  Financial contributions will be
considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transportation and accessibility  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
22412.A comprehensive package of transport improvements will be required  to support the
employment area. Required improvements will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site as a whole and for individual
phases of development.
b.Improved cycling and walking routes providing direct and attractive linkages  to the
existing and planned residential areas and amenities and making use of, where appropriate,
the adjacent green i nfrastructure network.
c.Providing public transport enhancements to connect the new employment area with new
residential areas, Stockton Heath; and Warrington Town Centre .
d.Improvements to increase capacity at Junction 20 of the M6.
e.Other network i mprovements and travel plan measures as identified by an appropriate
Transport Assessment  at the planning application stage .
13.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops within/close to the site are accessible by pedestrians and cyclists
via effective footpaths and cycle routes.
14. An area -wide travel plan should be created setting out strategic goals to support the
development, encompassing the entire development area.  This will help inform the
individual travel plans for occupants and enable larger- scale initiatives to be implemented
for the benefit of the entire development.
Utilities  and Environmental Protection  
15.A site -wide  foul and surface water strategy will be required across the allocation site as a
whole,  incorporating appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood alleviation
measures. The surface water strategy will be required to improve on greenfield run -off
rates. Development proposals will be expected to incorporate infiltration SuDS and SuDS
with multi- functional benefits in preference to traditional underground storage systems.
16.The surface water strategy should be integrated with the site’s green infrastructure
network in order to maximise ecological and potentially recreational benefits .
17.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.  A site wide clean water
strategy will also be required .
18.New development should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change ; be as
energy efficient and water efficient as possible  and seek to meet a proportion of its energy
needs from  renewable or low carbon energy  sources  in accordance with Policy EN V7.
19.Development proposals may be required to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment and incorporate appropriate mitigating measures.
20.Development within the allocation site will be required to  mitigate  air quality impacts on
the Manchester Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
225Historic Environment  
21.Development will be required to preserve and enhance  the historic environment,
heritage assets and their setting .
22.The Bradley Hall Moated Site Ancient Monument is of particular significance given its
location within the Employment Area.  Development proposals will be required to  be in
accordance with  the South East Warrington Employment Area Heritage Impact Assessment
including the proposed mitigation and enhancement measures.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.6.7 The Sou
th East Warrington Employment Area Employment Area performed well in 
terms of the assessment against the objectives of the Local Plan, the requirements 
of the Government’s National Planning Polic y Framework and the Local Plan’s  
Sustainability Appraisal.  
Figure  22 
- South East Warrington Employment Area  Boundary  
10.6.8 The abi
lity to make such a significant and sustainable contribution towards meeting 
Warrington’s current and long term employment development needs provides the 
Exceptional Circumstances required to justify the removal of The South East 
Warrington Employment Area from the Green Belt. It will consolidate a substantial 
existing Employment location.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
22610.6.9 The Allocation Policy  (including the requirement for a Development Framework)  will 
ensure that development comes forward in a comprehensive manner and clearly 
sets out key infrastructure requirements to support  The South East Warrington 
Employment Area.  
10.6.10 It will also
 provide a strong Green Belt boundary in this part of Warrington and will 
ensure that development preserves and enhances the built and natural 
environment.   
Key Eviden
ce 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC 
Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•South East W
arrington Employment Area Heritage Impact Assessment
(2021)
•Infrastructure D
elivery Plan (2021)
•Economic Development Needs Assessment (2021)
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Information submitted in support of ‘
Call for Sites’  by developers promoting
land
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
•HRA Proposed S
ubmission Version Local Plan ( 2021)
Council Wide Strategies  
•Warrington Means Business
•Local Transport Plan (LTP4  2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Developers and landowners
•Warrington & Co
•United Utilities
•Highways England
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
22710.6  Croft  
10.6.1  Land 
to the north east of the inset settlement of Croft adjacent to Deacons Close  
will be allocated for residential develop ment,  providing for a minimum of  75 new 
homes.  The development  will provide  a high quality residential setting with ease of 
access to existing local services  and facilities in Croft  and e mployment opportunities 
at Winwick Quay and Birchwood Park . 
10.6.2  Devel
opment is expected to  come for ward quickly upon adoption of the P lan.  This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in  2024/25, with the 
development  completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.   
Policy  OS1 – Croft  
1.Land to the north  east of Croft  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green Belt
and allocated for residential development for a minimum of 75 homes .
New Homes  
2.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and specialist housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
3.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
4.Specific provision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
5.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the deve lopment will be
constructed to an average minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
6.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the development .
7.Development will be expected to make a contribution towards the provision of additional
primary care capacity.
Open Space and Recreation  
8.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5.
9.Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing or
planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitches  that will serve residents of the
development .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
228Natural Environment  
10.The layout of the development  should take account of existing landscape features,
including  watercourses and significant hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes to the
wider objectives of the Mersey Forest.   Particular regard should be given to sites identified
in Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with Policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
11.A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt  
12.The north ern, eastern and southern  boundar ies of the site define  the Green Belt
boundary.  A landscape scheme will be required to re inforce  these Green Belt boundar ies,
particularly the hedgerow s along the north and eastern boundar ies.
13. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this w ould help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility  
14.A package of transport improvements  will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes within the site which  connect  into the wider
existing footway network  and greenway network/public right of way along t he south ern
boundary of the site  to provide connectivity with the existing community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
15.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops on Smithy Brow , Lord Street and Mustard  Lane are accessible by
pedestrians.
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
16.A site -wide surface water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures.
17.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge .
18.The development will be required to mitigate air quality impacts on the Manchester
Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
22919.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with P olicy  ENV7.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.6.3  The s
ite performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal.  The site only makes a 
weak contribution to the obje ctives of the Green Belt.  
Figur
e 22  – Croft Site Boundary  
10.6.4  Its
 location will ensure good access to services in Croft Village  local centre , 
Warrington Town C entre, and major existing and employment areas  at Winwick 
Quay and Birchwood Park . 
10.6.5  The al
location Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastruc ture 
provision will be secured  to en sure that Croft’s infrastructure/services can support 
the level of population growth.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
23010.6.6  The predominantly greenfield  and relatively unconstrained nature of the site will 
enable the site to be delivered in the early part of the plan period.  Developers 
promoting the site have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a comprehensive 
form of development  and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory . 
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment ( 2018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021 )
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for the  Outlying Settlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in 
support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting
the allocation
•Habitat
 Regulation
 Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed 
Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Other Pl
anning Documents  
•Plannin
g Obligations SPD
Council
 Wide Strategies  
•WBC  Local
 Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Other Rel
evant Documents  
•Croft 
Parish Plan (2018)
Delivery
 Partners  
•Develo
pers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
23110.7  Culcheth 
10.7.1  Land 
to the east  of the inset settlement of Culcheth bounded by Warrington Road 
(A574)  and Holcroft Lane  will be allocated for residential develop ment,  providing a 
minimum of  200 new homes.  The development  will provide  a high quality 
residential setting with ease of access to existing local services  and facilities in 
Culcheth and employment opportunities at Birchwood .  
10.7.2  Devel
opment is expected to  come forward quickly upon adoption of the P lan.  This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in  2024/25, with the 
development  completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.   
Policy  OS2 – Culcheth 
1.Land to the east  of Culcheth  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green Belt and
allocated for residential development for a minimum of 200 homes .
New Homes  
2.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to m eeting the Borough’s general and specialist housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
3.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
4.Specific provision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
5.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the deve lopment will be
constructed to an average minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
6.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the development .
7.Development will be required  to make a contribution towards the provision of additional
primary care capacity.
Open Space and Recreation  
8.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5.
9.Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing or
planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitch provision  that will se rve residents of the
development .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
232Natural Environment  
10.The layout of the development  should take account of existing landscape features,
including  watercourses , ponds  and significant hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes to
the wider objectives of the Mersey Forest.   Particular regard should be given to sites
identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with policy
DC4 and national guidelines.
11.A scheme  for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt  
12.The southwestern, eastern  and northern boundar ies of the site define  the Green Belt
boundary.  A landscape scheme  will be required to re inforce  these Green Belt boundar ies,
particularly the hedgerow along the south western boundary .
13. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility  
14.A package of transport improveme nts will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes  within the site  to connect into the  wider  existing
footway network to the west  and provide connectivity with the existing community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
15.The development will be required to make a contribution towards the delivery of
sustainable transport modes.
16. G ood accessibility to the existing public transport services should be provided by
ensuring that the bus route and bus stops on Warrington Road  are accessible by
pedestrians.
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
17.A site -wide surface water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures.
18. Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network will be required, ensuring that
surface water drainage is not combined with foul discharge.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
23319.The development will be required to mitigate air quality impacts on the Manchester
Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
20. Development within the site must not impact on the operation of (or impede the
required access to) the existing underground gas pipeline that crosses the site.
21.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change ; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy  ENV7.
Why we ha
ve taken this approach  
10.7.3  The sit
e performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal. The site only makes a weak 
contribution to the objectives of the Green Belt.  
Figure 2 3
 – Culcheth Site Boundary  
10.7.4  Its 
location will ensure good access to a range of services in Culcheth 
neighbourhood centre  and major  existing employment areas  at Taylor Business Park 
and Birchwood . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
23410.7. 5 The al
location Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastruc ture 
provision will be s ecured  to en sure that Culcheth’s infrastructure/services can 
support the level of population growth.  
10.7. 6 The 
greenfield and relatively unconstrained nature of the site will enable the site to 
be delivered in the early part of the plan period.  Developers pr omoting the site 
have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a comprehensive form of 
development  and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory . 
10.7.7  It s
hould be noted that the Green Belt boundary has been amended in this location 
to allow for the site allocation and also to address any anomalies that the site allocation would otherwise create.  In this instance the Green Belt boundary has been amended so that two residential properties on the corner of Holcroft Lane / 
Warrington Road (Lion’s Den and Little Lions Cottage) are also removed from the Green Belt.  The exceptional circumstances for this change are those put forward in respect of the allocate d site and the purpose of this further amendment is to secure 
a defensible boundary for the settlement of Culcheth.   
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for the  Outlying Settlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in 
support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting the
allocation
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Other Planning Documents  
•Planning Obligations SPD
Council Wide Strategies  
•WBC  Local Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Developers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
23510.8  Hollins Green  
10.8.1  Land 
to the southwest  of the inset settlement of Hollins Green  bounded by Marsh 
Brook Close , Warburton View  and Manchester Road (A57)  will be allocated for 
residential develop ment,  providing a minimum of  90 new homes.  The development  
will provide  a high quality residential setting with ease of access to existing local 
services  and facilities in Hollins Green  and employment opportunities at Birchwood .  
10.8.2  Devel
opment is expected to  come forward quickly upon adoption of the P lan.  This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in 2024/25, with the 
development  completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.   
Policy  OS3 – Hollins Green 
1.Land to the southwest of Hollins Green  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green
Belt and allocated for residential development for a minimum of 90 homes .
New Homes  
2.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will  be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and specialist housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
3.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
4.Specific provision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
5.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the development will be
constructed to an average minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
6.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary  school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the development .
7.Development will be required  to make a contribution towards the provision of additional
primary care capacity.
Open Space and Recreation  
8.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5.
9.Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing or
planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitch provision  that will serve residents of the
development .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
236Natural Environment  
10.The layout of the development  should take account of existing landscape features,
including  watercourses , ponds  and significant hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes to
the wider objectives of the Mersey Forest.   Particular regard should be given to sites
identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with Policy
DC4 and national guidelines.
11. A scheme  for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt  
12.The western, southwestern and south  eastern  boundar ies of the site define  the Green
Belt boundary.  A landscape scheme  will be required to re inforce  these Green Belt
boundar ies, particularly the hedgerow along the south  eastern boundary  fronting
Manchester Road (A57) .
13. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport  and accessibility  
14.A package of transport improvements  will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes  within the site  to connect into the wider existing
footway network  and public right of way  to the north and provide connectivity with the
existing community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
15.The development will be required to make a contribution towards the delivery of
sustainable transport modes.
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
16.A site -wide surface water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures.
17.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network  will be required , ensuring that
surface water drainage is n ot combined with foul discharge.
18. The development should demonstrate that there would be no likely significant effects
on the integrity of the adjacent European site (Rixton Clay Pits SAC) due to issues of water
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
237quality; ground water resource; impact on Great crested newts; fly -tipping or other anti -
social behaviour.  
19.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy  ENV7.
Why we ha
ve taken this approach  
10.8.3  The sit
e performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal. The site only makes a moderate contribution to the objectives of the Green Belt.  
Figure 2 4
 – Hollins Green Site Boundary  
10.8.4  Its 
location will ensure good access to services in Hollins Green  local centre  and 
major existing employment areas  at Birchwood . 
10.8.5  The allo
cation Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastruc ture 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
238provision will be s ecured  to en sure that Hollins Green ’s infrastructure/services can 
support the level of population growth. 
10.8.6  The
 Rixton  Clay Pits SAC is located 700m to the west of Hollins Green (village 
centre).  The allocation site lies within 500m of the SAC.  The SAC contains a 
population of Great Crested Newts .  The Habitats Regulations Assessment has 
highlighted potential impacts fr om the development of this site which have 
necessitated speci fic controls within the Policy.  
10.8.7  The development will need to be supported by a Protected Species Survey 
undertaken by a licenced ecologist to investigate the use of surrounding habitat by  
Great crested newts.  If loss of supporting habitat for Great Crested Newts is shown 
to arise, the development will need to provide mitigation measures for newts such that there is no net loss of suitable foraging and over -wintering habitat within 500m 
of the SAC.  This could be through either entirely new habitat creation or the 
enhancement of existing habitat to improve its ability to support Great crested newts.  Any such mitigation measures will need to be agreed with Natural England.  
10.8. 8 The 
green field and relatively unconstrained nature of the site will enable the site to 
be delivered in the early part of the Plan period.  Developers promoting the site 
have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a comprehensive form of development  and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory . 
10.8.9 I
t should be noted that the Green Belt boundary has been amended in this location 
to allow for the site allocation and also to address any anomalies that the site allocation would otherwise create.  In this instance  the Green Belt boundary has 
been amended so that dwellings on Marsh Brook Close to the north west of the allocated site are also removed from the Green Belt.  The exceptional circumstances for this change are those put forward in respect of the allocated site and the purpose of this further amendment is to secure a defensible boundary for the settlement of Hollins Green.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework ( 2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model ( 2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for the  O utlying Settlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in 
support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting
the allocation
•Habitat
 Regulation
 Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed 
Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
239Other Planning Documents  
•Planning
 Obligations SPD
Council W
ide Strategies  
•WBC  Local 
Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Delivery P
artners  
•Develop
ers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24010.9 Lymm (Pool Lane and Warrington Road) 
10.9.1 Two 
parcels of land to the west  of the inset settlement of Lymm , comprising land  
bounded by P ool Lane, Oldfield Road and Warrington Road and land bounded by 
Warrington Road, the Trans -Pennine Trail and Statham Community Primary School 
will be allocated for residential develop ment,  providing a minimum of  170 new 
homes.  The development will provide a high quality residential setting with ease of 
access to existing local services and facilities in Lymm and employme nt 
opportunities in Warrington Town C entre and the South East Warrington 
Employment Area. 
10.9.2 Develo
pment is expected to  come forward quickly upon adoption of the Plan.  This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in  2024/25, with the 
development  completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.  
Policy  OS4 – Lymm (Pool Lane/Warrington Road ) 
1.Land to the west  of Lymm  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green Belt and
allocated for residential development for a minimum of 170 h omes .
2.The development of the site should be in accordance with the emerging Lymm
Neighbourhood Plan and take into account the Lymm Heritage and Character Assessment
(2018).
New Homes  
3.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and specialist housing needs,
including family  homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
4.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
5.Specific provision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
6.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the development will be
constructed to an aver age minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
7.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the develo pment.
8.Development will be required  to make a contribution towards the provision of additional
primary care capacity.
Open Space and Recreation  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2419.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standards in accordance with Policy DC5.
10. Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing
or planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitch  provision  that will serve residents of the
development .
Natural Environment  
11.The layout of the development  should take account of existing landscape features,
including  trees  and significant hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes to the wider
objectives of the Mersey Forest.   Particular regard should be given to sites identified in
Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with policy DC4 and
national guidelines.
12. A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt  
13.The west , northern  and part of the southern boundar ies of the allocation  define  the
Green Belt  boundary.  A landscape scheme  will be required t hat creates a notable area of
natural wetland habitat and retains and enhances the trees and hedgerows along  these
Green Belt boundar ies, particularly the hedgerow along the northern boundary  and the
woodland along the western boundary.
14. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility  
15.A package of transport improvements  will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes  within the site (including footpath no.10 that
traverses the southern part of the allocation north to south) which  connect  into the wider
existing footway network around  the site  and provide connectivity with the existing
community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
16.The development will be required  to make a contribution towards the delivery of
improved cycle links to employment opportunities in the Town Centre and the proposed
employment allocation in South East Warrington .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24217.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops on Warrington Road  are acc essible by pedestrians .
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
18.A site -wide surface  water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures  that take account of existing
surrounding  drainage patterns .
19.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network  will be required , ensuring that
surface water drainage is n ot combined with foul discharge.
20.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be  as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon s ources in accordance with Policy ENV7.
21.The design of the development must incorporate appropriate measures to mitigate
noise impacts from the adjacent Statham Lodge Hotel.
Historic Environment  
22.Development will be required to preserve and enhance the  historic environment ,
heritage assets and their setting .
23.Development proposals will be required to be in accordance with the Heritage Impact
Assessments for Lymm – Pool Lane and Lymm - Warrington Road; including the proposed
mitigation and enhancement measures .
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.9.3 The sites
 performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal.  The site s only make s a 
weak or moderate contributio n to the objectives of the Green Belt.  
10.9.4 Its lo
cation will ensure good access to services in Lymm neighbourhood centre and 
major existing employment areas in Warrington Town Centre and the proposed 
employment area in the Garden Suburb.  
10.9.5 The A
llocation Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastruc ture 
provision will be s ecured  to en sure that Lymm ’s infrastructure/services can support 
the level of population growth. 
10.9.6  Ther
e are surrounding habitats, primarily to the west of the site that rely upon a 
‘wetland’ environment.  The Habitats Regulations Assessment has highlighted 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
243potential impacts from the development of this site which have necessitated 
specific controls wit hin the policy.  
10.9.7 The gr
eenfield and relatively unconstrained nature of the land  will enable the site s 
to be deli vered in the early part of the P lan period.  Developers promoting the site 
have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a comprehensive fo rm of 
development  and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory .  
Figure
 26 – Lymm: Pool Lane and Warrington Road Site Boundar ies 
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for the  Outlying Settlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in support 
of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers p romoting
the allocation
•Habitat
 Regulation
 Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021)
•SA Report: Proposed 
Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
244Other P
lanning Documents  
•Planni
ng Obligations SPD
•Emerging Lymm Neighbourhood Plan
•Lymm Heritage and Character Assessment (2018)
Counci
l Wide Strategies  
•WBC  Loca
l Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Deliver
y Partners  
•Deve
lopers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24510.10 Lymm (Rushgreen Road ) 
10.10 .1 Land to
 the east  of the inset settlement of Lymm  bounded by Rushgreen Road , 
Tanyard Farm and the Bridgewater Canal will be allocated for a residential led mixed 
use development providing a minimum of  136 new homes  and a new health facility .  
10.10 .2 The 
development will provide a high quality residential setting with ease of access 
to existing local services and facilities in Lymm and employment opportunities in 
Warrington Town Centre and the South East Warrington Employment Area . 
10.10 .3 Develo
pment  is expected to  come forward quickly upon adoption of the P lan. This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in 2024/25, with the 
development  completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.  
Policy  OS5 – Lymm (Rushgreen Road ) 
1.Land to the east of Lymm  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green Belt and
allocated for residential development for a minimum of 136 homes  and a new health
facility.
2.The development of the site should be in accordance with the emerging Lymm
Neighbourhood Plan and take into account the Lymm Heritage and Character Assessment
(2018).
New Homes  
3.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and spec ialist housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
4.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
5.Specific pro vision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
6.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the development will be
constructed to an average minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
7.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the development .
8.Development will be required  to provide for a new primary health care facility of a
minimum of 1,500  sq.m.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
246Open Space and Recreation  
9.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space standard s in accordance with Policy DC5 .
10. Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing
or planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitch  provision  that will serve residents of the
development .
Natural Environment  
11.The layout of the development  should take account of existing landscape features,
including  trees , ponds, watercourses  (including the Bridgewater Canal)  and significant
hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes to the wider objectives of the Mersey Forest .
Particular regard should be given to sites identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which
should be protected in line with policy DC4 and national guidelines.
12. A scheme for measurable biodiversity net  gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Belt  
13.The south ern boundar y of the site define s the Green Belt  boundary.  A landscape
scheme  will be required t hat retains and enhances the trees and hedgerows along  this
Green Belt boundar y and enhances the setting of the Bridgewater Canal .
14. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility  
15.A package of transport improvements  will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate access arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes  within the site  to connect into the wider existing
footway network  (including  the Bridgewater Canal towpath  that runs along the southern
boundary of the  site) and provide connectivity with the existing community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as identified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
16.The development will be required  to make a contribution towards the delivery of
improved cycle links to  employment opportunities in the Town Centre and the proposed
employment allocation in South East Warrington .
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24717.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops on Rushgreen  Road  are accessible by pedestrians .
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
18.A site -wide surface  water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures.
20.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network  will be required , ensuring that
surface water drainage is n ot combine d with foul discharge.
21. Development proposals will be required to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment and incorporate appropriate mitigation measures in accordance with Policy
ENV8  (Part 10) .
22.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with Policy  ENV 7.
Historic Environment  
23.Development will be required to pres erve and enhance the historic environment,
heritage assets and their  setting .
Why we
 have taken this approach  
10.10.4 T
he site performed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal. The site only makes a moderate contribution to the o bjectives of the Green Belt.  
Figu
re 27  – Rushgreen Road  Site Boundary  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
24810.10.5 Its 
location will ensure good access to services in Lymm neighbourhood centre and 
major existing employment areas in Warrington Town Centre and the proposed 
employment area in the Garden Suburb.  
10.10.
6 The allocation Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  
10.10.
7 Contributions  towards infrastructure provision will be s ecured  to en sure that 
Lymm ’s infrastructure/services can support the level of population growth .  The 
existing GP facilities in Lymm are at capacity and have no prospect of expansion. 
The delivery of a new primary  care health facility is therefore a key requirement of 
the development.   The final size and nature of the facility will need to be confirmed 
with the Warrington Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG).  
10.10.8 T
he greenfield and relatively unconstrained natur e of the site will enable the site to 
be delivered in the early part of the plan period.  Developers promoting the site 
have confirmed their commitment to ensuring a comprehensive form of development  and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory .  
Key Evi
dence 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
249•National Planning Policy Framework (2021)
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021 )
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment 
for the Outlying S ettlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting
the allocation
•Habitat 
Regulation 
Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed S
ubmission Version Local Plan (2021)
Other Planning Documents  
•Planning Obligations SPD
•Emerging Lymm Neighbourhood Plan
•Lymm Heritage and Character Assessment (2018)
Council Wide Strategies  
•Draft Local Transport Plan (LTP4)
Delivery Partners  
•Developers promotin g the site for residential development
•NHS Halton Clinical Commissioning Group & NHS Warrington Clinical
Commissioning Group
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
25010.11 Land to the north of Winwick  
10.11 .1 Land 
to the north of Winwick between Golborne Road ( A573 ) and W aterworks Lane  
will be allocated for residential development , providing a minimum of  130 new 
homes.  The development  will provide  a high quality residential setting with ease of 
access to existing local services  and facilities  in Winwick  and employment 
opportunities at Omega /Gemini/Winwick Quay .  
10.11.2  The dev
elopment  will be designed to respect the setting of the site of the Battle of 
Winwick, which is a Registered Battlefield.  
10.11 .3 Devel
opment is expected to  come forward quickly upon adoption of the P lan.  This 
means the  first homes are anticipated to be completed in  2024/25, with the 
settlement  extension completed in full within the first 10 years  of the Plan period.  
Policy  OS6 – Land to the north of Winwick  
1.Land to the north  of Winwick  (inset settlement)  will be removed from the Green Belt and
allocated for development for a minimum of 130 homes .
New Homes  
2.A range of housing tenures, types and sizes will be required in order to ensure
development contributes to meeting the Borough’s general and specia list housing needs,
including family homes with gardens, specific provision for older people and for younger
people looking to purchase their first home.
3.A minimum of 30% of homes should be affordable  in accordance with Policy DEV2 .
4.Specific pro vision should be made for self- build/custom build plots, subject to demand as
demonstrated by the Council’s self- build register.
5.To reflect the site’s location adjacent to the open countryside the development will be
constructed to an average minimum density of 30dph.
Community Facilities  
6.The development will be required to  make a contribution towards  the provision of
additional primary and secondary school places to meet the need for school places that will
be generated from the development .
7.Development will be expected to make a contribution towards the provision of additional
primary care capacity.
Open Space and Recreation  
8.The development will be required to provide a minimum level of open space in line with
the Council’s open space stan dards in accordance with Policy DC5.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2519.Proposals  will be required to make a contribution to expanding and enhancing existing or
planned built leisure facilities  and playing pitches  that will serve residents of the
development .
Natural Environment  
10.The layout of the settlement  extension should take account of existing landscape
features, including  watercourses and significant hedgerows  and ensure the site contributes
to the wider objectives of the Mersey Forest.   Particular regard should be given to sites
identified in Policy DC4 (Ecological Network) which should be protected in line with policy
DC4 and national guidelines.
11. A scheme for measurable biodiversity net gain should be demonstrated through the use
of the Defra Metric and provided for all development parcels that come forward for
planning approval.  Mitigation measures for loss of habitat will only be allowed if shown to
be necessary by application of the mitigation hierarchy in accordance with the requirements
of Policy DC4.
Green Bel t 
12.The western, north ern and easter n boundar ies of the site define  the Green Belt
boundary.  A landscape scheme will be required that reinforce s these Green Belt
boundar ies, particularly the hedgerow along the northern boundary .
13. A scheme of compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility
of land remaining in the Green Belt will be required to be provided.  Financial contributions
will be considered where this would help to ensure that the benefits of compensatory
improvements can be maximised by providing them in the most appropriate location.
Transport and accessibility  
14.A package of transport improvements  will be required to support the  development .
Required improvements  will include:
a.Ensuring appropriate a ccess arrangements for the site .
b.Provision of  cycling and walking routes  within the site  to connect into the  wider  existing
footway network to the south and provide connectivity with the existing community .
c.Other necessary  network improvements as id entified by an appropriate Transport
Assessment.
15.Good accessibility to public transport services should be provided by ensuring that the
bus routes and bus stops on Newton Road (A49)  and Myddleton Lane are accessible by
pedestrians.
Utilities and Environmental Protection  
16.A site -wide surface water strategy is required, incorporating appropriate Sustainable
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  and flood alleviation measures.
17.Improvements to the water supply and sewerage network  will be required , ensuring that
surface water drainage is n ot combined with foul discharge.
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
25218. Development proposals will be required to assess the impact on the groundwater
environment  and the operational asset in close proximity to the site and incorporate
appropriate mitigation measures in accordance with Polic ies INF3 (Parts 5 to 7) and ENV8
(Part s 10 to 13).
19. The development will be required to mitigate air quality impacts on the Ma nchester
Mosses SAC in accordance with Policy ENV8 (Part 4).
20.Development within the site should not impact on the operation of the existing power
line that crosses the site.
21.The development  should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate change; be as
energy efficient as possible and seek to meet a proportion of its energy needs from
renewable or low carbon sources in accordance with P olicy  ENV7.
Historic Environment  
22.Development will be required to preserve and enhance the historic en vironment,
heritage assets and their setting .
23.Development proposals will be required to be in accordance with the Winwick Heritage
Impact Assessment including the proposed mitigation and enhancement measures .
24. Development proposals will be expected to conserve and enhance the historic
significance, appearance and integrity of and the ability to understand and appreciate the
setting of the Battle of Winwick.
Why we 
have taken this approach  
10.11.4 The site pe
rformed well in terms of the assessment against the objectives of the 
Local Plan, the requirements of the Government’s National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Local Plan’s Sustainability Appraisal. The site only makes a moderate contribution to the o bjectives of the Green Belt.  
Figure
 29 – Winwick Site Boundary  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
25310.11.5 Its 
location will ensure good access to services in Winwick  local centre, Warrington 
Town C entre, and major existing and proposed employment areas  at Winwick Quay, 
Omega  and Gemini . 
10.11 .6 The al
location Policy will allow the site to be delivered quickly and ensure that 
development comes forward in a comprehensive manner that preserves and 
enhances the built and natural environment.  Contributions towards infrastructure 
provision will be secured to ensure Winwick’s infrastructure can support the 
increased population generated by the site’s development. 
10.11.7  The 
site is located within Ground Water Source Protection Zones 1 and 2, a s well as 
being in close proximity a significant asset, Winwick Service Reservoir.  The service 
reservoir is an operational asset  that operates 24/7 and may result in noise .  Also it 
is surrounded by a network of water supply pipes that transport water to and from 
the asset , which  need to be given due regard in the design and layout of any 
proposed development.  Careful masterplanning is required to mitigate these issues 
and in particular to mitigate the risk of pollution to public water supply and the wate r environment.  The developer will need to liaise with United Utilities regarding 
the proximity of development to the existing reservoir and existing water supply pipes.   The development should be designed to provide an easement width of 10m 
(5m either sid e) of the existing water supply infrastructure.  The developer will be 
required to prepare and agree a management plan to ensure the impacts on the water supply infrastructure is managed and mitigated during the construction process and include mitigating measures to protect against any impact on the water supply infrastructure during the operational life of the development.  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
25410.11.8 The
 site is located in a sensi tive location with regard  to historic Battlefield. It is 
therefore imperative that development  respects the setting of this important 
heritage asset.  
10.11. 9 The
 greenfield and relatively unconstrained nature of the site will enable the site to 
be delivered in the early part of the plan period.  Developers promoting the site 
have confirmed their c ommitment to ensuring a comprehensive form of 
development and their support of the build rates which have informed the 
development trajectory.  
Key Evid
ence 
•National Planning Policy Framework (2021 )
•Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
•WBC Site Assessment (2 018)
•WBC Green Belt Assessment (2 016)
•WBC Green Belt Site Selection-Implications of Green Belt release (2021)
•Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2021)
•WBC Transport Model  (2021)
•Heritage Impact Assessment for the  Outlying Settlements (2021 )
•Information submitted in 
support of ‘Call for Sites’  by developers promoting the
allocation
•Habitat Regulation Assessment: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
•SA Report: Proposed Submission Version Local Plan (2021 )
Other Planning Documents  
•Planning Obligation SPD
Council Wide Strategies  
•WBC  Local Transport Plan (LTP4)  (2019)
Delivery Partners  
•Developers promoting the site for residential development
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
255MONITORING  
AND REVIEW 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
25611 Monitoring Framework  
 
11.1  Monitoring  Warrington’s Local Plan and keeping it up to date  
 11.1.1  The success of the Local Plan will be judged by its effectiveness in achieving its objectives and making progress towards the vision. This can be measured by 
monitoring progress against a range of indicators that can be identified and reported upon each year in the Council’s Annual Monitoring report.  
 11.1.2  Where monitoring identifies there is a fundamental risk to the delivery of the Local 
Plan then this enables the Council to identify necessary interventions including the potenti al review of the Local Plan . 
 
Policy M1 - Local Plan Monitoring  and Review  
 
Monitoring Framework  
1. The Council will prepare an Annual Monitoring Report setting out performance against 
Local Plan policies based on the indicators provided in Appendix 2.  
 
2. If delivery of housing , including affordable housing,  in any given monitoring year falls 
below 100% of the annual requirement, the Council will consider implementing all or some 
of the following measures to bring forward development:  
 
a. Working with developers and infrastructure providers to remove obstacles to the delivery 
of sites;  
b. Seeking alternative sources of funding if problems with infrastructure provision is 
delaying development of key strategic sites;  
c. Consideration of the potential to increase density on allocated sites;  
d. Consideration of th e ability to deliver strategic sites earlier in the Plan period; and  
Working with other authorities under the Duty to Co -operate to address any unmet needs.  
 
3. Where total delivery of housing is less than 75% of the annual requirement for three 
consecutiv e monitoring years, this will trigger the need for the consideration of a review or 
partial review of the Local Plan.  
 
4. Where there is an identified risk to delivery of infrastructure essential to delivering the 
Spatial Strategy of the Plan, this will trigger the need for the consideration of a review or 
partial review of the Local Plan.  
 
Monitoring Main Development Allocations  
5. In order to ensure timely delivery of the Main Development Areas, the Council will draw 
up an action plan setting out key mile stones for the delivery of the se areas , including 
masterplanning, phasing of infrastructure and submission of planning applications, and 
monitor progress on an annual basis.  
 
6. The annual rate of housing completions within the Main Development Areas will be 
considered as part of Borough wide monitoring . 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
257Why we have taken this approach  
 
11.1.3  Regular monitoring of actual de velopment outcomes against the P lan is an essen tial 
part of ensuring that the P lan is effective. Monitoring can indicate areas where 
interventions may be needed to  achieve the objectives of the P lan, and may also 
demonstrate the need for a r eview or partial review of the Plan. Of key importance 
to Warrington is the monitoring of housing delivery.  
 
11.1.4  Given the size and complexity of the Garden Suburb, South West Extension  and the 
Waterfront, and the fact they are expected to make a significant contribution 
towards housing needs within the Plan period, it is considered important to closely monitor their implementation.  
 11.1.5  The indi cators contained within Policy  M1 Monitoring Framework will be monitored 
on an annual basis through the Council’s Annual Monitoring Report, alongside a range of other contextual indicators as set out in Appendix 2. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
258GLOSSARY  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
259Glossary  
 
Affordable  housing : housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the 
market (including  housing that provides a subsidised  route to home ownership  and/or is for 
essential  local workers);  and  which  complies with  one or more  of the following  definitions:  
 a)  Affordable  housing for rent: meets all of the following  conditions:  (a) the rent  is set in
  
accordance  with  the Government’s  rent  policy for Social Rent or Affordable  Rent, or is at 
least 20% below  local market rents (including  service charges where  applicable);  (b) the 
landlord is a registered  provider,  except where it is included as part of a Build to Rent 
scheme (in which  case the landlord need not be a registered  provider);  and (c)
 it includes 
provisions  to remain at an affordable  price for future eligible households,  or for the 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative  affordable  housing provision.  For Build to Rent 
schemes affordable  housing for rent  is expected  to be the normal  form  of affordable  
housing provision  (and, in this context,  is known  as Affordable  Private Rent). 
 b)  Starter  homes: is as specified  in Sections 2 and 3 of the Housing  and  Planning Act 2016 
and  any secondary  legislation  made under these sections. The definition  of a starter 
home shoul 
d reflect the meaning set out in statute and  any such secondary  legislation  at 
the time of plan‐ preparation  or decision‐making. Where  secondary  legislation  has the 
effect of limiting a household’s  eligibility  to purchase  a starter  home to those with  a 
particular  maximum  level of household  income,  those restrictions  should be used. 
 c)  Discounted  market sales housing : is that sold  at a discount of at least 20% below  local 
market value. Eligibility is determined  with  regard to local incomes and  local house 
prices. Provisions  should be in place to ensure  housing remains at a discount for future 
eligible households.  
 d)  Other affor
dable routes to home  ownership : is housing provided for sale that provides a 
route to ownership  for those who could  not achieve home ownership  through the 
market. It includes  shared ownership,  relevant equity loans, other  low cost homes for 
sale (at a price equivalent  to at least 20% below  local market value)  and  rent to buy 
(which includes a period of intermediate  rent). Where  public grant funding is provided, 
there  should be provisions  for the homes to remain at an affordable  price for future 
eligible households,  or for any receipts to be recycled for alternative  affordable  housing 
provision,  or refunded  to Government  or the relevant  authority  specified  in the funding 
agreement.  
 Air Quality  Management  Areas (AQMA) : Areas designated  by local authorities  because they
 
are not likely to achieve national air quality objectives  by the relevant deadlines. 
 Ancient or veteran tree: A tree which, because of its age, size and  condition,  is of 
exceptional  biodiversity,  cultural  or heritage value. All ancient trees are veteran trees. Not 
all veteran trees are old enough to be ancient,
 but are old relative to other trees of the same 
species. Very few trees of any species reach the ancient  life‐stage 
 
Ancient Woodland : An area that has been wooded continuously  since at least 1600 AD. It 
includes  ancient semi‐natural woodl
and and  plantations  on ancient  woodland  sites (PAWS). 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
260Annual position statement:  A document  setting out the 5 year housing land supply position 
on 1st April  each year, prepared  by the local planning authority  in consultation  with 
developers  and  others who have an impact on delivery. 
 
Archaeological  interest: There will be archaeological  interest  in a heritage asset if it holds, 
or potentially  holds, evidence  of past human activity worthy of expert investigation  at some 
point. 
 Article 4 di
rection: A direction  made under Article 4 of the Town and  Country Planning 
(General Permitted  Development)  (England)  Order  2015 which withdraws  permitted  
development  rights granted by that Order. 
 
Best and most versatile agricultural  land : Land in grades 1, 2 and  3a of the Agricultur al 
Land Classification.  
 
Brownfield  Land : See "Previously  Developed  Land". 
 Brownfield  land registers:  Registers  of previously  developed  land that local  planning 
authorities  consider to be appropriate  for residential  development,  having  regard to criteria 
in the Town and  Country Planning (Brownfield  Land Registers)  Regulation
 s 2017. Local 
planning authorities  will be able to trigger a grant of permission  in principle for residential  
development  on suitable sites in their registers where they follow the required procedures.  
 Build to Rent: Purpose built housing that is typically 100% rented out. It can form  part of a 
wider  multi‐tenure development  comprising  either flats or houses, but should be on the 
same site an
d/or contiguous  with  the main  development.  Schemes will usually offer longer 
tenancy agreements  of three  years or more, and  will typically be professionally  managed  
stock  in single ownership  and  management  control. 
 Climate change Adaptation : Adjustments  made to natural or human systems in response  to 
the actual  or anticipated  impacts of climate change, to mitigate harm or exploit beneficial  
opportuniti
es. 
 Climate change mitigation:  Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate 
system, primarily through  reducing greenhouse  gas emissions.  
 Coastal change management  area: An area identified  in plans  as likely to be affected by 
physical change to the shoreline  through erosion, coastal landslip, permanent  inundation  or 
coastal accr 
etion. 
 Community  forest : An area identified  through the England Community  Forest Programme  
to revitalise  countryside  and  green space in and  around major conurbations.  
 Community  Right to Build Order: An Order  made by the local planning authority  (under the 
Town and  Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning p
ermission  for a sitespecific  
development  proposal or classes of development.  
 Competent  person (to prepare site investigation  information):  A person with  a recognised  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
261relevant qualification,  sufficient  experience  in dealing  with  the type(s)  of pollution or land 
instability,  and membership  of a relevant professional  organisation.  
Conservation  (for heritage policy) : The process of maintaining  and  managing  change to a 
heritage asset  in a way that sustains and  where  appropriate  enhances  its significance.  
Decentralised  energy: Local renewable  and  local low carbon energy sources. 
Deliverable:  To be considered  deliverable,  sites for housing should be available now, offer a 
suitable location for development  now,  and
 be achievable  with  a realistic prospect that 
housing will be delivered  on the site within five years. In particular:   
a)sites which do not involve major development  and  have planning permission,  and all sites
with  detailed  planning permission,  should be considered  deliverable  until permission
expire
s, unless  there  is clear evidence that homes will not be delivered  within five years (for
example because they are no longer viable,  there is no longer a demand  for the type of units
or sites have long term phasing plans).
b)where  a site has outline planning permission  for major development,  has been allocated
in
 a development  plan, has a grant of permission  in principle,  or is identified  on a brownfield
register, it should only be considered  deliverable  where there is clear evidence that housing
completions  will begin on site within five years.
Design Code : A set of illustrated  des
ign requirements  that provide specific,  detailed 
parameters  for the physical development  of a site or area. The graphic and written 
components  of the code should build upon a design vision, such  as masterplan  or other 
design and
 development  framework  for a site or area. 
Design guide: A document  providing  guidance  on how development  can be carried out in 
accordance  with  good design practice, often  produced  by a local authority.  
Designated  Heritage Asset : A World Heritage  Site, Scheduled  Monument,  Listed Building, 
Protected  Wreck Site, Registered  Park and  Garden,
 Registered  Battlefield  or Conservation  
Area designated  as such under the relevant legislation.  
Designated  rural areas: National Parks,  Areas of Outstanding  Natural  Beauty and  areas 
designated  as ‘rural’ under Section 157 of the Housing Act 1985. 
Developable:  To be considered  developable,  sites  should be in a suitable location for 
housing development  with  a reasonable  prospect that they  will be available and  could be 
viably developed  at the point envisaged.  
Development  Plan : Is defined in section 38 of the
 Planning and  Compulsory  Purchase  Act 
2004, and  includes  adopted  local plans, neighbourhood  plans that have been made and 
published  spatial development  strategies,  together with  any regional  strategy policies that 
remain in
 force. Neighbourhood  plans  that have been approved  at referendum  are also  part 
of the development  plan, unless  the local planning authority  decides that the 
neighbourhood  plan  should not be made. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
262Edge of centre:  For retail purposes,  a location that is well  connected  to, and up to 300 
metres from,  the primary shopping  area. For all other main  town  centre  uses, a location 
within 300 metres of a town  centre boundary.  For office development,  this includes 
locations  outside the town  centre  but within 500 metres of a public transport  interchange.  
In determining  whether
 a site falls within the definition  of edge of centre, account should be 
taken of local circumstances.  
 
Entry‐level exception  site: A site that provides entry‐ level homes suitable for first  time 
buyers (or equivalent,  for those looking to rent), in line with  paragraph  72 of this 
Framework.   
 Environmental  impact assessment:  A procedure  to be followed for certain types of project 
to ensure
 that decisions  are made in full knowledge  of any likely significant  effects on the 
environment.   
 Essential local workers: Public sector employees  who provide frontline services in areas 
including  health, education  and  community  safety – such as NHS 
 staff, teachers,  police, 
firefighters  and  military personnel,  social care  and  childcare  workers. 
 General  aviation airfields: Licenced or unlicenced  aerodromes  with  hard or grass runways,  
often  with  extensive  areas of open land related to aviation activity.  
 Geodiversity:  The range of rocks, minerals,  fossils, soils  and  landforms.
   
 Green infrastructure:  A network  of multi‐functional  green and blue spaces and  other 
natural features, urban  and  rural,  which is capable of delivering  a wide range of 
environmental,  economic,  health  and wellbeing  benefits  for nature, climate, local and wider 
communities  and  prosperity.  
 Habitats site: Any site which  would be included within the definition  at regulation  8 of the 
Conservation  of Habitats  and  Species Regulations  2017 for the purpose of those regulations,  
including  candidate  Special Areas of Conservation,  Sites of Community  Importance, 
 Special 
Areas of Conservation,  Special Protection  Areas and  any relevant  Marine Sites.  
 Heritage asset:  A building, monument,  site, place, area or landscape  identified  as having  a 
degree of significance  meriting consideration  in planning d 
ecisions, because of its heritage 
interest. It includes  designated  heritage assets and  assets identified  by the local planning 
authority  (including  local listing).  
 Heritage coast:  Areas of undeveloped  coastline which  are managed  to conserve  their 
natural beauty and, where  appropriate,  to improve accessibility  for visitors. 
 
Historic environment:  All
 aspects of the environment  resulting from the interaction  
between people and  places through time, including  all surviving  physical remains of past 
human activity,  whether visible, buried  or submerged,  and  landscaped  and planted  or 
managed  flora.  
 
Historic environment  record: Information  services that seek to provide access to 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
263comprehensive  and  dynamic resources  relating  to the historic environment  of a defined 
geographic  area for public benefit  and use.  
Housing Delivery Test: Measures  net homes delivered  in a local authority  area against the 
homes required,  using national statistics and  local authority  data. The Secretary  of State will 
publish the Housing Delivery Test results  for each local authority  in England every 
November.  
International,  national and locally  designated  sites  of importance  for biodiversity:  All 
international  sites (Special  Areas of Conservation,  Special Protection  Areas, and  Ramsa
r 
sites),  national sites (Sites of Special Scientific  Interest) and  locally designated  sites including  
Local Wildlife Sites.  
Irreplaceable  habitat: Habitats  which would be technically  ver y difficult (or take a very 
significant  time) to restore, recreate  or replace once  destroyed,  taking  into account their 
age, uniqueness,  species diversity or rarity. They include ancient  woodland,  ancient and 
veteran trees,  blanket  bog, limestone  pavement,  sand dunes, salt marsh and  lowland fen.  
Local Development  Order: An Order  made by a local planning authority  (under the Town 
and  Country Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission  for a spe
cific development 
proposal or classes of development.  
Local Enterprise  Partnership:  A body, designated  by the Secretary  of State for Housing, 
Communities  and  Local Government,  established  for the purpose of creating  or improving  
the conditions  for economic  growth in an area.  
Local housing need: The number of homes identified  as being
 needed through the 
application  of the standard method set out in national planning guidance  (or, in the context 
of preparing  strategic policies  only,  this may be calculated  using a justified alternative  
approach  as provided for in paragraph
 61 of this Framework).   
Local Nature Partnership:  A body, designated  by the Secretary  of State for Environment,  
Food and  Rural Affairs, established  for the purpose of protecting  and  improving  the natural 
environment  in an area and  the benefits  derived from it.  
Local planning
 authority:  The public authority  whose duty it is to carry out specific planning 
functions  for a particular  area. All references  to local planning authority  include the district 
council, London borough  council, county council, Broads Authority,  National Park Authority,  
the Mayor  of London and a development  corporation,  to the extent  appropriate  to their 
responsibilities.  
Local plan: A plan  for the future dev
elopment  of a local area, drawn up by the local planning 
authority  in consultation  with  the community.  In law this is described  as the development 
plan  documents  adopted  under the Planning and  Compulsory  Purchase  Act 2004. A local 
plan  can consist of either strategic or non‐strategic policies, or a combination  of the two.  
Main town centre uses: Retail  development  (including  warehouse  clubs
 and  factory outlet 
centres); leisure, entertainment  and more  intensive  sport and  recreation  uses (including  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
264cinemas, restaurants,  drive‐through restaurants,  bars and  pubs, nightclubs,  casinos, health 
and  fitness  centres,  indoor bowling centres and  bingo halls); offices; and  arts, culture and 
tourism development  (including  theatres,  museums,  galleries and  concert halls, hotels and 
conference  facilities). 
 
Major development:  For housing, development  where  10 or more  homes will be provided,  
or the site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more. For non‐residential  development  it means 
additional  floorspace  of 1,000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare  or more, or as otherwise  
provided in the Town and Country Planning (Development  Management  Procedure)  
(England)  Order 2015. 
 Major hazard sites, installations  and pipelines:  Sites and  infrastructure,
  including  licensed 
explosive  sites and  nuclear installations,  around which  Health and  Safety Executive  (and 
Office for Nuclear  Regulation)  consultation  distances  to mitigate the consequences  to public 
safety of major accidents  may apply. 
 Minerals resources  of local and national importance:  Minerals which  are necessary  to meet 
society’s needs, including  aggregates,  brickclay (especially  Etruria Marl and fireclay), silica 
sand (including  high grade silica sands), coal  derived
 fly ash in single use deposits,  cement 
raw materials,  gypsum,  salt,  fluorspar,  shallow and  deep‐mined coal,  oil and  gas (including  
conventional  and  unconventional  hydrocarbons),  tungsten,  kaolin, ball clay, potash, 
polyhalite  and local minerals of importance  to heritage assets and  local distinctiveness. 
 Mineral Consultation  Area:  a geographical  area based on a Mineral
 Safeguarding  Area, 
where  the district or borough council should consult the Mineral  Planning Authority  for any 
proposals  for non‐minerals development.   
 Mineral Safeguarding  Area: An area designated  by minerals planning authorities  which 
covers known  deposits of minerals which are 
 desired to be kept  safeguarded  from 
unnecessary  sterilisation  by non‐mineral development.   
 National trails : Long distance routes for walking, cycling and  horse riding. Natural  Flood 
Management:  managing  flood and coastal erosion  risk by protecting,  restoring  and 
emulating  the natural ‘regulating’  function of catchments,  rivers, floodplains  and
  coasts.  
 
Nature Recovery  Network:  An expanding,  increasingly  connected,  network of wildliferich 
habitats  supporting  species recovery,  alongside  wider  benefits  such as carbon capture, 
water quality improvements,  natural flood risk management  and  recreation.  It includes  the 
existing network  of protected  sites  and  other wildlife rich habitats  as well  as and  landscape  
or catchment  scale recovery are
as where there is coordinated  action for species and 
habitats. 
 Neighbourhood  Development  Order: An Order  made by a local planning authority  (under 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990) through  which  parish councils and  neighbourhood  
forums can grant planning permission  for a specific development  proposal or classes of 
development.  
 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
265Neighbourhood  plan: A plan  prepared  by a parish council or neighbourhood  forum for a 
designated  neighbourhood  area. In law this is described  as a neighbourhood  development  
plan  in the Planning and  Compulsory  Purchase  Act 2004. 
 
Non‐strategic policies: Policies  contained  in a neighbourhood  plan, or those policies  in a 
local plan  that are not strategic policies. 
 Older  people: People ov
er or approaching  retirement  age, including  the active, newlyretired  
through to the very frail elderly; and  whose housing needs can encompass  accessible,  
adaptable  general needs housing through  to the full range of retirement  and  specialised  
housing for those with  support or care  needs.  
 Open space: All open space of public value, including  not just land, but also  areas of water 
(such
 as rivers,  canals,  lakes and  reservoirs)  which  offer important  opportunities  for sport 
and  recreation  and  can act as a visual amenity.  
 Original building: A building as it existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed  after  1 July 1948, 
as it was built originally.  
 Out of centre: A location which
 is not in or on the edge of a centre  but not necessarily  
outside the urban  area.  
 Out of town: A location out of centre  that is outside the existing urban  area. 
 Outstanding  universal  value: Cultural and/or natural significance  which is so exceptional  as 
to transcend
 national boundaries  and  to be of common  importance  for present and  future 
generations.  An individual  Statement  of Outstanding  Universal  Value is agreed and  adopted 
by the UNESCO World  Heritage Committee  for each World  Heritage Site.  
 People with disabilities:  People have a disability  if they  have a physical or mental 
impairment,  and  that impairment  has a substantial  and 
 long‐term adverse effect on their 
ability to carry out normal  day‐to‐day activities.  These persons  include, but are not limited 
to, people with  ambulatory  difficulties,  blindness,  learning  difficulties,  autism and  mental 
health  needs.  
 
Permission  in principle:  A form
 of planning consent  which  establishes  that a site is suitable 
for a specified  amount of housing‐led development  in principle.  Following  a grant of 
permission  in principle,  the site must receive  a grant  of technical  details  consent before 
development  can proceed. 
 
Planning condition:  A co
ndition imposed  on a grant of planning permission  (in accordance 
with  the Town  and  Country Planning Act 1990) or a condition  included in a Local 
Development  Order  or Neighbourhood  Development  Order.  
 Planning obligation:  A legal  agreement  entered into under section  106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts  of a development  proposal.  
 Playing  field: The whole of a site which  encompasses  at least one playing  pitch  as defined  in 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
266the Town and Country Planning (Development  Management  Procedure)  (England)  Order 
2015. 
 
Previously  Developed  Land : Land which  is or was occupied  by a permanent  structure,  
including  the curtilage of the developed  land (although  it should not be assumed  that the 
whole of the curtilage should be developed)  and  any associated  fixed surface infrastructure.  
This  excludes:  land that is or was last occupied  by agricultural  or forestry  buildings;  land that 
has been developed  for minerals extraction  or waste disposal by landfill, where  provision  for 
restoration  has been made through development  management  procedures;  land in built‐up 
areas such as residential  gardens, parks, recreation  grounds and  allotments;  and
 land that 
was previously  developed  but where the remains of the permanent  structure  or fixed 
surface structure  have blended into the landscape.  
 Primary Shopping  Area: Defined area where  retail  development  is concentrated.   
 Priority Habitats and Species : Species and
 Habitats  of Principle Importance  included in the 
England Biodiversity  List published  by the Secretary  of State under section
 41 of the Natural 
Environment  and  Rural  Communities  Act 2006. 
 Ramsar sites: Wetlands  of international  importance,  designated  under the 1971 Ramsar 
Convention.  
 Renewable  and Low‐carbon Energy: Includes  energy for heating  and  cooling  as well  as 
generating  electricity.  Renewable  energy  covers those energ
 y flows  that occur naturally and 
repeatedly  in the environment  – from the wind, the fall of water, the movement  of the 
oceans,  from the sun and  also  from biomass  and deep geothermal  heat.  Low carbon 
technologies  are those that can help reduce emissions  (compared  to conventional  use of 
fossil fuels). 
 Rural exception  sites: Small sites used for affordable  housing in
 perpetuity  where sites 
would not normally be used for housing. Rural  exception  sites  seek to address the needs of 
the local community  by accommodating  households  who are either current residents  or 
have an existing family or employment  connection.  A proportion  of market homes may be 
allowed  on th
e site at the local planning authority’s  discretion,  for example where essential 
to enable the delivery of affordable  units  without grant funding.  
 Recycled aggregates:  aggregates  resulting from the processing  of inorganic  materials  
previously  used in construction,  e.g. construction  and  demolition  waste.  
 Safeguarding  zone: An area defined in 
 Circular 01/03: Safeguarding  aerodromes,  technical 
sites and  military explosives  storage areas,  to which  specific safeguarding  provisions  apply. 
 
Secondary  aggregates:  aggregates  from industrial  wastes such as glass (cullet),  incinerator  
bottom ash, coal  derived  fly ash, railway ballast, fine ceramic  waste (pitcher),  and  scrap 
tyres; and  industrial  and
 minerals by‐products,  notably waste from china clay, coal  and slate 
extraction  and  spent  foundry sand. These can also include hydraulically  bound materials.   
 
Self‐build and custom‐build housing: Housing built by an individual,  a group  of individuals,  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
267or persons  working with  or for them,  to be occupied  by that individual.  Such housing can be 
either market  or affordable  housing. A legal  definition,  for the purpose of applying the Self‐
build and  Custom Housebuilding  Act 2015 (as amended),  is contained  in section  1(A1) and 
(A2) of that Act. 
 
Setting of a Heritage Asset : The surroundings  in which  a heritage asset is experienced.  Its 
extent  is not fixed and  may change as the asset and  its surroundings  evolve. Elements  of a 
setting  may make a positive or negative contribution  to the significance  of an asset,  may 
affect the ability to appreciate  that significance  or may be neutr al. 
 Significance  (for heritage policy): The value of a heritage asset  to this and future 72 
generations  because of its heritage interest. The interest may be archaeological,  
architectural,  artistic or historic. Significance  derives not only from a heritage asset’s 
physical presence,  but also  from its setting. For World  Heritage Sites,  th
 e cultural  value 
described  within each site’s Statement  of Outstanding  Universal  Value forms part of its 
significance.  
 Special Protection  Areas: Areas classified  under regulation  15 of the Conservation  of 
Habitats  and Species Regulations  2017 which  have been identified  as being  of international  
importance  for the breeding,  feeding, wintering  or the migration
  of rare  and  vulnerable  
species of birds. 
 Site Investigation  information : Includes a risk assessment  of land potentially  affected by 
contamination,  or ground stability and  slope stability reports,  as appropriate.  All 
investigations  of land potentially  affected by contamination  should be carried out in 
accordance  with  established  procedures  (such  as BS10175 Investigation  of Potentially  
Contaminated  Sites ‐ Code of Practice).  
 
Sites  of Spe
cial Scientific Interest : Sites designated  by Natural England under the Wildlife 
and  Countryside  Act 1981. 
 
Spatial development  strategy:  A plan containing  strategic policies  prepared  by a Mayor or a 
combined  authority.  It includes  the London Plan (prepared  under provisions  in  the Greater 
London Authority  Act 1999) and  plans  prepared  by combined  authorities  that have been 
given equivalent  plan‐ making  functions  by an order made under the Local Democracy,  
Economic  Development  and  Construction  Act 2009 (as amended).  
 Stepping stones : Pockets of habitat that,  while not necessarily  connected,  facilitate the 
movement  of species across 
 otherwise  inhospitable  landscapes. 
 Strategic Environmental  Assessment  (SEA) : A procedure  (set out in the Environmental  
Assessment  of Plans and  Programmes  Regulations  2004) which  requires the formal 
environmental  assessment  of certain plans  and  programmes  which  are likely to have 
significant  effects on the environment.  
 Strategic policies: Policies  and  site allocations  which  address strategic priorities  in line with 
the requirements  of Section  19 (1B‐E) of the Planning and  Compulsory  Purchase  Act 2004.  
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
268Strategic policy‐making authorities:  Those authorities  responsible  for producing  strategic 
policies  (local planning authorities,  and  elected Mayors or combined  authorities,  where  this 
power has been conferred).  This  definition  applies  whether  the authority  is in the process of 
producing  strategic  policies or not.  
 
Supplementary  Planning Document  (SPD) : Documents  which add  further  detail to the 
policies  in the Local Plan. They  can be used to provide further
 guidance  for development  on 
specific sites, or on particular  issues, such as design. Supplementary  planning documents  are 
capable of being a material  consideration  in planning decisions  but are not part of the 
development  plan. 
 Sustainable  Transport  Modes : Any efficient, safe and
  accessible  means of transport  with 
overall low impact on the environment,  including  walking and  cycling, low and  ultra‐low 
emission vehicles,  car sharing  and  public transport.  
 Town Centre : Area defined on the local authority’s  Policies  Map, including  the primary 
shopping  area and areas predominantly  occupied  by main  town  centre  uses within or adjacent 
to the primary shopping  area. Refe 
rences to town centres or centres apply to city centres, 
town  centres,  district centres and  local centres but exclude small parades of shops of purely 
neighbourhood  significance.  Unless  they  are identified  as centres in Local Plans, existing out‐
of‐centre  developments,  comprising  or including  main  town  centre  uses,  do not constitute  
town
 centres. 
 Transport  Assessment:  A comprehensive  and  systematic  process that sets out transport 
issues relating  to a proposed  development.  It identifies  measures  required  to improve 
accessibility  and  safety for all modes of travel, particularly  for alternatives  to the car such as 
walking, cycling and  publ 
ic transport,  and  measures  that will be needed to deal  with  the 
anticipated  transport  impacts of the development.  
 Transport  Statement : A simplified  version  of a transport  assessment  where  it is agreed the 
transport  issues arising  from development  proposals  are limited and  a full transport  
assessment  is not required.  
 Travel plan : A long‐term management  strategy for an organisation  or site that seeks to 
deliver sustainable  transport  objectives  and
 is regularly reviewed.  
 Wildlife Corridors:  Areas of habitat connecting  wildlife populations.  
 Windfall sites: Sites not specifically  identified  in the development  plan. 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
269APPENDIX 1:  
HOUSING  AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
TRAJECTORY 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
270Housing Trajectory
PLAN PERIOD 
TOTALS
2021/222022/232023/242024/252025/262026/272027/282028/292029/302030/312031/322032/332033/342034/352035/362036/372037/382038/39
SHLAA (Sites  0.25Ha and  above) 1040 324 257 215 408 721 656 1311 288 300 357 558 412 73 55 17 0 0 6992
SHLAA Ref: 1506 00000 6 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 6 0 00 1200
SHLAA Ref: 1541  (Parcel K 7 ) 000000000 2 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0 340
SHLAA Ref: 1633  (Parcel K 5 ) 000000 4 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 8 0 5 0 00 730
Northern  Parcel (GB Release) 0000 3 5 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 5 5 860
Southern  Parcel (GB Release) 0000000000 3 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 450
Option 2 (GB Release) 0000 9 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 1 8 0 2430
SHLAA Sites  (HE consented) 130 190 159 138 70 70 15 00000000000 772
Thelwall Heyes (GB Release) 0 0 0 28 55 55 55 55 55 47 0 0000000 350
Stockport Road  (GB Release) 000000 000000000000 0
Croft (GB Release) 0 0 0 17 35 23 000000000000 75
Culcheth (GB Release) 0 0 0 27 55 55 55 80000000000 200
Hollins Green (GB Release) 0 0 0 17 35 35 300000000000 90
Lymm ‐ Warrington Rd (GB Release) 0 0 0 27 55 55 33 00000000000 170
Lymm ‐ Rushgreen Rd (GB Release) 0 0 0 17 35 35 35 14 0 0 0 0000000 136
Winwick (GB Release) 0 0 0 17 35 35 35 80000000000 130
SHLAA (Sites  0.25Ha and  above) 25 00080 2 5 2 0 1 3 040000000 95
SHLAA (Sites  0.25Ha and  above) 52 70 0 0 0 10 11 25 12 7 11 0000000 198
SHLAA (Sites  under 0.25Ha) 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 81 1458
16676
1328 665 497 584 997 1485 1414 1972 899 905 963 1179 1033 694 676 548 421 416 16676
Total (5 Years)
Average
Total (Year) 0 0 0 150 430 543 466 335 305 297 270 300 300 300 300 300 300 295 4891
Total (5 Years) 48911335 909 462Top‐up Sites
Settlements
Small Sites Allowance
6675 4545 1385
814Years 1‐5 Years 6‐10 Years 11‐15 Years 16‐18
Wider Urban Area
Other
4071TOTALGarden SuburbPeel Hall
Waterfront
Fiddlers Ferry Power Stn
GB Release
580 1946 1470 895
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
2711328
665
4975849971485
14141972
899 9059631179
1033
694676
548
421 416
05001000150020002500
2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 2030/31 2031/32 2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 2037/38 2038/39Completions  by year 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
272APPENDIX 2: 
MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
273Appendix  2: Monitoring  Framework  
Policy Target(s) Indicato r Which SA 
objective this 
policy meets 
DEV1   Delivery of a minimum of 14,688 new
homes between 2021 and 2038
(average of 816 homes per annum) Housing completions analysis
 Strategic Housing LandAssessments (rolling 5,10 and 15
year)All 
DEV2   A mixture of housing type and tenures
which responds well to identified need
 Specifically 20-30% affordable housingon qualifying developments
 Provision of self-build or custom buildplots on all allocated Local Plan housingsites Housing completions analysis
 Percentage of affordable homes
secured from qualifying
developments
 Number of self-build or custombuild plots secured from qualifyingdevelopments6 
DEV3  A minimum, between 2021 and 2032 of:
2 permanent pitches for Gypsies andTravellers
5 permanent plots for Travellingshowpeople
5-10 transit pitches for Gypsies and
Travellers Strategic Housing LandAvailability Assessment (rolling
5,10 and 15 year)
 Total number of pitches available
 New pitches and plots approvedand provided per annum6 
DEV4  Delivery of a minimum of 316.26hectares of employment land (B2, B8
and E Class office uses)
 No net loss of employment land indefined employment areas Employment Land completions
analysis
 Hectares of existing employmentland lost to none employment
uses.All 
DEV5  To ensure vital and viable centres  Town Centre Health Check
Indicators advocated in the
National Planning Policy
Guidance Specifically:
Diversity of main town centreuses
Potential capacity for growthor change
Proportion of vacant streetlevel
Pedestrian Flows
Accessibility
State of environmental quality1, 3, 4, 9 
GB1  No net loss of land covered by GreenBelt designation to inappropriate
development Hectares of Green Belt land 10, 12, 16 
TC1  To ensure a vital and viable town centre  Town Centre Health Check
Indicators advocated in the
National Planning Policy
Guidance. Specifically:
Proportion of vacantproperties at street level
Commercial yields
Retailer representation
Pedestrian Flows1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 12, 19 
INF1  To improve the safety and efficiency ofthe transport network
 Improve walking and cycling facilities
 Improve public transport
 Improve freight transport Application monitoring
 Children travelling to school bysustainable modes
 Level of cycling within the borough
 Local bus passenger journeys
 Traffic flows on major routes(including HGV movements)
 Organisation travel planmonitoring4, 5, 9, 10  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
274Policy Target(s) Indicato r Which SA 
objective this 
policy meets 
 Through IDP updates 
 
 
INF2  Route and corridors safeguarded for 
future potential transport schemes  Application monitoring 
 Delivery of schemes 
 Through IDP updates 4, 9, 14 
INF3  Delivery of appropriate utilities and telecommunications infrastructure 
(including broadband) 
 Protection of existing utility infrastructure from inappropriate development  Application monitoring 
 Through IDP updates 1, 3, 9 
INF4  Promote health and wellbeing and 
reduce health inequalities  
 Redevelop existing hospital or seek to allocate a site for a new hospital  Application monitoring 
 Through IDP updates 
 Joint strategic needs assessment 5 
INF5  Provide or contribute towards sufficient 
and appropriate infrastructure   Progress of schemes 
 Town Centre Health Check 
 Through IDP updates ALL 
DC1  Reduce levels of unemployment and environmental deprivation in comparison 
to a 2015 base 
 Increase number of neighbourhood plans across the borough 
 Appropriate and sustainable development in the countryside and the 
settlements  Indices of Multiple deprivation 
 Number of neighbourhood plans 
 Applications monitoring 8 
DC2  Conserve and enhance (where 
appropriate) the historic environment 
 No net loss of designated assets  Application monitoring 
 Number of entries on Heritage at 
Risk Register 
 Number of listed buildings 
 Number of scheduled monuments 
 Area of conservation areas 11, 12, 19 
DC3  Work with partners to develop and  adopt 
a strategic approach to the care and management of the borough's Green  
Infrastructure. 
 Protect and enhance the borough’s 
environmental assets. 
 Improve the connectivity of the borough’s Strategic Green Infrastructure Network.  Application monitoring 
 Number of planning approvals 
with conditions to ensure works to 
manage/enhance the condition of 
SSSI/SAC/SPA/Ramsar sites/ 
features of interest/local 
designations. 
 Amount of new or improved PROW (Km/miles) 4, 5, 10, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16 
DC4  To safeguard and enhance the borough’s biodiversity: 
Net gains in bio-diversity 
Net gains in ecological network 
  Application monitoring 
 Increase in biodiversity as a result 
of planning permissions granted 
(Defra metric).  
 Quantity and extent of additional land contributing to the ecological 
network as a result of planning 
permissions granted (hectares). 13 
DC5  Net increase in open space provision 
   Quantity and extent of new sport, 
open space and recreational 
development: 
 Area of open space/green infrastructure (by typology) 
created as a result of new 
development (hectares) 
 Number of playing pitches created, lost and or replaced 
(including AGP’s) and/or S106 
Contributions. 
 Review of PPS (3 yearly). 
 New major community/sports 5, 10 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
275Policy Target(s) Indicato r Which SA 
objective this 
policy meets 
infrastructure projects delivered 
and/or S106 Contributions. 
DC6  High quality design  Assessment of proposals
 Application monitoring – Numberrefused on design grounds
 Application monitoring – Numberof applications referred to Places
Matters Design Review Panel???7, 19 
ENV1  Promote sustainable waste
management
 Reduce the amount of waste producedin the borough Total amount of waste arising
Percentage landfill
Percentage incineration withenergy from Waste
Percentage incinerationwithout energy from waste
Percentagerecycled/composted18 
ENV2  No applications permitted against
Environment Agency advice Application monitoring – Numberof applications permitted against
Environment Agency advice14, 15, 16 
ENV3  Safeguard the borough's limited
minerals resources.
 Safeguard the borough's mineralstransportation, handling or processing
infrastructure. Application monitoring
 Number of applications approvedcontrary to safeguarding policy.16, 18 
ENV4  Production of primary land won sand
and gravel within safeguarded areas.
 Production of primary land won sandand gravel outside safeguarded areas. Application monitoring
 Number of applications approved
within/outside of safeguarding
areas.
 Capacity of consented sites(tonnes).16, 18 
ENV5  Promotion of energy mineral
development.
 Safeguard the borough's peat resources Application monitoring
 Number of applications permitted
for mineral exploration and
exploitation.
 Number of applications approvedcontrary to peat safeguarding
policy.16, 18 
ENV6  Provision of appropriate restoration and
aftercare/use schemes. Application monitoring
 Number of applications permitted
with restoration and aftercare
schemes.16, 18 
ENV7  Promote renewable/low carbon energy
infrastructure.
 Promote the minimisation of carbonemissions and the use of renewable/low
carbon technologies in new
development. Installed renewable energycapacity through the planning
system.
 Application monitoring.
 Number of planning approvals
with conditions requiring the use
of renewable/low carbon
technologies.16, 17 
ENV8  No adverse impact on the host
environment and amenity Through the DevelopmentManagement process – as and
when applications submitted
 Application monitoring16,17 
MD1  To deliver a new urban quarter of around1,335 new homes (1,070 within the Plan
period). Housing completions analysis.
 Strategic Housing LandAvailability Assessment (rolling 5,
10 and 15 year).ALL 
MD2  To deliver a sustainable urban extension
of around 4,200 new homes (2,400
within the Plan period). Housing completions analysis.
 Strategic Housing LandAvailability Assessment (rolling 5,
10 and 15 year).ALL 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
276Policy Target(s) Indicato r Which SA 
objective this 
policy meets 
MD3  To deliver a sustainable urban extension 
mixed–use development of around 1,800 
new homes (1,300 within the Plan 
period) and 101 hectares of employment 
land.   Housing completions analysis. 
 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year). 
 Employment land completions analysis. ALL 
MD4  To deliver a new sub-urban quarter of up to 1,200 new homes within the Plan 
period.  Housing completions analysis. 
 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year). ALL 
MD5  To deliver a sustainable urban extension 
of around 310 new homes within the 
Plan period.  Housing completions analysis. 
 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year). ALL 
MD6  To deliver a major new employment 
location of around 137 hectares of 
employment land.  Employment land completions 
analysis. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19 
OS1  To deliver a high quality residential development of around 75 new homes 
within the first 10 years of the Plan 
period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 
17, 19 
OS2  To deliver a high quality residential development of around 200 new homes within the first 10 years of the Plan 
period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 
17, 19 
OS3  To deliver a high quality residential 
development of around 90 homes within 
the first 10 years of the Plan period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 
17, 19 
OS4  To deliver a high quality residential development of around 170 new homes within the first 10 years of the Plan 
period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 
15, 17, 19 
OS5  To deliver a high quality residential 
development of around 136 new homes 
and a medical centre within the first 10 
years of the Plan period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 
 Through IDP updates 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 
17, 19 
OS6  To deliver a high quality residential development of around 130 homes new 
homes within the first 10 years of the 
Plan period.  Housing completions analysis 
 Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (rolling 5, 
10 and 15 year) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 
15, 17, 19 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
277APPENDIX 3: 
SUPERSEDED  
POLICIES 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
278 Appendix  3: List of Superseded  Policies 
Local Plan Core Strategy (2014) Policy 
Reference  Proposed  Submission  Version 
Local Plan (2021) Policy 
Reference  
Policy CS 1 Overall Spatial Strategy ‐ 
Delivering  Sustainable  Development ‐ 
Policy CS 2 Overall Spatial Strategy ‐ 
Quantity and  Distribution  of 
Development  Policies DEV1 – DEV5 
Policy CS 3 Overall Spatial Strategy ‐ 
Maintaining  a 10 Year Forward Supply 
of Housing Land Policy DEV1 – Housing Delivery, 
Policy DEV2 – Meeting 
Warrington’s  Housing Needs 
Policy CS 4 Overall Spatial Strategy – 
Transport Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy CS 5 Overall Spatial Strategy ‐ 
Green Belt Policy GB1  – Warrington’s  Green 
Belt 
Policy CS 6 Overall Spatial Strategy ‐ 
Strategic  Green Links Policy DC3  – Green 
Infrastructure  Network 
Policy CS 7 Strategic  Location ‐ The 
Town  Centre Policy TC1 ‐  Town  Centre  and 
Surrounding  Area 
Policy CS 8 Strategic  Proposal ‐  Omega 
and  Lingley Mere ‐ 
Policy CS 9 Strategic  Location ‐ Inner 
Warrington  Policy DC1  – Warrington’s  Places 
Policy CS 10 Strategic  Proposal ‐ 
Waterfront  & Arpley Meadows  Policy MD1 – Waterfront  
Policy CS 11 Strategic  Opportunity  ‐ 
Port Warrington  ‐ 
Policy PV 1 Development  in Existing 
Employment  Areas Policy DEV4 – Economic  Growth 
and  Development  
Policy PV 2 Fiddlers  Ferry  Policy DEV4 – Economic  Growth 
and  Development  and  Policy 
MD3  – Fiddlers  Ferry 
Policy PV 3 Strengthening  the 
Borough's  Workforce  Policy DEV4 – Economic  Growth 
and  Development  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
279Local Plan Core Strategy (2014) Policy 
Reference  Proposed  Submission  Version 
Local Plan (2021) Policy 
Reference  
Policy PV 4 Retail  Development  within 
the Town  Centre  and  Primary 
Shopping  Area Policy DEV5 – Retail  and  Leisure 
Needs 
Policy PV 5 Enhancing  the Town 
Centre  Economy  Policy TC1 ‐  Town  Centre  and 
Surrounding  Area,  Policy DEV5 ‐ 
Retail  and  Leisure Needs 
Policy PV 6 Retailing within 
Employment  Premises  Policy DEV5 – Retail  and  Leisure 
Needs 
Policy PV 7 Promoting  the Visitor 
Economy  Policy DC1  – Warrington’s  
Places, Policy TC1  – Town  Centre 
and  Surrounding  Area 
Policy SN 1 Distribution  and  Nature  of 
New  Housing Policy DEV1 – Housing Delivery, 
Policy DEV2 – Meeting 
Warrington’s  Housing Needs 
Policy SN 2 Securing Mixed and 
Inclusive Neighbourhoods  Policy DEV2 – Meeting 
Warrington’s  Housing Needs 
Policy SN 3 Accommodation  Needs of 
Gypsies and  Travellers  and  Travelling  
Showpeople  Policy DEV3 – Gypsy  & Traveller 
and  Travelling  Show People 
Provision  
Policy SN 4 Hierarchy  of Centres  Policy DEV5 – Retail  and  Leisure 
Needs 
Policy SN 5 New  Retail  and  Leisure 
Development  Within Defined  Centres Policy DEV5 – Retail  and  Leisure 
Needs 
Policy SN 6 Sustaining  the Local 
Economy  and  Services Policy DEV4 – Economic  Growth 
and  Development,  Policy INF4 – 
Community  Facilities 
Policy SN 7 Enhancing  Health and 
Well‐ being ‐ 
Policy QE 1 Decentralised  Energy 
Networks  and  Low Carbon 
Development  Policy ENV7  – Renewable  and 
Local  Carbon Energy 
Development  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
280Local Plan Core Strategy (2014) Policy 
Reference  Proposed  Submission  Version 
Local Plan (2021) Policy 
Reference  
Policy QE 2 Grid  Connected  
Renewable  Energy Infrastructure Policy ENV7  – Renewable  and 
Low Carbon Energy 
Development  
Policy QE 3 Green Infrastructure  Policy DC3  – Green 
Infrastructure  Network 
Policy QE 4 Flood  Risk  Policy ENV2  – Flood  Risk  and 
Water Management  
Policy QE 5 Biodiversity  and 
Geodiversity  Policy DC4  – Ecological  Network 
Policy QE 6 Environment  and  Amenity 
Protection  Policy ENV8  – Environmental 
and  Amenity Protection  
Policy QE 7 Ensuring a High Quality 
Place Policy DC6  – Quality of Place 
Policy QE 8 Historic Environment  Policy DC2  – Historic 
Environment 
Policy MP 1 General Transport 
Principles  Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy MP 2 Telecommunications   Policy INF3 ‐ 
Telecommunications  & Utilities 
Policy MP 3 Active Travel  Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy MP 4 Public Transport  Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy MP 5 Freight Transport    
Policy MP 6 Transport  Infrastructure  Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy MP 7 Transport  Assessments 
and  Travel Plans Policy INF1 – Sustainable  Travel 
and  Transport 
Policy MP 8 Waste  Policy ENV1  – Waste 
Management  
Policy MP 9 Minerals  Policy ENV3 ‐  Safeguarding  of 
Minerals  Resources,  ENV4 
Primary Extraction  of Minerals,  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
281Local Plan Core Strategy (2014) Policy 
Reference  Proposed  Submission  Version 
Local Plan (2021) Policy 
Reference  
ENV5  Energy Minerals,  ENV6 
Restoration  and  Aftercare  of 
Mineral  and  Waste Sites 
Policy MP 10 Infrastructure   Policy INF5 – Delivering  
Infrastructure 
Policy TC 1 Key Development  Sites in 
the Town  Centre Policy TC1  – Town  Centre  and 
Surrounding  Area 
Policy TC 2 Small  Scale  Development 
in the Town Centre Policy TC1  – Town  Centre  and 
Surrounding  Area 
Policy IW 1 The A49 Corridor  ‐ 
Policy IW 2 Victoria Park Area  Policy DC1  – Warrington’s  Places 
Policy WW 1 Chapelford  Urban Village ‐ 
Policy SW 1 Stockton Heath District 
Centre Policy DEV5 – Retail  and  Leisure 
Needs 
Policy CC 1 Inset and  Green Belt 
Settlements  Policy GB1  – Warrington’s  Green 
Belt 
Policy CC 2 Protecting  the Countryside  ‐ 
Policy CC 3 Walton Hall Estate  Policy DC1  – Warrington’s  Places 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
282APPENDIX 4: 
BIODIVERSITY 
DESIGNATIONS  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
283Appendix  4: Biodiversity  Designations  and Green  
          Infrastructure  Opportunities  
 
European  Sites of International  Importance  (Special Areas  of Conservation)  
Holcroft Moss  Rixton Claypits 
Risley Moss   
Sites of Special Scientific  Interest (SSSI) 
Holcroft Moss  Risley Moss  
Rixton Claypits  Woolston  Eyes 
Regionally  Important  Geological  Sites (RIGs) 
Lymm  Dam  Lymm ‐  The Dingle 
   
Local Nature Reserves 
Colliers Moss  Risley Moss 
Paddington  Meadows   Rixton Claypits 
Local Wildlife Sites 
Appleton  Reservoir   Moss Side Farm 
Bewsey  Tip  Paddington  Meadows  
Bog Rough  Pestfurlong  Moss 
Burtonwood  Moss  Radley Plantation  
Burtonwood  Nature Park  Rixton Brickworks  (North) 
Croft Grasslands   Rixton Brickworks  (South) 
Dennow Wood  Rixton Moss 
Eleven Acre Common   Rows Wood 
Gatewarth  Landfill Site  Sankey Brook 
Gemini Washlands   Sankey Canal Central 
Gorse Covert Mounds  Silver Lane Ponds 
Grappenhall  Heys  (Part
 1)  St Helens Canal (East) 
Grappenhall  Heys  (Part  2)  St Helens Canal (West) 
Heatley  Lake  Statham Ox‐Bow 
Heatley  Lake  (Pond)  Stockton Heath  Rifle  Range  Quarry 
Helsdale  Wood & Newhey's  Plantation   Stretton Moss 
Hitchfield  Wood  The Bongs and the Gorse 
Houghton  Green  Pool  The Dingle and Ford's Rough 
Ladies Walk Wood  The Twigg eri
es 
Latchford  Railway Sidings  Thelwall Meadow 
Little and Big Moss Woods (Part  1)  Twenty Acre Wood 
Little and Big Moss Woods (Part  2)  Upper Mersey Estuary 
Little and Big Moss Woods (Part  3)  Walton Locks 
Lymm  Dam Complex  Westy Point 
Lymm  Dingle  Winwick Old Quay 
Mary Ann Plantation  Woolston  Mo
ss 
Moore Nature Reserve  Woolston  New  Cut Canal 
Morton Marsh & Upper Moss  Side Fields  
Strategic Green Links   
The Mersey Valley (including  St. Helens Canal  and the 
River  Bollin) 
The Bridgewater  Canal Sankey Valley Park 
The Transpennine  Trail 
Nature Improvement  Area (NIA)   
Great Manchester  Wetlands   
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
284APPENDIX 5: 
HISTORIC  
ASSETS  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
285Appendix  5: Historic Assets 
 
Statutory  Listed  Buildings  
Name   Address  Grade 
BARROW  FARMHOUSE   BARROW  FARMHOUSE   KENYON LANE  Croft  Warrington   II 
WOODHEAD  FARMHOUSE  WOODHEAD  FARMHOUSE   PARKSIDE  ROAD  Winwick   
Warrington   II 
BARN  TO NORTH OF 
WOODHEAD  FARMHOUSE  BARN  TO NORTH OF WOODHEAD  FARMHOUSE   
PARKSIDE  ROAD  Winwick   Warrington   II 
SANKEY VIADUCT  OVER 
SANKEY BROOK SANKEY VIADUCT  OVER SANKEY BROOK  BRADLEY  LANE  
NEWTON  LE WILLOWS   Burtonwood  and Westbrook   
Warrington   I 
LUMB BROOK BRIDGE (AN 
AQUEDUCT)  LUMB BROOK BRIDGE (AN AQUEDUCT)   LUMB BROOK 
ROAD  Stockton Heath  Warrington   II 
THRESHING  BARN  AT 
DAINTITHS  FARM THRESHING  BARN  AT DAINTITHS  FARM  PARK  LANE  
Appleton   Warrington   II 
LAUREL COTTAGE  AND 
ATTACHED  UNOCCUPIED  
COTTAGE  LAUREL COTTAGE  AND ATTACHED  UNOCCUPIED  
COTTAGE   PEPPER STREET  Appleton   Warrington   II 
MOORE  LANE BRIDGE 
(OVER MANCHESTER  SHIP 
CANAL) MOORE  LANE BRIDGE (OVER  MANCHESTER  SHIP CANAL)  
LAPWING  LANE  Penketh  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST THOMAS   CHURCH OF ST THOMAS   LONDON  ROAD  Stockton  Heath  
Warrington   II 
THE RED LION INN  THE RED LION INN  LONDON  ROAD  Stockton Heath  
Warrington   II 
STRETTON  HOUSE  STRETTON  HOUSE  NORTHWICH  ROAD  Stretton   
Warrington   II 
ACTON GRANGE BRIDGE 
(OVER BRIDGEWATER  
CANAL) ACTON GRANGE BRIDGE  (OVER BRIDGEWATER  CANAL)  
BYE LANE  Walton  Warrington   II 
WALNUT  TREE 
FARMHOUSE  WALNUT  TREE FARMHOUSE  CHESTER  ROAD  Walton  
Warrington   II 
140,142,144  AND 146, 
CHESTER ROAD 140  142  144  AND 146  CHESTER  ROAD  Walton  
Warrington   II 
GATES, GATEPIERS  AND 
SCREENS AT WALTON  HALL 
LODGE (NOW LODGE TO 
CREMATORIUM) GATES  GATEPIERS  AND SCREENS AT WALTON  HALL 
LODGE (NOW LODGE TO CREMATORIUM)   CHESTER  
ROAD  Walton  Warrington  II 
LYCHGATE  TO CHURCH OF 
ST JOHN THE  EVANGELIST  LYCHGATE  TO CHURCH OF ST JOHN THE  EVANGELIST  
CHESTER ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
RETAINING  WALL, 
BALUSTRADES  AND STEPS 
BETWEEN  LAWNS EAST OF 
WALTON  HALL RETAINING  WALL  BALUSTRADES  AND STEPS BETWEEN  
LAWNS EAST OF WALTON  HALL  WALTON  HALL PARK  
Walton  Warrington   II 
WALTON  LEA BRIDGE  WALTON  LEA BRIDGE  WALTON  LEA ROAD  Walton  
Warrington   II 
CHURCH COTTAGE  EAST 
CHURCH COTTAGE  WEST CHURCH COTTAGE  EAST  CHURCH  LANE|CHURCH  
COTTAGE  WEST  CHURCH  LANE  Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
286PAIR OF GATEPIERS  TO 
YARD OF RECTORY  PAIR OF GATEPIERS  TO YARD OF RECTORY   CHURCH LANE  
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
IVY COTTAGE   IVY COTTAGE   FERRY LANE  THELWALL   Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
CHAIGELEY  SCHOOL  LYMM ROAD  THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
BEECH  COTTAGE  
BEECH  HOUSE BEECH  COTTAGE   LYMM ROAD|BEECH  HOUSE  LYMM 
ROAD  THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
FORMER THRESHING  
BARN,  CARTSHED,  AND 
STABLES 15 METRES 
SOUTH  OF HOME FARM FORMER THRESHING  BARN  CARTSHED   AND STABLES  15 
METRES SOUTH OF HOME FARM  STOCKPORT  ROAD  
THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
PICKERING  ARMS INN  PICKERING  ARMS INN  THE  VILLAGE  THELWALL   
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
MILEPOST  AT NGR 6721 
8709 MILEPOST  AT NGR 6721 8709  BOOTH'S  HILL ROAD  
Lymm   Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
BRIDGEWATER  STREET 
AQUEDUCT  THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL BRIDGEWATER  STREET 
AQUEDUCT   BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Lymm  Warrington   II 
WALTON  BRIDGE  WALTON  BRIDGE   WRRINGTON  ROAD  Walton  
Warrington   II 
BELLHOUSE  FARMHOUSE   BELLHOUSE  FARMHOUSE   BELLHOUSE  LANE  
GRAPPENHALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington  II 
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
LUMB BROOK BRIDGE (AN 
AQUEDUCT,  THAT PART IN 
GRAPPENHALL  CIVIL 
PARISH) BRIDGEWATER  CANAL LUMB BROOK BRIDGE (AN 
AQUEDUCT   THAT PART IN GRAPPENHALL  CIVIL  PARISH)  
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
HALFACRE  LANE 
AQUEDUCT  BRIDGEWATER  CANAL HALFACRE  LANE AQUEDUCT   
THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST WILFRID  CHURCH OF ST WILFRID  CHURCH LANE  Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   I 
STOCKS AT ENTRANCE  TO 
ST WILFRED'S  
CHURCHYARD  STOCKS AT ENTRANCE  TO ST WILFRED'S  CHURCHYARD   
CHURCH LANE  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington  II 
GRAPPENHALL  RECTORY  GRAPPENHALL  RECTORY   CHURCH LANE  Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
THELWALL  OLD  HALL  THELWALL  OLD  HALL   FERRY LANE  THELWALL  
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
OLD HALL FARMHOUSE   OLD HALL FARMHOUSE   LYMM ROAD  THELWALL   
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
HOME FARMHOUSE   HOME FARMHOUSE   STOCKPORT  ROAD  THELWALL   
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS  CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS  THELWALL  NEW ROAD  
THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
1, 3, 5 AND 7, ARLEY 
GROVE  1  3  5 AND 7  ARLEY  GROVE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
8, BOOTHS LANE  8  BOOTH'S  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
287THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
BARSBANK  LANE 
AQUEDUCT  THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL BARSBANK  LANE AQUEDUCT   
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
LLOYD BRIDGE THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL LLOYD BRIDGE  BRIDGEWATER  
CANAL  Lymm  Warrington  II 
THE FARMHOUSE  AT 
GREAT SHEPCROFT  FARM THE FARMHOUSE  AT GREAT SHEPCROFT  FARM  
SHEPCROFT  LANE  Appleton  Warrington  II 
CHURCH OF ST CROSS  CHURCH OF ST CROSS   STRETTON  ROAD  APPLETON  
THORN  Appleton   Warrington   II 
SCHOOL FARM 
FARMHOUSE  SCHOOL FARM FARMHOUSE   STRETTON  ROAD  Appleton   
Warrington   II 
YEW TREE FARMHOUSE   YEW TREE FARMHOUSE   YEW TREE LANE  Appleton   
Warrington   II 
Hatton Hall  Hatton Hall  Warrington  Road  Hatton  Warrington   II 
BROOKSIDE  FARMHOUSE   BROOKSIDE  FARMHOUSE   FARNWORTH  ROAD  Penketh   
Warrington   II 
L SHAPED BARN  AT 
PENKETH  HALL L SHAPED BARN  AT PENKETH  HALL  HALL  NOOK   Penketh  
Warrington   II 
12,14,16,18  AND 20, 
LONDON ROAD 12 14 16 18 AND 20  LONDON  ROAD  Stockton Heath  
Warrington   II 
STRETTON  HALL  STRETTON  HALL  HALL  LANE  Stretton  Warrington   II 
FORMER BARN AT 
STRETTON  HOUSE FORMER BARN AT STRETTON  HOUSE  NORTHWICH  ROAD  
Stretton  Warrington   II 
WALLSPIT   WALLSPIT   TARPORLEY  ROAD  Stretton   Warrington   II 
33, CHESTER ROAD  33  CHESTER  ROAD  Walton  Warrington  II 
NUMBER  134 (ATTACHED  
DWELLING)  AND RAILING 
TO FORECORT   
VILLAGE HALL VILLAGE HALL  CHESTER  ROAD|NUMBER  134  (ATTACHED  
DWELLING)  AND RAILING TO FORECORT   134  CHESTER  
ROAD  Walton  Warrington  II 
138  AND 138A,  CHESTER 
ROAD  138  AND 138A  CHESTER  ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
WALTON  HALL  LODGE 
(NOW LODGE TO 
CREMATORIUM) WALTON  HALL  LODGE (NOW LODGE TO CREMATORIUM)   
CHESTER ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST JOHN THE 
EVANGELIST  CHURCH OF ST JOHN THE  EVANGELIST   CHESTER  ROAD  
Walton  Warrington   II* 
131  AND 133, CHESTER 
ROAD  131  AND 133   CHESTER ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
AQUEDUCT  CARRYING  THE 
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
OVER CHESTER ROAD (OLD 
LINE) AQUEDUCT  CARRYING  THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL OVER 
CHESTER ROAD (OLD LINE)  CHESTER  ROAD (FORMER  
ROUTE OF)  Walton  Warrington   II 
WALTON  HALL  WALTON  HALL  WALTON  HALL  PARK  Walton  Warrington   II 
3 AND 5, WALTON  LEA 
ROAD  3 AND 5  WALTON  LEA ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
BARN  AT NUMBER  103  (TO 
NORTH) BARN  AT NUMBER  103  (TO NORTH)  103   CINNAMON  
LANE  Poulton‐with‐Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
PADDINGTON  GRANGE  PADDINGTON  GRANGE  447  MANCHESTER  ROAD  
PADDINGTON   Poulton‐with‐Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
288RIXTON OLD HALL  RIXTON OLD HALL   MANCHESTER  ROAD  RIXTON  Rixton‐
with‐Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
THE CHURCH OF ST PETER THE CHURCH OF ST PETER  WEIR LANE  MARTINSCROFT   
Woolston   Warrington   II 
BEEHIVE  FARMHOUSE   BEEHIVE  FARMHOUSE   BARLEYCASTLE  LANE  Appleton  
Warrington   II 
BOOTHS FARM, SHIPPON  
ON LEFT  (NORTH WEST) 
SIDE OF FARMYARD  BOOTHS FARM  SHIPPON  ON LEFT  (NORTH WEST) SIDE 
OF FARMYARD   BARLEYCASTLE  LANE  Appleton   
Warrington   II 
TANYARD  FARM 
FARMBUILDING  TANYARD  FARM FARMBUILDING   BARLEYCASTLE  LANE  
Appleton   Warrington   II* 
GREEN LANE FARMHOUSE  GREEN LANE FARMHOUSE   GREEN LANE  Appleton   
Warrington   II 
OBELISK  OBELISK  HIGH WARREN   Appleton   Warrington   II 
WRIGHT'S  GREEN COTTAGE  WRIGHT'S  GREEN COTTAGE   LUMB BROOK ROAD  
WRIGHTS  GREEN  Appleton   Warrington  II 
DAINTITHS  FARMHOUSE  
INCLUDING  FORMER DAIRY 
WING DAINTITHS  FARMHOUSE  INCLUDING  FORMER DAIRY 
WING  PARK LANE  Appleton   Warrington   II 
3‐13,  SPRINGFIELD  STREET, 
WARRINGTON 3‐13  SPRINGFIELD  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
13 AND 15, SUEZ STREET, 
WARRINGTON 13 AND 15  SUEZ STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
FARM COTTAGES   FARM COTTAGES   1 2 3  VALE OWEN ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST JAMES  CHURCH OF ST JAMES  WILDERSPOOL  CAUSEWAY   
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
98 AND 100, WILDERSPOOL  
CAUSEWAY,  WARRINGTON 98 AND 100  WILDERSPOOL  CAUSEWAY   WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
383, WILDERSPOOL  
CAUSEWAY,  WARRINGTON 383  WILDERSPOOL  CAUSEWAY   WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
GREENALL  WHITLEY'S 
WILDERSPOOL  BREWERY  
(BLOCK  AT CORNER OF 
GREENALL'S  AVENUE)  GREENALL  WHITLEY'S  WILDERSPOOL  BREWERY  (BLOCK 
AT CORNER OF GREENALL'S  AVENUE)   WILDERSPOOL  
CAUSEWAY   WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
3 AND 5, WINWICK  STREET, 
WARRINGTON 3 AND 5  WINWICK  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
CHESHIRE  LINES 
COMMITTEE  WAREHOUSE  CHESHIRE  LINES COMMITTEE  WAREHOUSE   WINWICK  
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
PREMISES  OF W A 
BOULTING  LTD PREMISES  OF W A BOULTING  LTD  WINWICK  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
46, 48, 48A AND 50, 
HORSEMARKET  
CHAMBERS,  
HORSEMARKET  STREET, 
WARRINGTON 46  48  48A  AND 50  HORSEMARKET  
CHAMBERS|HORSEMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
K4 TELEPHONE  KIOSK  K4 TELEPHONE  KIOSK  BRIDGE  FOOT   BRIDGE FOOT  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
PARKERS FARM  PARKERS FARM  DELENTY DRIVE  BIRCHWOOD   
WARRINGTON  WA3  6AN  Birchwood   Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
289BARN  ADJOINING  PARKERS 
FARM BARN  ADJOINING  PARKERS FARM  DELENTY DRIVE  
BIRCHWOOD   WARRINGTON   WA3 6AN  Birchwood   
Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST LEWIS  CHURCH OF ST LEWIS  MUSTARD  LANE  LITTLE  TOWN  
Croft  Warrington   II 
WELL IN GARDEN  NUMBER  
119 WELL IN GARDEN  NUMBER  119   MUSTARD  LANE  LITTLE 
TOWN  Croft  Warrington   II 
EAVES BROW FARMHOUSE  EAVES BROW FARMHOUSE   SPRING LANE  Croft  
Warrington   II 
NEWCHURCH  OLD 
REFECTORY  NEWCHURCH  OLD REFECTORY   WARRINGTON  ROAD  
Croft  Warrington   II 
WIGSHAW  HOUSE  WIGSHAW  HOUSE  WIGSHAW  LANE  WIGSHAW   Croft  
Warrington   II 
NORTH  BARN AT HURST 
HALL NORTH  BARN AT HURST HALL  HURST  LANE  GLAZEBURY   
Culcheth and Glazebury   Warrington   II* 
THE CHURCH OF ALL 
SAINTS THE CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS  WARRINGTON  ROAD  
GLAZEBURY   Culcheth and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
BLUE  BELL INN  BLUE  BELL INN  HORSEMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
502, KNUTSFORD  ROAD  502  KNUTSFORD  ROAD  WARRINGTON  WA4  1DX  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THE OLD WARPS, IN 
VICTORIA  PARK THE OLD WARPS  IN VICTORIA  PARK  KNUTSFORD  ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
562‐568, KNUTSFORD  
ROAD, WARRINGTON  562‐568  KNUTSFORD  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
THE CHESIRE CHEESE 
PUBLIC HOUSE THE CHESIRE CHEESE PUBLIC HOUSE  654  KNUTSFORD  
ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
OFFICES OF WILLIAMS,  
TARR AND CO LTD OFFICES OF WILLIAMS   TARR AND CO LTD  LILFORD  
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THE BLACK HORSE PUBLIC 
HOUSE THE BLACK HORSE PUBLIC HOUSE  LIVERPOOL  ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ROMAN CATHOLIC  
CHURCH OF THE SACRED 
HEART ROMAN CATHOLIC  CHURCH OF THE  SACRED  HEART  
LIVERPOOL  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
55, LONG LANE, 
WARRINGTON 55  LONG  LANE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil Parish  
Warrington   II 
YE OLDE BARLEY MOW 
PUBLIC HOUSE 
(EXCLUDING  THE SIDE 
FACADE) YE OLDE BARLEY MOW PUBLIC HOUSE (EXCLUDING  THE 
SIDE FACADE)  MARKET  PLACE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II* 
46 WITH ATTACHED  BARN 
AND COBBLED  YARD 46 WITH ATTACHED  BARN AND COBBLED  YARD  46  
MARSH HOUSE LANE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
1‐13,  PALMYRA  SQUARE, 
13A‐21,  PALMYRA  SQUARE, 
WARRINGTON 1‐13  PALMYRA  SQUARE|13A ‐21  PALMYRA  SQUARE  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ROWLEY  FOOTBRIDGE   ROWLEY  FOOTBRIDGE   PARR STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
76‐82,  SANKEY STREET, 
WARRINGTON 76‐82  SANKEY  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
290BOROUGH  TREASURER'S  
OFFICE AND BANK HOUSE BOROUGH  TREASURER'S  OFFICE AND BANK HOUSE  
SANKEY STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
WOOLWORTH'S   WOOLWORTH'S   19 AND 21  SANKEY STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
BARCLAY'S  BANK  BARCLAY'S  BANK  25  SANKEY STREET  WARRINGTON  
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ORFORD HOUSE AND 
ENTRANCE  GATES AND 
GATE PIERS ORFORD HOUSE AND ENTRANCE  GATES AND GATE PIERS  
16  SCHOOL  ROAD  ORFORD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
GENERAL  POST  OFFICE  GENERAL  POST  OFFICE  SPRINGFIELD  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
2 AND 4, BRIDGE STREET, 
WARRINGTON 2 AND 4  BRIDGE  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
10, BRIDGE STREET, 
WARRINGTON 10  BRIDGE  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
12 AND 14, BRIDGE 
STREET, WARRINGTON  12 AND 14  BRIDGE STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
16, 18 AND 20, BRIDGE 
STREET, WARRINGTON  16  18  AND 20  BRIDGE STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
22‐24,  BRIDGE STREET, 
WARRINGTON 22‐24  BRIDGE  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
BARCLAYS  BANK  BARCLAYS  BANK  78 AND 80  BRIDGE STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THE FEATHERS  PUBLIC 
HOUSE THE FEATHERS  PUBLIC HOUSE  94  BRIDGE STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THE OLD ACADEMY   THE OLD ACADEMY   BRIDGE STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
STATUE OF OLIVER 
CROMWELL  STATUE OF OLIVER CROMWELL   BRIDGE STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
80, BUTTERMARKET  
STREET, WARRINGTON  80  BUTTERMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
95, BUTTERMARKET  
STREET, WARRINGTON  95  BUTTERMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
UNITARIAN  CHURCH  UNITARIAN  CHURCH  CAIRO STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
FORMER NATIONAL  
SCHOOL (NOW CAMPING  
EQUIPMENT  SHOWROOM)  FORMER NATIONAL  SCHOOL (NOW CAMPING  
EQUIPMENT  SHOWROOM)   CHURCH  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
131  (NOW PART  OF RING 
O' BELLS) AND 133 
(CHURCH  HOUSE) 131  (NOW PART  OF RING O' BELLS) AND 133  (CHURCH  
HOUSE)  131 AND 133  CHURCH  STREET  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
COBBLES AT ENTRANCE  TO 
ST ELPHIN'S,  AND 
PAVEMENT  COBBLES AT ENTRANCE  TO ST ELPHIN'S  AND PAVEMENT  
CHURCH STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil Parish  
Warrington   II 
GENERAL  WOLFE PUBLIC 
HOUSE GENERAL  WOLFE PUBLIC HOUSE  CHURCH STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
2 (BANK HOUSE) AND 4 
(DIAL  HOUSE) 2 (BANK HOUSE) AND 4 (DIAL HOUSE)  2 AND 4  DIAL 
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
1, FROGHALL  LANE, 
WARRINGTON 1  FROGHALL  LANE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
29174 AND 76, GREENALLS  
AVENUE,  WARRINGTON  74 AND 76  GREENALL'S  AVENUE  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
104‐128, GREENALLS  
AVENUE,  WARRINGTON  104‐128  GREENALL'S  AVENUE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
POLICE STATION AND 
COURTS POLICE STATION AND COURTS  ARPLEY  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
Transporter  Bridge  to part 
of Joseph Crosfield  and 
Sons Ltd's Works Transporter  Bridge  to part of Joseph Crosfield and Sons 
Ltd's Works   Bank  Quay  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II* 
3 AND 5, BEWSEY ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 3 AND 5  BEWSEY ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
10‐16,  BEWSEY ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 10‐16  BEWSEY  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
ST ALBANS YOUTH CENTRE  ST ALBANS YOUTH CENTRE  BEWSEY  ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
115  AND 117, BEWSEY 
ROAD, WARRINGTON  115  AND 117   BEWSEY ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
51‐61,  BEWSEY ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 51‐61  BEWSEY  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
63‐67,  BEWSEY ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 63‐67  BEWSEY  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
21, BOLD STREET, 
WARRINGTON 21  BOLD  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil Parish  
Warrington   II 
MIDLAND  BANK  MIDLAND  BANK  11 AND 13  BRIDGE STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
45, BRIDGE STREET, 
WARRINGTON 45  BRIDGE  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
KENYON HALL  KENYON HALL  BROSELEY  LANE  TWISS GREEN  Culcheth  
and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
HOLCROFT  HALL  HOLCROFT  HALL  HEY  SHOOT  LANE  CULCHETH   Culcheth 
and Glazebury   Warrington   II* 
SOUTH  BARN AT HURST 
HALL SOUTH  BARN AT HURST HALL  HURST  LANE  GLAZEBURY   
Culcheth and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
BROOKHOUSE  
FARMHOUSE  BROOKHOUSE  FARMHOUSE  67   WIGSHAW  LANE  
CULCHETH   Culcheth  and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
THE CLOSE  THE CLOSE  CINNAMON  LANE  Poulton‐ with‐Fearnhead   
Warrington   II 
CHRIST CHURCH  CHRIST CHURCH  STATION  ROAD  PADGATE   Poulton‐
with‐Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
CLAYTON  COTTAGE<br  /> 
MOSS EDGE COTTAGE  MOSS EDGE COTTAGE   WEIR LANE|CLAYTON  COTTAGE   
WEIR LANE  MARTINSCROFT   Woolston   Warrington   II 
39‐49,  BEWSEY ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 39‐49  BEWSEY  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
ROMAN CATHOLIC  
CHURCH OF ST ALBAN ROMAN CATHOLIC  CHURCH OF ST ALBAN  BEWSEY  ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
93, BEWSEY STREET, 
WARRINGTON 93  BEWSEY  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
9‐19,  BOLD STREET, 
WARRINGTON 9‐19  BOLD  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
MUSEUM  AND ART 
GALLERY MUSEUM  AND ART GALLERY  BOLD STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
292ROYAL OAK  PUBLIC HOUSE 
AND NOS  109 TO 113 ROYAL OAK  PUBLIC HOUSE AND NOS 109 TO 113  BRIDGE 
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
82 AND 84, 
BUTTERMARKET  STREET, 
WARRINGTON 82 AND 84  BUTTERMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
TRUSTEE SAVINGS BANK  TRUSTEE SAVINGS BANK  BUTTERMARKET  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
3‐9, CHINA  LANE, 
WARRINGTON 3‐9  CHINA LANE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
BULL'S HEAD PUBLIC 
HOUSE BULL'S HEAD PUBLIC HOUSE  33  CHURCH  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
RING O' BELLS PUBLIC 
HOUSE RING O' BELLS PUBLIC HOUSE  CHURCH  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
GATEWAY  TO CHURCH OF 
ST ELPHIN GATEWAY  TO CHURCH OF ST ELPHIN  CHURCH  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
135  AND 137, CHURCH 
STREET, WARRINGTON  135  AND 137   CHURCH STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
10, EGYPT STREET, 
WARRINGTON 10  EGYPT  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
NO 6 (IVY LODGE) AND NO 
8 (LABURNUM  VILLA) NO 6 (IVY LODGE) AND NO 8 (LABURNUM  VILLA)  6 AND 8  
FROGHALL  LANE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil Parish  
Warrington   II 
80‐100, GREENALLS 
AVENUE,  WARRINGTON  80‐100  GREENALL'S  AVENUE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
1 (RIGBY'S),  2, AND 3 
(FORMER  READING  ROOM) 1 (RIGBY'S)   2  AND 3 (FORMER  READING  ROOM)  
MARKET PLACE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
COUNTY COURT  COUNTY COURT  PALMYRA  SQUARE  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF THE HOLY 
TRINITY CHURCH OF THE HOLY TRINITY  SANKEY  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
NATIONAL  WESTMINSTER  
BANK NATIONAL  WESTMINSTER  BANK  23  SANKEY STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ORFORD GREEN 
FARMHOUSE  ORFORD GREEN FARMHOUSE   VALE OWEN ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THEATRE  TAVERN  THEATRE  TAVERN  1  WINWICK  STREET  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
NATIONAL  WESTMINSTER  
BANK NATIONAL  WESTMINSTER  BANK  7  WINWICK  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
KING'S HEAD PUBLIC 
HOUSE KING'S HEAD PUBLIC HOUSE  WINWICK  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST ANN  CHURCH OF ST ANN  WINWICK  ROAD  WARRINGTON  
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
SPEAKMAN  HOUSE  SPEAKMAN  HOUSE  357  WARRINGTON  ROAD  Culcheth 
and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
GRANTHAM'S  BRIDGE THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL GRANTHAM'S  BRIDGE  STAGE 
LANE  BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
BURFORD  LANE 
AQUEDUCT  THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL BURFORD  LANE AQUEDUCT   
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Lymm  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
293BROOKFIELD<br  /> 
FOURWAYS  FOURWAYS   16  BROOKFIELD  ROAD|BROOKFIELD   18  
BROOKFIELD  ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
BURFORD  LANE 
FARMHOUSE  BURFORD  LANE FARMHOUSE   BURFORD  LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
STABLE AND CARTSHED  
BUILDING  15 METRES 
NORTH  OF BURFORD  LANE 
FARMHOUSE  STABLE AND CARTSHED  BUILDING  15 METRES NORTH  OF 
BURFORD  LANE FARMHOUSE   BURFORD  LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
BRIDGE OVER OUTFALL  
AND SPILLWAY,  LYMM 
DAM BRIDGE OVER OUTFALL  AND SPILLWAY   LYMM DAM  
CHURCH ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
WALL  TO GROUNDS  OF 
DANE BANK HOUSE, WITH 
ARCHWAY  WALL  TO GROUNDS  OF DANE BANK HOUSE  WITH 
ARCHWAY   DANE BANK ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
5, 7, 9, 11 AND 13, THE 
GROVE  5  7  9  11 AND 13  THE GROVE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
BARN  15 METRES SOUTH 
OF WILDERSMOOR  HALL 
FARMHOUSE  BARN  15 METRES SOUTH OF WILDERSMOOR  HALL 
FARMHOUSE   HIGHER LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
MOUNTING  BLOCK IN 
FRONT  OF FILLING 
STATION  IMMEDIATELY  
WEST OF JUNCTION  WITH 
GRAMMAR  SCHOOL ROAD MOUNTING  BLOCK IN FRONT OF FILLING STATION 
IMMEDIATELY  WEST  OF JUNCTION  WITH GRAMMAR  
SCHOOL ROAD  HIGHER LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
ICEHOUSE  IN YARD AT 
REAR  OF WILDERSMOOR  ICEHOUSE  IN YARD AT REAR  OF WILDERSMOOR   HIGHER 
LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
NUMBER  1 WITH 
ATTACHED  SCREEN WALL, 
STEPS AND RAILINGS  NUMBER  1 WITH ATTACHED  SCREEN WALL  STEPS AND 
RAILINGS   LYMM BRIDGE  Lymm   Warrington   II 
12, MILL BANK  12  MILL  BANK  Lymm  Warrington   II 
1, NEW ROAD  1  NEW ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE MOAT HOUSE, 
INCLUDING  THE COTTAGE  
AT LYMM HALL THE MOAT HOUSE  INCLUDING  THE COTTAGE  AT LYMM 
HALL   RECTORY  LANE  Lymm  Warrington  II 
90, WARRINGTON  ROAD  90  WARRINGTON  ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST MARY THE 
VIRGIN CHURCH OF ST MARY THE  VIRGIN   CHURCH ROAD  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
BROOKFIELD  HOUSE  BROOKFIELD  HOUSE  29  CHURCH ROAD  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
LYMM CROSS  LYMM CROSS  THE  CROSS  Lymm   Warrington   I 
WILDERSMOOR  HALL 
FARMHOUSE  WILDERSMOOR  HALL  FARMHOUSE   HIGHER LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
127, HIGHER LANE  127  HIGHER  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
WELL IN YARD AT REAR  OF 
WILDERSMOOR  WELL IN YARD AT REAR  OF WILDERSMOOR   HIGHER LANE  
Lymm   Warrington   II 
1A AND 3, LYMM BRIDGE  1A AND 3  LYMM BRIDGE  Lymm   Warrington   II 
3, 5, 7 AND 9, NEW ROAD  3  5  7 AND 9  NEW ROAD  Lymm   Warrington   II 
PORTION  OF LYMM 
GRAMMAR  SCHOOL 
WHICH FORMERLY  PORTION  OF LYMM GRAMMAR  SCHOOL WHICH 
FORMERLY  COMPRISED  OUGHTRINGTON  HALL  
OUGHTRINGTON  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
294COMPRISED  
OUGHTRINGTON  HALL 
BRIDGE OVER MOAT TO 
LYMM HALL  AND 
ADJACENT  MOAT WALLS BRIDGE OVER MOAT TO LYMM HALL AND ADJACENT  
MOAT WALLS  RECTORY  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
TANYARD  FARMHOUSE   TANYARD  FARMHOUSE   88  RUSHGREEN  ROAD  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
STATHAM  LODGE  STATHAM  LODGE  WARRINGTON  ROAD  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL, 
COVERED  CANAL DOCK 
(NORTH OF HENRY STREET) THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  COVERED  CANAL DOCK 
(NORTH OF HENRY STREET)  BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  
Lymm   Warrington   II 
THE NOOK  AND PUMP AND 
TROUGH IN THE GROUNDS  THE NOOK  AND PUMP AND TROUGH IN THE  GROUNDS   
STAGE LANE  OUGHTRINGTON   Lymm  Warrington   II 
K6 TELEPHONE  KIOSK 
OUTSIDE THELWALL  POST 
OFFICE K6 TELEPHONE  KIOSK  OUTSIDE THELWALL  POST OFFICE  
THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
BEWSEY OLD HALL  BEWSEY OLD HALL  BEWSEY   Burtonwood  and Westbrook   
Warrington   II* 
BRADLEGH  OLD  HALL  BRADLEGH  OLD  HALL   BRADLEY  LANE  Burtonwood  and 
Westbrook   Warrington   II 
SUNDIAL SOUTH EAST  OF 
PORCH, ST MARY'S 
CHURCHYARD  SUNDIAL SOUTH EAST  OF PORCH  ST MARY'S 
CHURCHYARD   LIVERPOOL  ROAD  Great Sankey  
Warrington   II 
BEWSEY OLD HALL 
FARMHOUSE  BEWSEY OLD HALL  FARMHOUSE   BEWSEY  Burtonwood  
and Westbrook   Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST MARY  CHURCH OF ST MARY  LIVERPOOL  ROAD  Great Sankey  
Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   LIVERPOOL  ROAD  Great Sankey  Warrington   II 
SANKEY RAILWAY  STATION SANKEY RAILWAY  STATION  STATION  ROAD  Great Sankey  
Warrington   II 
IVY HOUSE  IVY HOUSE  DELPH LANE  HOUGHTON  GREEN  Winwick  
Warrington   II 
CHURCH HOUSE 
FARMHOUSE  CHURCH HOUSE FARMHOUSE   GOLBORNE  ROAD  
Winwick  Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   NEWTON  ROAD  Winwick   Warrington   II 
MYDDLETON  HALL  MYDDLETON  HALL  DELPH  LANE  HOUGHTON  GREEN  
Winwick  Warrington   II* 
LAMPS ON EAST  AND WEST 
DRIVES OF TOWN HALL LAMPS ON EAST  AND WEST  DRIVES OF TOWN  HALL  
SANKEY STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II* 
POLICE STATION  POLICE STATION  VICTORIA  SQUARE  Stockton Heath  
Warrington   II 
PAIR OF K6 TELEPHONE 
KIOSKS PAIR OF K6 TELEPHONE  KIOSKS  SANKEY STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
PREMISES  OF GORDAN  
SHEDS PREMISES  OF GORDAN  SHEDS  WINWICK  QUAY  Winwick   
Warrington   II 
MULBERRY  TREE HOTEL  MULBERRY  TREE HOTEL  VICTORIA  SQUARE  Stockton  
Heath  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
295WESTERN  OUTBUILDING  
TO TOWN HALL WESTERN  OUTBUILDING  TO TOWN HALL  SANKEY  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   I 
ENTRANCE  GATES, PIERS 
AND LAMPS ENTRANCE  GATES  PIERS AND LAMPS  SANKEY STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
COACH HOUSE AT THE 
NOOK COACH HOUSE AT THE  NOOK   STAGE LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
BURFORD  LANE 
WAREHOUSE  AND HOUSE 
ATTACHED  BURFORD  LANE WAREHOUSE  AND HOUSE ATTACHED   
BURFORD  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE MANOR HOUSE  THE MANOR HOUSE  MILL LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
PIGEON HOUSE BEHIND 
DANE BANK HOUSE PIGEON HOUSE BEHIND DANE BANK HOUSE  MILL BANK  
Lymm   Warrington   II 
RIVINGTON  COTTAGE   RIVINGTON  COTTAGE   HIGHER  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
TRENACE  HOUSE  TRENACE  HOUSE  22  EAGLE BROW  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL, 
CASE TO WATERPOINT  ON 
SOUTH  BANK OF CANAL,  15 
METRES WEST OF AGDEN 
BRIDGE THE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  CASE TO WATERPOINT  ON 
SOUTH  BANK OF CANAL  15 METRES WEST OF AGDEN 
BRIDGE  Lymm  Warrington  II 
16, BRIDGEWATER  STREET 16  BRIDGEWATER  STREET  Lymm  Warrington   II 
BARN,  GRANARY  AND 
SHIPPON  10 METRES 
SOUTH  EAST OF BURFORD  
LANE FARMHOUSE  BARN   GRANARY  AND SHIPPON  10 METRES SOUTH EAST 
OF BURFORD  LANE FARMHOUSE   BURFORD  LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
11, 13, 15, 17 AND 19, 
CHURCH ROAD  11  13  15   17 AND 19  CHURCH ROAD  Lymm  Warrington   II 
STOCKS AT LYMM CROSS  STOCKS AT LYMM CROSS  THE CROSS  Lymm  Warrington   II 
17, 18, 19, 20 AND 21, MILL 
BANK  17  18  19   20 AND 21  MILL BANK  Lymm  Warrington  II 
CHURCH OF ST PETER  CHURCH OF ST PETER  OUGHTRINGTON  LANE  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
LODGE TO LYMM 
GRAMMAR  SCHOOL LODGE TO LYMM GRAMMAR  SCHOOL  OUGHTRINGTON  
LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
LYMM HALL  LYMM HALL  RECTORY  LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II* 
LYMM WATER TOWER  LYMM WATER TOWER  TOWER LANE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
THE ORFORD HOTEL AND 
ATTACHED  RANGE OF 
OUTBUILDINGS  AND 
BOUNDARY  WALL THE ORFORD HOTEL AND ATTACHED  RANGE OF 
OUTBUILDINGS  AND BOUNDARY  WALL  GORSEY LANE  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
LOWER ALDER ROOT 
FARMHOUSE  LOWER ALDER ROOT FARMHOUSE   HOLLINS  LANE  
Winwick  Warrington   II 
THE MANOR HOUSE  THE MANOR HOUSE  GOLBORNE  ROAD  Winwick   
Warrington   II 
ARBURY FARMHOUSE   ARBURY FARMHOUSE   ARBURY LANE  Winwick   
Warrington   II 
MYDDLETON  HALL 
FARMHOUSE  MYDDLETON  HALL  FARMHOUSE   DELPH LANE  
HOUGHTON  GREEN  Winwick  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST OSWALD  CHURCH OF ST OSWALD  GOLBORNE  ROAD  Winwick   
Warrington   I 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
296CHURCH OF ST MICHAEL  
AND ALL ANGELS CHURCH OF ST MICHAEL  AND ALL ANGELS  CHAPEL LANE  
Burtonwood  and Westbrook   Warrington   II 
CAUSEWAY  BRIDGES 
FARMHOUSE  CAUSEWAY  BRIDGES FARMHOUSE   ALDER LANE  
Burtonwood  and Westbrook   Warrington   II 
GATEHOUSE  TO BRADLEGH  
OLD HALL GATEHOUSE  TO BRADLEGH  OLD HALL  BRADLEY  LANE  
Burtonwood  and Westbrook   Warrington   II* 
SARACEN'S  HEAD  PUBLIC 
HOUSE, AND STABLES AT 
REAR  TO THE NORTH‐EAST  SARACEN'S  HEAD  PUBLIC HOUSE  AND STABLES AT REAR 
TO THE NORTH‐EAST  WILDERSPOOL  CAUSEWAY   
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
POST  OFFICE  POST  OFFICE  101A AND 101B  SANKEY  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
25,27 AND 29, STANLEY 
STREET, WARRINGTON  25 27 AND 29  STANLEY  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
2, WESTFORD  ROAD, 
LOWER WALTON, 
WARRINGTON 2  WESTFORD  ROAD  LOWER WALTON   WARRINGTON  
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
PARR HALL  PARR HALL   PALMYRA  SQUARE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
FOUNTAIN  IN WESTERN  
PART  OF GARDENS  FOUNTAIN  IN WESTERN  PART  OF GARDENS   PALMYRA  
SQUARE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington  II 
HEALTH OFFICE  HEALTH OFFICE  86   SANKEY  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
8, MARKET PLACE, 
WARRINGTON 8  MARKET PLACE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
13, MARKET PLACE, 
WARRINGTON 13  MARKET  PLACE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
YE OLDE BARLEY MOW 
PUBLIC HOUSE (ONLY  THE 
SIDE FACADE) YE OLDE BARLEY MOW PUBLIC HOUSE (ONLY THE  SIDE 
FACADE)  MARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II* 
CROMWELL  HOUSE  CROMWELL  HOUSE  88 TO 92  CHURCH STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
BUILDING  DATED 1817 
(CORNER  NAYLOR STREET) BUILDING  DATED 1817 (CORNER  NAYLOR STREET)  DIAL 
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
VIGO HOUSE, INCLUDING  
GATEWAY  VIGO HOUSE  INCLUDING  GATEWAY   6  DIAL  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
39 AND 41 AND 43, BRIDGE 
STREET, WARRINGTON  39 AND 41 AND 43  BRIDGE  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
STABLES TO PADDINGTON  
GRANGE (TO EAST) STABLES TO PADDINGTON  GRANGE (TO EAST)  
MANCHESTER  ROAD  PADDINGTON   Poulton‐with ‐
Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
HOPE FARMHOUSE   HOPE FARMHOUSE   609  WARRINGTON  ROAD  RISLEY  
Croft  Warrington   II 
BRIDGE OVER BROOK AND 
DELL AT HEAD OF LYMM 
DAM BRIDGE OVER BROOK AND DELL AT HEAD OF LYMM DAM  
THE AVENUE  Lymm  Warrington   II 
OLD VILLAGE FARM, 
FORMER BARN AND 
ATTACHED  SHIPPON  OLD VILLAGE FARM  FORMER BARN AND ATTACHED  
SHIPPON   FERRY LANE  THELWALL   Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
THOMASONS  BRIDGE OVER 
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL THOMASONS  BRIDGE OVER BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  
RUNCORN  ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
135, CHESTER ROAD  135  CHESTER  ROAD  Walton  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
297MILESTONE   MILESTONE   VICTORIA  SQUARE  Stockton Heath  
Warrington   II 
BROOK HOUSE  BROOK HOUSE  99  WHITEFIELD  ROAD  Stockton  Heath  
Warrington   II 
FIRTREE HOUSE  FIRTREE HOUSE  TARPORLEY  ROAD  Stretton   Warrington   II 
STABLE AT WALLSPIT   STABLE AT WALLSPIT   TARPORLEY  ROAD  Stretton   
Warrington   II 
THE ALBION PUBLIC HOUSE THE ALBION PUBLIC HOUSE  BATTERSBY  LANE  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THE WHEATSHEAF   THE WHEATSHEAF   2  ORFORD LANE  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
BEWSEY TERRACE   BEWSEY TERRACE   119‐125  BEWSEY  ROAD  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
WALL  TO CHURCHYARD  OF 
CHURCH OF ST PAUL WALL  TO CHURCHYARD  OF CHURCH OF ST PAUL  BEWSEY 
ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ST ALBANS ROMAN 
CATHOLIC  PRESBYTERY  ST ALBANS ROMAN CATHOLIC  PRESBYTERY   BEWSEY 
ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
72 ‐74 Bewsey Street  72 and 74 Bewsey  Street  Warrington   Cheshire   WA2 7JE  
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
12, BOLD STREET, 
WARRINGTON 12  BOLD  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil Parish  
Warrington   II 
THE LION HOTEL  THE LION HOTEL  BRIDGE STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
Former Fish Market  Old Market Place  Warrington   WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
9‐11,  MARKET PLACE, 
WARRINGTON 9‐11   MARKET  PLACE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
TECHNICAL  SCHOOL  TECHNICAL  SCHOOL  PALMYRA  SQUARE  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
MEMORIAL  TO SOUTH 
LANCASHIRE  REGIMENT  IN 
QUEEN'S  GARDENS  MEMORIAL  TO SOUTH LANCASHIRE  REGIMENT  IN 
QUEEN'S  GARDENS   PALMYRA  SQUARE  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
EDUCATION  OFFICE  EDUCATION  OFFICE  84   SANKEY STREET  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
TOWN HALL  TOWN HALL  SANKEY  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   I 
HOLLY HOUSE  HOLLY HOUSE  73  SANKEY STREET  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
8, BRIDGE STREET  8  BRIDGE STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
Friends Meeting  House, 
Warrington  1b Academy  Place  Warrington   WA1 2NR  Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
CROSS KEYS PUBLIC HOUSE CROSS KEYS PUBLIC HOUSE  BUTTERMARKET  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
ROMAN CATHOLIC  
CHURCH OF ST MARY ROMAN CATHOLIC  CHURCH OF ST MARY  
BUTTERMARKET  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
25‐31,  CHURCH STREET, 
WARRINGTON 25‐31  CHURCH  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
298MARQUIS  OF GRANBY 
PUBLIC HOUSE AND SYKES 
SHOE REPAIRS MARQUIS  OF GRANBY PUBLIC HOUSE AND SYKES SHOE 
REPAIRS   CHURCH STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST ELPHIN  CHURCH OF ST ELPHIN  CHURCH STREET  WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
86 AND 86A,  CHURCH 
STREET, WARRINGTON  86 AND 86A  CHURCH  STREET  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
THREE PIGEONS  PUBLIC 
HOUSE THREE PIGEONS  PUBLIC HOUSE  DALLAM LANE  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
BARONET  FARMHOUSE,  
WITH ATTACHED  FARM 
BUILDINGS  AND COBBLED  
YARD BARONET  FARMHOUSE   WITH ATTACHED  FARM 
BUILDINGS  AND COBBLED  YARD  EASTFORD  ROAD  
LOWER WALTON   WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
HOLLY LODGE  HOLLY LODGE  10  FROGHALL  LANE  WARRINGTON   Non 
Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
3, MARTINCROFT  GREEN  3  MARTINCROFT  GREEN  Woolston   Warrington   II 
BOOTHS FARM 
FARMHOUSE  BOOTHS FARM FARMHOUSE   BARLEYCASTLE  LANE  
Appleton   Warrington   II 
BARLEYCASTLE  
FARMHOUSE  BARLEYCASTLE  FARMHOUSE  BARLEYCASTLE  LANE  
Appleton   Warrington   II 
FORMER CANAL 
WAREHOUSE  FORMER CANAL WAREHOUSE   BIRCHDALE  ROAD  
Appleton   Warrington   II 
BRIDGE COTTAGE   BRIDGE COTTAGE   166   LONDON  ROAD  Appleton   
Warrington   II 
WRIGHTS  GREEN HOUSE  WRIGHTS  GREEN HOUSE  LUMB BROOK ROAD  WRIGHTS  
GREEN  Appleton   Warrington   II 
CROSS COTTAGES   CROSS COTTAGES   PEPPER STREET  Appleton   Warrington   II 
BARN  TO EAST  OF ORFORD 
GREEN FARMHOUSE  BARN  TO EAST  OF ORFORD GREEN FARMHOUSE   VALE 
OWEN ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
EASTERN  OUTBUILDING  TO 
TOWN HALL EASTERN  OUTBUILDING  TO TOWN HALL  SANKEY  STREET  
WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   I 
TELEPHONE  KIOSKS  AT 
EAST END OF CHURCH OF 
THE HOLY  TRINITY TELEPHONE  KIOSKS  AT EAST  END OF CHURCH OF THE 
HOLY  TRINITY  MARKET GATE  WARRINGTON   Non Civil 
Parish  Warrington   II 
CHRIST'S CHURCH  CHRIST'S CHURCH  LADY LANE  Croft  Warrington   II 
ST LEWIS PRESBYTERY   ST LEWIS PRESBYTERY   MUSTARD  LANE  LITTLE  TOWN  
Croft  Warrington   II 
SPRINGFIELD  FARMHOUSE  SPRINGFIELD  FARMHOUSE   SPRING LANE  Croft  
Warrington   II 
BARN  AT HOPE 
FARMHOUSE  (TO SOUTH‐
WEST) BARN  AT HOPE FARMHOUSE  (TO SOUTH‐WEST)  
WARRINGTON  ROAD  RISLEY  Croft  Warrington   II 
LODGE TO KENYON  HALL 
AND ADJACENT  GATE PIERS LODGE TO KENYON  HALL AND ADJACENT  GATE PIERS  
BROSELEY  LANE  TWISS  GREEN  Culcheth  and Glazebury   
Warrington   II 
103, CINNAMON  LANE  103  CINNAMON  LANE  Poulton‐with ‐Fearnhead   
Warrington   II 
484, KNUTSFORD  ROAD, 
WARRINGTON 484  KNUTSFORD  ROAD  WARRINGTON   Non Civil  Parish  
Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
299CHURCH OF ST LUKE  CHURCH OF ST LUKE  LIVERPOOL  ROAD  WARRINGTON  
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II* 
GREENBANK   GREENBANK   CANAL  SIDE|GREENBANK   CHURCH  LANE  
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
SUNDIAL IN ST WILFRED'S 
CHURCHYARD  (4 METRES 
SOUTH  OF CHURCH 
PORCH) SUNDIAL IN ST WILFRED'S  CHURCHYARD  (4 METRES 
SOUTH  OF CHURCH PORCH)  CHURCH LANE  Grappenhall  
and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
THE HALL, WITH GATES 
AND FORECOURT  WALLS THE HALL   WITH GATES AND FORECOURT  WALLS  
CHURCH LANE  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington  II 
2 AND 4, LAUREL BANK  2 AND 4  LAUREL BANK  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
MILEPOST  AT NGR 6586 
8741 MILEPOST  AT NGR 6586 8741  STOCKPORT  ROAD  
THELWALL   Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
REDLANE  BRIDGE  REDLANE  BRIDGE  RED LANE  Appleton   Warrington   II 
APPLETON  CROSS (BASE)  APPLETON  CROSS (BASE)  STRETTON  ROAD AT JUNCTION  
WITH CANN LANE  Appleton  Warrington  II 
WALLCROFT  WALLCROFT   WARREN  DRIVE  Appleton   Warrington   II 
THE HATTON ARMS  THE HATTON ARMS  WARRINGTON  ROAD  Hatton  
Warrington   II 
PENKETH  HALL  PENKETH  HALL  HALL  NOOK  Penketh   Warrington   II 
THE COTTAGE  (NORTH OF 
JUNCTION  WITH 
LUMBBROOK  ROAD) THE COTTAGE  (NORTH OF JUNCTION  WITH LUMBBROOK  
ROAD)  GRAPPENHALL  ROAD  Stockton  Heath  
Warrington   II 
ST THOMAS  VICARAGE  ST THOMAS  VICARAGE   WALTON  NEW ROAD  Stockton 
Heath  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST MATTHEW  CHURCH OF ST MATTHEW   STRETTON  ROAD  Stretton   
Warrington   II 
TANYARD  HOUSE  TANYARD  HOUSE  WELL LANE  Stretton  Warrington   II 
HOUGHS BRIDGE  HOUGHS BRIDGE   HOUGH'S  LANE  Walton  Warrington   II 
BRIDGE HOUSE  BRIDGE HOUSE  1 AND 2  WALTON  HALL  PARK  Walton  
Warrington   II 
FEARNHEAD  HOUSE  FEARNHEAD  HOUSE  CINNAMON  LANE  Poulton‐with ‐
Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
2 AND 4, MEAD ROAD  2 AND 4  MEAD ROAD  Poulton‐with ‐Fearnhead   
Warrington   II 
WALTON  HOUSE  WALTON  HOUSE  152   WALTON  NEW ROAD  Walton  
Warrington   II 
BRIDGE STORES  BRIDGE STORES  2  BELLHOUSE  LANE  GRAPPENHALL   
Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL 
CHURCH LANE BRIDGE BRIDGEWATER  CANAL CHURCH LANE BRIDGE  
BRIDGEWATER  CANAL  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
ST OSWALDS  WELL IN 
FIELD TO SOUTH OF 
WOODHEAD  FARMHOUSE  ST OSWALDS  WELL IN FIELD TO SOUTH OF WOODHEAD  
FARMHOUSE   PARKSIDE  ROAD  Winwick   Warrington  II 
WALL, GATES AND GATE 
PIERS TO FRONT OF 
KENYON HALL WALL   GATES AND GATE PIERS TO FRONT OF KENYON 
HALL  WINWICK  LANE  Croft  Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
300ROMAN CATHOLIC  
CHURCH AT WINWICK  
PSYCHIATRIC  HOSPITAL  ROMAN CATHOLIC  CHURCH AT WINWICK  PSYCHIATRIC  
HOSPITAL   HOLLINS  LANE  Winwick  Warrington   II 
THELWALL  HEYS  THELWALL  HEYS  CLIFF LANE  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  
Warrington   II 
WILDERSPOOL  HOUSE AND 
ATTACHED  GARDEN WALL 
AND RAILING WILDERSPOOL  HOUSE AND ATTACHED  GARDEN WALL 
AND RAILING  WILDERSPOOL  CAUSEWAY   WARRINGTON   
Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF ST HELEN  CHURCH OF ST HELEN  MANCHESTER  ROAD  HOLLINFARE   
Rixton‐with‐Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   NEWCHURCH  LANE  Culcheth  and Glazebury   
Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   WARRINGTON  ROAD  OPPOSITE  ROWE 
FARM  Croft  Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   WARRINGTON  ROAD  Culcheth  and 
Glazebury   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   A49  Appleton  Warrington  II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   LIVERPOOL  ROAD  Great Sankey  Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   WARRINGTON  ROAD  Penketh   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE  OUTSIDE 90 
FEARNHEAD  LANE MILESTONE  OUTSIDE 90 FEARNHEAD  LANE  FEARNHEAD  
LANE  Poulton‐with‐Fearnhead   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   MANCHESTER  ROAD  Rixton‐with ‐
Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   MANCHESTER  ROAD  Rixton‐with ‐
Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   MANCHESTER  ROAD  HOLLINS GREEN  
Rixton‐with‐Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   LONDON ROAD  A49  SWING BRIDGE  
Stockton Heath   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   LONDON ROAD  Stretton   Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   GOLBORNE  ROAD  Winwick   Warrington  II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   WINWICK  ROAD  A49   Winwick  Warrington   II 
MILESTONE   MILESTONE   MANCHESTER  ROAD  Woolston   Warrington   II 
MOUNTING  BLOCK  MOUNTING  BLOCK  CHESTER  ROAD  Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
MOUNTING  BLOCK  MOUNTING  BLOCK   SWAN GREEN  Winwick   Warrington   II 
WAR MEMORIAL   WAR MEMORIAL   LUMB BROOK ROAD  APPLETON  
THORN  Appleton   Warrington   II 
WAR MEMORIAL   WAR MEMORIAL   ST MARY'S ROAD  Penketh   Warrington   II 
WAR MEMORIAL   WAR MEMORIAL   HOLLINS  GREEN  Rixton‐with‐
Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
GLAZEBROOK  STATION,  
INCLUDING  STATION 
HOUSE AND NORTH 
PLATFORM  BUILDING  GLAZEBROOK  STATION  INCLUDING  STATION HOUSE AND 
NORTH  PLATFORM  BUILDING   GLAZEBROOK  LANE  
Rixton‐with‐Glazebrook   Warrington   II 
COLLINS GREEN 
FARMHOUSE  COLLINS GREEN FARMHOUSE   3 PENKFORD  LANE  
COLLINS GREEN  Burtonwood  and Westbrook   
Warrington   II 
MOUNTING  BLOCK  MOUNTING  BLOCK  LIVERPOOL  ROAD  Great Sankey  
Warrington   II 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
301HATTON  ARMS K6 
TELEPHONE  KIOSK HATTON  ARMS K6 TELEPHONE  KIOSK  HATTON  LANE  
HATTON   Hatton  Warrington   II 
CHURCH OF OUR LADY OF 
THE ASSUMPTION  CHURCH OF OUR LADY OF THE  ASSUMPTION   ST MARY'S 
STREET  WARRINGTON   Non  Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
THELWALL  WAR 
MEMORIAL  THELWALL  WAR MEMORIAL   BELL LANE  Grappenhall  and 
Thelwall  Warrington   II 
Monks Siding Signal Box  Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
The Polygons,  including  
terraces, encircling  path, 
reflecting  pool and eastern 
boundary  wall 9c Dane  Bank Road  Lymm  Cheshire  WA13 9DQ  Lymm  
Warrington   II 
Warrington  Cenotaph   Junction of Knutsford  Road and Wilderspool  Causeway   
Warrington   Cheshire   Non Civil  Parish  Warrington   II 
Bridgewater  Canal 
Pickering's  Bridge  Grappenhall  and Thelwall  Warrington   II 
Lymm  War Memorial   Churchyard  of St Mary the Virgin   Church Road  Lymm  
Warrington   WA13 0AP  Lymm  Warrington   II 
Parish Boundary  Stone, 
Broseley  Lane Broseley  Lane  Culcheth   Warrington   WA3 4BG  Culcheth 
and Glazebury   Warrington   II 
Pickett‐Hamilton  Fort  Burtonwood  and Westbrook   Warrington   II 
 
Schedule  of Buildings  and Structures  of Locally  Important  Architectural  and Historic 
Interest (Locally  Listed Buildings)  
Name  Address  Parish 
Nook Farmhouse  & Barns  Arley Road  Appleton  
Springside   Arley Road  Appleton  
Hillfoot Farmhouse  Hough's Lane  Appleton  
Hill Cliffe  Baptist  Church  Red Lane  Appleton  
Wright's Green Cottage  Lumb Brook Road  Appleton  
Patch Cottage  Lumb Brook Road  Appleton  
Thorn Brow Farmhouse   Green Lane  Appleton  
Lych Gate to Fox Covert Burial  Ground  Firs Lane/ Windmill Lane  Appleton  
War memorial   Lumb Brook Road  Appleton  
Quarry Cottage  Quarry Lane  Appleton  
Birch Tree House  Off Red Lane  Appleton  
Walnut Tree Farmhouse   Stretton Road  Appleton  
Appleton  Thorn Village Hall  Stretton Road  Appleton  
Cabbage Cottage  40 Chapel  Lane  Appleton  
Thorn House  (Appleton  Thorn Vicarage)  Green Lane  Appleton  
1 Cross  Cottages  Pepper Street  Appleton  
2 Cross  Cottages  Pepper Street  Appleton  
Cann Lane Farm House  Cann Lane  Appleton  
Sandstone  gateways  and walls  By 171  London Road  Appleton  
Persian Cottage & Cheriton Cottage  Lumb Brook Road  Appleton  
Bramble  Barn  The  Hurst  Off Firs Lane/ Park  Lane  Appleton  
Lanehurst  Barn  The Hurst  Off Firs Lane/ Park  Lane  Appleton  
Barn at Walnut  Tree Farm  Stretton Road  Appleton  
Memorial  Cross  St. Cross  Church  Stretton Road  Appleton  
Brook  House  Cann Lane South  Appleton  
Culeen House  Cann Lane South  Appleton  
Lodge to Underclyffe  House  171  London Road  Appleton  
Sandstone  piers and wall  London Road  Appleton  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
302Hawthorne  Cottage  Pepper Street  Appleton  
Moss  View Cottage  Pepper Street  Appleton  
Hatton Farm Cottage/The  Cottage  Pepper Street  Appleton  
Quarry House  Quarry Lane  Appleton  
London Bridge PH  163  London Road  Appleton  
Rowe Farmhouse  Warrington  Road  Birchwood  
Heathfield  House  Delenty  Drive  Birchwood  
Pillbox  Delenty  Drive  Birchwood  
Yew Tree Farm  Bold Lane  Burtonwood  
Bewsey Lodge  Bewsey Farm Close  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Collins Green Farmhouse   Penkford  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Memorial  Lychgate to St Michaels 
Church Chapel  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Causey West Bridge  Alder Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Chapel  House Inn  Chapel  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Callands Farm House  Ladywood  Road  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Burtonwood  Methodist  Church  Phipps Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Burtonwood  Brewery building  Bold Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Bankhouse  Farm  Bold Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Gates to Burtonwood  Cemetery   Chapel  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Youth Club ‐ former Infant School  Jcn Clay Lane/Phipps  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Old School  House  23,Clay  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Nursery formerly St.Paul of the Cross  RC 
School Mercer Street/Clay  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Burtonwood  Cottages  Pennington  Lane  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
Bewsey New Hall  By Shackleton  Close, Old Hall  Burtonwood  & 
Westbrook  
   18 Lord Street  Croft 
   143  Mustard Lane  Croft 
Horse  Shoe PH  Smithy Lane  Croft 
Southworth  Hall  Southworth  Lane  Croft 
  54 Smithy Brow  Croft 
The  Plough Inn  Heath Lane  Croft 
  115  Stone  Pit Lane  Croft 
Kenylo Bridge  Sandy Brow Lane  Croft 
   60 and 62 New Lane  Croft 
Highfield  Kenyon Lane  Croft 
Heath House  Kenyon Lane  Croft 
Turrett Hall  Stone Pit Lane  Croft 
Beech Farm  93 Heath Lane  Croft 
Former Croft County Primary School  Adj.  1 Croft Heath Gardens/Heath  
Lane Croft 
   18 Dam Lane  Croft 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
303Fowl Farmhouse   Back Lane  Cuerdley 
Upper Moss  Side Farm  Moss  Side Lane  Cuerdley 
Lower Moss  Side Farm  Lapwing Lane  Cuerdley 
Cross  Lane Farmhouse   Widnes Road  Cuerdley 
  1 Back Lane  Cuerdley 
Newchurch  Parish Hall  Common  Lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Lych Gate at Newchurch  Parish Church  Church Lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
War Memorial  o/s Newchurch  Parish 
Church Shaw Street/Church  lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Mile Stone opp.school   Newchurch  Lane/Warrington  Road  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Milestone   Opp  Rowe Farm,  Warrington  Road  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Pack Horse Inn PH  Shaw Street/Bent  Lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Raven Inn PH  Hey Shoot Lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Milestone   Warrington  Road  Culcheth & Glazebury  
Newchurch  Parish Church  Church Lane  Culcheth & Glazebury  
The  Cottage  Bellhouse  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   3 Broad Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   5 Broad Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   7 Broad Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   189  Chester Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   283  Chester Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Rams  Head PH  Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Parr Arms  PH  Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Birchfield   Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Ingleside  Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Cottage  3 Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   200  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   224a Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Grappenhall  Methodist  Church  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   12 All Saint's Drive  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Bell Cottage  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Dolphin Cottage  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Ivy Cottage  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Daichaidh   Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Pickering  Cottage  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Little Manor PH  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Redbarn Farmhouse   Off Cliffe Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Lodge  to Thelwall Heyes  Cliffe  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Romiley House  Ferry Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
School  House  Gigg  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Woodlands   Halfacre  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Lodge  Halfacre  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
White House  Stockport  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Bridge House  Stockport  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Barn adj to The Bridge House  Stockport  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
White Lane Farmhouse   Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Cuerdon Lodge  44 Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   1 Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   114  Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   202  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   204  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Gables  Half Acre  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
   128  Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
2 Massey Hall Cottages  Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
304The  Lodge  Lumb Brook Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Barn at Manor House  Farm  Cartridge  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
1 & 2 Woodside  Cottages,  formerly 
'Thatched  Cottages'  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Willows  Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Latchford  Viaduct  Thelwall New Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Old part of Thelwall Massey School  Halfacre  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Highfields   Off Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Highfields  Cottages  Off Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Highfields  Farmhouse   Off Weaste Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Thelwall Post Office  Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
1 & 3, Thelwall New Road  Thelwall New Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Stanny Lunt Bridge  Chester Road/Church  Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Bradley Hall  Off Cliff Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Barn at Bradley hall  Off Cliff Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Milestone   Euclid Ave/Chester  Rd  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Thelwall Memorial   Bell Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
The  Lodge  East lodge to Grappenhall  
Heys Opp.41  Broad Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Mounting  Block  Opp  165 Chester Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Milestone   Opp.Summerville  Chester Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
1 & 2 ‐ Cottages   Church Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Mounting  Block ‐ opp. Springbrook  P.H. Jcn Chester Road/Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Milepost  Opp. 210 Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Red telephone  box  o/s 92 Knutsford  Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Former County School  Annexe  Thelwall New Road  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Cobbled street area  of Grappenhall  
Village Church Lane o/s Rams  Head P.H.  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Clay Bank Farmhouse   Broad Lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Pickerings  Bridge  West of the Firs, Half Acre lane  Grappenhall  & Thelwall 
Holly House Farm  Park  Road, adacent no.46  Great  Sankey 
Garden suburb  17‐23 Penketh Road  Great  Sankey 
Northern  part of Gt. Sankey  CP School  Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
Southern  part of Gt.sankey  CP School  Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
War Memorial   St.Mary's  Road  Great  Sankey 
   374  and 376  Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
Outbuildings  to Whittle  Hall Farm  Whittle  Hall Road  Great  Sankey 
Whittle  Hall Farm  Whittle  Hall Road  Great  Sankey 
Mounting  Block  opp. 219, Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
Cherry Tree Farmhouse   Burtonwood  Road  Great  Sankey 
Sankey Bridge  Old Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
Crosfield Court  Haig Avenue  Great  Sankey 
Mounting  Block  Jcn. Liverpool  Road & 2, Clarence 
Avenue Great  Sankey 
St. Marys Cemetery   St. Marys Road  Great  Sankey 
   372  Liverpool  Road  Great  Sankey 
The  Greenside   Goose Lane, opp. 49  Hatton 
School  House  10 & 12 Goose Lane  Hatton 
Queasty Birch Hall  Off Summer Lane  Hatton 
The  Orchard,  1 New House  Farm 
Cottages Hatton lane  Hatton 
2 New House  Farm Cottages  Hatton Lane  Hatton 
Holly Bank Cottage  Warrington  Road  Hatton 
Factory Cottage  Warrington  Road  Hatton 
Greenside  farmhouse   Goose Lane  Hatton 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
3051 & 2 New Cottages ‐ East side of 
Hatton Lane Hatton Lane  Hatton 
Bobs Old Cottage & Newtons Cottage  Hatton Lane  Hatton 
Pillmoss Farmhouse   Pillmoss Lane  Hatton 
Blue Coat cottage & 4 New Cottage  Hatton Lane  Hatton 
Goose Cottage  35 Goose Lane  Hatton 
Hatton House  Hatton Lane  Hatton 
Hatton Gate Farmhouse   Daresbury  Lane  Hatton 
   4 & 6 Booths Hill Road  Lymm 
The  Limes  11 Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
   20 Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
   3 & 5 Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
Lymm  Library  Davies Way  Lymm 
   38 Cherry Lane  Lymm 
   21 and 23 Church Road  Lymm 
   25 and 27 Church Road  Lymm 
   31 Church Road  Lymm 
Crouchley  Hall Farmhouse   Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Deansgreen  Hall  Off Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Beech Cottage  50 Eagle Brow  Lymm 
   11 Eagle Brow  Lymm 
Sunday School  Eagle Brow  Lymm 
   1 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   53 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   12 Higher Lane  Lymm 
Lymm  Baptist Church  Higher Lane  Lymm 
The  Chestnuts   58 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   66 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   2 Maltmans  Road  Lymm 
   12 New Road  Lymm 
   17 New Road  Lymm 
   32 New Road  Lymm 
Laurel Bank  27 New Road  Lymm 
   37 Rectory Lane  Lymm 
Reddish House  Reddish Lane  Lymm 
   68 Rushgreen  Road  Lymm 
Lymm  Hotel  Whitbarrow  Road  Lymm 
   68 Camsley Lane  Lymm 
   80 Whitbarrow  Road  Lymm 
   7 and 9 Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
   36 Cherry Lane  Lymm 
Cherry Hall Farm  Cherry Lane  Lymm 
   20 to 26 Church Road  Lymm 
   6 The  Dingle  Lymm 
   4 The  Dingle  Lymm 
   2 Eagle Brow  Lymm 
   23 Eagle Brow  Lymm 
   25 Eagle Brow  Lymm 
   4 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   6 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   8 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   10 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   68 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   99 Higher Lane  Lymm 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
306   97 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   95 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   93 Higher Lane  Lymm 
   5 Lymm  Bridge  Lymm 
   7 Lymm  Bridge  Lymm 
   15 New Road  Lymm 
   30 New Road  Lymm 
Reddish Hall  Reddish Lane  Lymm 
   1 The  Square  Lymm 
   1a The Square  Lymm 
Wildersmoor  Hall Farm  Higher Lane  Lymm 
Cotebrook  House  Oughtrington  Lane  Lymm 
Pool Bank Farm  Pool Lane  Lymm 
Agden Bridge  Spring Lane  Lymm 
2 Barns adjacent to Cheriton House  38, Booths Lane  Lymm 
56 Booths Hill Road & 2, Barsbank  Lane 56, Booths Hill Road & 2, Barsbank  
Lane Lymm 
Whitbarrow  Aqueduct   Bridgewater  Street  Lymm 
Little Brookfield   13, Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
Former Lymm  UDC Offices  Brookfield  Road/Whitbarrow  Road  Lymm 
Congregational  Church  Brookfield  Road  Lymm 
Gateway  Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Clouds Cottage  Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Cottage east of Clouds cottage  Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Former Stable to rear of Clouds Cottage Crouchley  Lane  Lymm 
Dingle Bank  Dingle Bank  Close  Lymm 
Lamp post  Junction of Mill  Lane & Birch Brook 
Road, Heatley Lymm 
Lymm  Court (formerly  Court House)  13, New Road  Lymm 
Former Oughtrington  School  Oughtrington  Crescent  Lymm 
Pool Farm  Pool Lane  Lymm 
The  Star Inn P.H.  Star Lane  Lymm 
St. Peters Memorial  Cross  Oughtrington  Lane  Lymm 
Milepost  Knutsford  Road/Gallows  Croft  Lymm 
   2 Bridgewater  Street  Lymm 
No.29 Clinic  (former P.H.)  Eagle Brow  Lymm 
15/17 Pool Lane Cottages  Pool Lane  Lymm 
11/13 Pool Lane Cottages  Pool Lane  Lymm 
Former School  now Community  Centre Opp.5   Warrington  Road  Lymm 
   13 Mill Lane  Lymm 
Wildersmoor  House  181  & 181a Higher  Lane  Lymm 
   26 New Road  Lymm 
   71 Whitbarrow  Road  Lymm 
Old Chapel  Cherry Lane  Lymm 
   10 Booths Lane  Lymm 
No. 19  Railway Cottage  Whitbarrow  Road  Lymm 
The  Jolly Thresher PH  Higher Lane  Lymm 
1 to 4 Station Cottages  Station Road  Padgate 
Padgate Rectory  Station road  Padgate 
Padgate Station ‐ northern building  off Station Road  Padgate 
Padgate Station ‐ southern  building  Off Station Road/ Green Lane  Padgate 
War Memorial   Off Station Road/Blackbrook  Avenue Padgate 
Milestone   outside 90 Fearnhead  Lane  Padgate 
Padgate Methodist  Church  Green Lane  Padgate 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
307Ferry Inn  Fiddlers  Ferry  Penketh 
   19 Poplar Avenue  Penketh 
Greenway   Well  Lane  Penketh 
   27 to 33 Farnworth  Road  Penketh 
   1 and 3 Poplar Avenue  Penketh 
Heathfield   32, Chapel  Road/Ditchfield  Road  Penketh 
Community  Centre  (Old  Quaker 
building) Meeting Lane  Penketh 
Penketh & Sankey British Legion  Greystone  Road  Penketh 
War Memorial   Greystone  Road  Penketh 
   42 Chapel  Road  Penketh 
   22 and 24 Chapel Road  Penketh 
Wesleyan  Day School  Chapel  Road  Penketh 
Milestone   144  Liverpool  Road  Penketh 
The  Manna House  Warrington  Road  Penketh 
Milestone   opp 207  Warrington  Road  Penketh 
Greystone  Cottage  101  Meeting Lane  Penketh 
   89 Station Road  Penketh 
Heath Cottage  100  Heath Road/ Harford Close  Penketh 
Springfield  House  516  Manchester  Road  Poulton with Fearnhead  
   34 Green Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
   69 Green Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
   71 Green Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Grange Mount  260  Padgate Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Padgate Junior  & Infants  School  Station Road  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Beech Grove  House  Newton Grove  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Grove  House  Newton Grove  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Enfield Farmhouse  Tweedsmuir  Close  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Enfield Cottages  Tweedsmuir  Close  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Barn adjoining  Enfield Cottages  Tweedsmuir  Close  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Houghton  Mill Bridge  Cinnamon  Lane North  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Green Lane School  Green Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Central Building of School  Green Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
The  Farmers Arms  PH  Fearnhead  Lane  Poulton with Fearnhead  
Yew Tree House  Warrington  Road/Glaziers  Lane  Risley 
Railways Cottages  Dam Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Barn at Holly Bank Farm  Bridge Road, off Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Holly Bank farmhouse  ‐ Mounting  Block Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Former RC Church of St. Michael  3 Moss  Side Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Holly Bush Farmhouse   30 Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
341‐ 347 Manchester  Road  Lane End  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Mounting  block  o/s Holly Bank Farmhouse   Rixton with Glazebrook  
Mile Stone  opp.252 Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Mile Stone  opp.24 Manchester  Road by Moss 
Side Farm Rixton with Glazebrook  
The  Old Smithy  Dam Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Cemetery   Dam Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
The  Black Swan P.H.  Jcn. Dam Lane/Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Post Office  Opp.27  School Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
The  Old Vicarage  next to 52 School Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Milestone   507  Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Village Shop  524/526 Manchester  Road  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Methodist  Church  Chapel  Lane / top School Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Mission House  Moat Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
308Mount  Pleasant Farm  Glazebrook  Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Railway Cottages  Glazebrook  Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
Ivy cottage  77 Dam Lane  Rixton with Glazebrook  
   82 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   88 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   90 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   3 Grappenhall  Road  Stockton Heath 
Summerville  Residential  Home  Hill Top Road  Stockton Heath 
2 Hill Top Cottage  Hunts Lane  Stockton Heath 
Hill Crest  143  London Road  Stockton Heath 
   44 Whitefield  Road  Stockton Heath 
   18 ‐ 24 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
Old Telephone  Exchange   35 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
   45 Grappenhall  Road  Stockton Heath 
   81a Grappenhall  Road  Stockton Heath 
   1 Hill Top Cottage  Stockton Heath 
   101  Walton New Road  Stockton Heath 
Old Mounting  Block  Grappenhall  Road/Lumbrook  Road  Stockton Heath 
Milestone   Grappenhall  Road/Lumbrook  Road  Stockton Heath 
War Memorial   London Road/Ellesmere  Road  Stockton Heath 
Former Victoria Hotel & two adjoining  
shops London Road/Grappenhall  Road  Stockton Heath 
Milestone  by Swing Bridge  Fairfield Road/London  Road  Stockton Heath 
Swing Bridge A49  London Road  Stockton Heath 
The  Hollies  2, Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
Elm Cottage  4, Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   6 Ackers  Road  Stockton Heath 
   22 and 24 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   60/62/64  Chester Road  Stockton Heath 
   124  Fairfield Road  Stockton Heath 
Thorn Marine  London Road  Stockton Heath 
Roberts Shoe Shop  44/46 London Road  Stockton Heath 
   14 and 16 Parkgate Road  Stockton Heath 
   69‐75 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
   83‐85 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
Lamp post  Rear of 10 Fairfield Road  Stockton Heath 
Church  Adj.  40 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
Lamposts   Victoria Square  Stockton Heath 
Rose Cottage  133  Fairfield Road  Stockton Heath 
London Bridge  London Road  Stockton Heath 
Methodist  Church  Corner of Heath Street  & Walton 
Road Stockton Heath 
   46 to 56 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
   66 to 76 Walton Road  Stockton Heath 
Blacksmiths  Forge  Victoria Place (to rear of PH)  Stockton Heath 
  137  Fairfield Road  Stockton Heath 
  37 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
  39 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
   84 Ackers Road  Stockton Heath 
Lane End Farmhouse   Northwich  Road  Stretton 
Ashfield  Northwich  Road  Stretton 
Road Side Farm Building  London Road  Stretton 
War Memorial  St.Matthews  Church  Stretton Road  Stretton 
Tanyard Farmhouse   Well  Lane  Stretton 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
309Cat & Lion PH  Tarporley  Road  Stretton 
The  Ship PH (Demolished)   Chester Road  Walton 
Smithy House  Chester Road  Walton 
   99 Chester Road  Walton 
1 Walton Lea Cottage  Chester Road  Walton 
The  Lodge  Chester Road  Walton 
   35 Chester Road  Walton 
New Lodge  Houghs Lane  Walton 
Stoneoaks  Cottage  Thomasons  Bridge Lane  Walton 
Underbridge  Cottages  Underbridge  Lane  Walton 
Rowswood  Farmhouse   Park  Lane  Walton 
Wood Cottage  Park  Lane  Walton 
2 Cockfight  Cottages  Runcorn Road  Walton 
4 Cockfight  Cottages  Runcorn Road  Walton 
Porch House  Farm  Runcorn Road  Walton 
   7 Walton Lea Road  Walton 
   13 Walton Lea Road  Walton 
   2 Walton Lea Road  Walton 
   1 Warrington  Road  Walton 
Rowswood  Cottage  Warrington  Road  Walton 
2 Walton Lea Cottage  Chester Road  Walton 
3 Walton Lea Cottage  Chester Road  Walton 
   34 Chester Road  Walton 
1 The  Elms Cottages  Hobb Lane  Walton 
2 The  Elms Cottages  Hobb Lane  Walton 
3 The  Elms Cottages  Hobb Lane  Walton 
Grange Mill House  Mill Lane  Walton 
   9 Walton Lea Road  Walton 
   11 Walton Lea Road  Walton 
   105/105a  Walton New Road  Walton 
   107  Walton Road  Walton 
Smithy converted  to house  adjacent 136, Old Chester Road  Walton 
North building in yard  Rear 134  Old Chester Road  Walton 
Old tool shed of Walton Hall Estate  Chester Road/Walton  Lea Road  Walton 
Barn at Rowswood  Farm  Walton Hall Estate, Park  Lane  Walton 
School  converted  to House  2, Runcorn Road  Walton 
Old Mounting  Block  Walton New Road/Chester  Road  Walton 
The  Former Vicarage  Chester Road  Walton 
War Memorial  Cross  Jcn. Chester Road/Ellesmere  Road  Walton 
Smithy House  136  Old Chester Road  Walton 
Grange Green Manor  Mill Lane  Walton 
Canal Farmhouse   Runcorn Road  Walton 
Memorial  ‐ Walton Church  Chester Road  Walton 
Milestone   o/s The Croft, Chester Road  Walton 
The  Walton Arms PH  Old Chester Road  Walton 
CWS Water Tower (Demolished)   Barbauld Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Imperial PH  145  Bewsey Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   5 Bold Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Emmanuel  Church  Bold Street  Warrington  Unparished  
St Austins  Chambers   23 Bold Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   7 Bold Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   123  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   83 & 85 Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   88 Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
310   90 & 92 Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Borough Arms  PH  Buttermarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Lower Angel PH  Buttermarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   29 Cairo Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   34 ‐ 38 Church  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   2 ‐ 4 Froghall Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Hop Pole PH  Horsemarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Brooklands  PH  Lovely Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Latchford  Baptist Church  Loushers Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Adelphi Vaults PH  88 ‐ 90 Mersey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   7 Museum Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   9 Museum Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   11 Museum Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   19 & 21 Museum Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Registry Office  Winmarleigh  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Blackburne  Arms PH  Orford Green  Warrington  Unparished  
   51 & 53 Orford Green  Warrington  Unparished  
St Margarets  Church  Orford Green  Warrington  Unparished  
Irish Club  Orford Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Hawthorne  PH  Orford Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
The  King & Queen PH  Padgate Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
   12 Ryland Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Manx Arms  PH (Demolished)   31 School  Brow  Warrington  Unparished  
Brickmakers  PH  68 School  Brow  Warrington  Unparished  
   1 Springfield  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Christ Church  Wash Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
St Johns  United Reformed  Church  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   94 Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
The  Causeway  PH  233  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   39 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   41 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   43 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   45 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   47 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   49 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   51 Wilson Patten Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   20 Winmarleigh  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Masonic Hall  Winmarleigh  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Appliance  Centre  25 Winwick Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Greenwoods   27 Winwick Street  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Lord Rodney PH  Winwick Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Red Lion PH  Winwick Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Wycliffe United Reformed  Church  Edgeworth  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Warrington  Community  Care  (Nurses 
Home) 8 Bewsey Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   125  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   133 ‐  135  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Wycliffe Memorial  Hall  Edgworth  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   12 & 14 Friars  Gate  Warrington  Unparished  
Sir Thomas  Boteler High  School  Grammar  School  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   29 Horsemarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   31 Horsemarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   33 Horsemarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   35 Horsemarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
311   715  Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Golden Lion PH  69 Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   674  Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Osborne Terrace 688 to 694  Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
St Barnabas  Church  Lovely Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
East Lodge (Warrington  Cemetery)   Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
West Lodge (Warrington  Cemetery)   Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
C of E Chapel (Warrington  Cemetery)   Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Shelter & W.C. ‐ Cemetery   Manchester  Road/Padgate  Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Entrance Gates  and Piers ‐ Cemetery   Manchester  Road/Padgate  Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Perimeter  Wall  to Cemetery   Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   1 Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   3 Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   5 Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   7 Manchster  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
   9 Manchester  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Patten Arms  Hotel  Parker Street  Warrington  Unparished  
St Benedicts  RC Church  Rhodes  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   349  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   351  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   353  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   355  Wilderspool   Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   357  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   359  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   361  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   363  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   365  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   367  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
   369  Wilderspool  Causeway   Warrington  Unparished  
Crosfield Conservatory   Bank Park, rear of Town Hall  Warrington  Unparished  
War Memorial   Bridge Foot  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Packet  House  P.H.  Bridge Street/Mersey  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Higher Seven Stars P.H.  87, Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Railway Building  Broad Arpley Lane, off Bridge Foot  Warrington  Unparished  
2‐10, Buttermarket  Street  Market  Gate  Warrington  Unparished  
   15 Cairo Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Former Palace Cinema  Friars  Gate  Warrington  Unparished  
1‐17, Raddon Place  Rear of Grange Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Railway P.H.  686, Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Co‐op store (former cinema)  Lovely Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Anzac War Memorial  ‐ Cemetery   Manchester  Road/Padgate  Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Former School  of Art‐North Cheshire 
College Museum Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Centre  Sport ‐ former gymnasium   Palmyra  Square South  Warrington  Unparished  
67 and 69 Sankey Street  Sankey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Central station  Winwick Street  Warrington  Unparished  
2‐34 Horsemarket  St. & 1‐9 
Buttermarket  St. Market  Gate  Warrington  Unparished  
MSC Warehouse  adjacent 131, Howley 
Lane Howley  Warrington  Unparished  
Former Emmanuel  Sunday School  School  Street/Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Latchford  House  Knutsford  Road near Powell Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Former Trustee Savings Bank  2, Rylands  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
67 & 69, Sankey  Street  Sankey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
312Corner building Arpley  Street  Junction of  Wilson Patten St. & 
Arpley St. Warrington  Unparished  
The  British Aluminium  Recreation  Club  Grange Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
Warrington  Bridge  Bridge Foot/Bridge  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Former shop ‐ Hepworths   Corner Market Gate & Bridge Street Warrington  Unparished  
Friars  Green Church  Cairo Street  Warrington  Unparished  
War Memorial   o/s Crosfields,  Liverpool  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Oakwood  Infants School  Oakwood  Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
Oakwood  Junior  School  Oakwood  Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
School  Tower  & Ancilliary  Building  Oakwood  Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
110 ‐ 128  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
32‐38 Facade  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Garnett  CWS Tower (Demolished)   Barbauld Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Rylands Old Pavilion Building  Gorsey Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Woodbine  Terrace  Grammar  School  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Laurels  Grammar  School  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Ex‐railway bridge  Knutsford  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Ex Baptist Chapel  Legh Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Crosfields  Offices  Liverpool  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Sloop P.H.  Liverpool  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Kendrick  Building ‐ Warrington  Hospital Lovely Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
St.Albans  War Memorial   Bewsey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Workhouse  ‐ General Hospital  Lovely Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Stone  Rear 19 Godfrey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Stone  Rear 60 Gorsey Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Stone  Rear 88 Gorsey Lane  Warrington  Unparished  
Orford Hall Gatepiers   Orford Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
Latchford  Conservative  Club  St.Marys Street  Latchford   Warrington  Unparished  
Central House  Central Way/Winwick  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Beamont  School  O'Leary Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Boundary  Wall  to Peninsula  Barracks  O'Leary Street  Warrington  Unparished  
122  to 126  Bridge Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Barns at Ford Farm  Eastford Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Richard Fairclough  School ‐ formerly   Wash Lane/Halla ‐Way  Warrington  Unparished  
Bolton Council School  Longdin Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Alderman  Bolton Infant School  Longdin Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Brook  House  Grammar  School  Road  Warrington  Unparished  
Former Vicarage  86 Orford Avenue  Warrington  Unparished  
   43 to 51 Sankey Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   2 to 6 Egypt Street  Warrington  Unparished  
Insurance  House  13 Arpley Street  Warrington  Unparished  
   14 to 32 Buttermarket  Street  Warrington  Unparished  
The  Swan Hotel  Golborne  Road  Winwick 
The  Elms  4 Golborne  Road  Winwick 
   17 Golborne  Road  Winwick 
The  Plough PH  Mill Lane  Winwick 
   14 Radley Lane  Winwick 
The  Cottage  Parkside  Road  Winwick 
Farm buildings  Delph Lane  Winwick 
Barn at rear of Coachmans  Cottage  Delph Lane  Winwick 
Southern  Waterworks  Cottage  Waterworks  Lane  Winwick 
Northern  Waterworks  Cottage  Waterworks  Lane  Winwick 
1 & 2 Waterworks  cottages  Delph Lane  Winwick 
2, Waterworks  Cottage  Delph Lane  Winwick 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
313Cross/Memorial  outside St.Oswalds  
Church Newton Road  Winwick 
Old Mounting  block outside St.Oswalds  
Church Newton Road  Winwick 
Church Walk Cottages  Church Walk  Winwick 
Former Methodist  Chapel  Golborne  Road, next to 37  Winwick 
The  Hermit Inn P.H.  Golborne  Road  Winwick 
Rose Mount  Terrace  Golborne  Road, next to Hermit Inn  Winwick 
Cop Holt Cottages  Newton Road  Winwick 
Newton Road Cottages  Newton Road  Winwick 
Pipers Hole Cottage  Parkside  Road  Winwick 
Monk House  Parkside  Road  Winwick 
Coach house  Rear of Swan Hotel, Golborne  Road  Winwick 
Boundary  Wall  Pilgrim Close o/s no.6  Winwick 
Gerosa Avenue  off Golborne  Road  Winwick 
Former cellar to Pipers Hall  off Golborne  Road  Winwick 
Former Winwick Hospital  boundary  
walls and gate piers Winwick Road  Winwick 
Hospital  houses and cottages  Hollins Lane  Winwick 
Winwick Hall (Hollins Park  Hospital)  Off Hollins Lane  Winwick 
Old part Winwick Primary School  Myddleton  Lane  Winwick 
Old Rectory  Rectory Lane  Winwick 
Oven  Back Farm  Winwick Lane  Winwick 
The  Terrace  Myddleton  Lane  Winwick 
Milestone   Golborne  Road o/s no.10  Winwick 
Milestone   o/s no.87 Winwick Road  Winwick 
Lodge  Delph Lane  Winwick 
No.4  Hollins Drive  Winwick 
Coachmans  Cottage  Delph Lane  Winwick 
C of E Mission School  Warren Lane  Woolston  
War Memorial   Weir  Lane  Woolston  
Milestone   Manchester  Road/ Redwood  Close  Woolston  
Woolston  Lodge  Weir  Lane  Woolston  
 
Scheduled  Ancient Monuments  
Name  Address 
Bank Quay Transporter  bridge  Bank Quay 
Barrow Old Hall  moated site  Barrow Hall Lane, Great Sankey 
Bewsey Old Hall moated site, fishpond and 
connecting  channel Sankey Valley Park, Bewsey 
Bradlegh Old Hall moated site and Fishpond   Bradley Lane,  north of Lumber  Lane , Burtonwood  
Bradley Hall moated site  South of Grappenhall  Lane/Cliffe  Lane junction, 
Appleton  
Lymm  Hall moated site and ice house  Rectory Lane, Lymm 
Rixton Old Hall moated site  South of Manchester  Road, Rixton 
Roman settlement  at Wilderspool  South of Loushers Lane, Warrington  
St. Oswald's Well  Off Parkside,  Winwick,  150  metres south of 
woodland  
Tumulus  Bowl Barrow  West of Highfield Lane and North of Myddleton  
Lane, Winwick 
Two Cockpits  125m west of Lymm  Hall, Rectory Lane,  Lymm 
Two sections of Roman Road between Appleton  and 
Stretton North and South of Stretton Road by Park  Royal 
Hotel 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
314Conservation  Areas 
Bewsey Street 
Bridge Street 
Buttermarket  Street 
Church Street 
Culcheth Newchurch  Hospital 
Grappenhall  Victoria Road/York  Drive 
Grappenhall  Village 
Greenalls  Brewery 
Lymm  Village 
Palmyra  Square 
Stockton Heath 
Stockton Heath ‐ Ackers Road/Marlborough  Crescent 
Thelwall Village 
Town Hall 
Walton Village 
Winwick Street 
 
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning policy & Programmes  
War rington Borough Council  
Growth Directorate  
East Annexe  
Town Hall  
Sankey Street  
Warrington WA1 1UH  
 
Tel: 01925 442826  
Email:  localplan@warrington.gov.uk  
Updated Proposed Submission Version Local Plan
316