STAGE 1: SCOPING AND CALL FOR SITES CONSULTATION
South Warwickshire   
LOCAL PLAN  MAY 2021South Warwickshire Local Plan2Summary
This consultation is the first stage in preparing the South Warwickshire Local Plan – a new Plan 
for Stratford-on-Avon and Warwick Districts. The new Local Plan will affect the way we live, work, 
visit and play in South Warwickshire to 2050. Stratford-on-Avon District Council and Warwick 
District Council are working together to prepare this Plan. Both Councils are also preparing other 
plans on specific topics relevant to their District. Those plans are entirely separate to this South 
Warwickshire Local Plan.
A Local Plan sets out the planning policies that the councils will use to assess applications for 
development and change of use as well as identifying (allocating) sites for new development 
proposals to meet our future development needs in terms of housing and job growth. We also want 
to use the South Warwickshire Local Plan to facilitate the provision of the necessary infrastructure 
to support this growth and to help us mitigate and adapt to climate change.
The first part of the document (chapters 1, 2 and 3) explains the context for preparing the Local 
Plan, the process for doing so and how you can get involved. 
Chapter 4 assesses the key strategic issues facing South Warwickshire centred on twelve 
sustainability themes.
Chapter 5 sets out a vision and overarching principles that will underpin the approach to the whole 
Plan as well as ten strategic objectives the Plan will need to achieve. The four overarching principles 
that will sit at the heart of the South Warwickshire Local Plan are: 
• Tackling climate change
• Promoting wellbeing 
• Improving connectivity 
• Increasing biodiversity  
Chapter 6 suggests seven growth options which consider where future development in South 
Warwickshire might go. No further development is not an option. At this first stage no detailed 
work has been undertaken to ascertain the suitability of these locations. We want to hear your 
views about these options to inform which locations we explore further. There are no right or wrong 
answers and each option generates different impacts and has a range of pros and cons. 
This Scoping and Call for Sites consultation is intended to start the conversation about the kind of 
place we want South Warwickshire to be in the future. We have included a glossary which explains 
some of the more technical / planning terms in Appendix 1 . The best way to share your views is to 
respond to the questions throughout this document. A full list of all the questions is in Appendix 2 . 
We are consulting now because we need to ensure that the plans for Stratford-on-Avon and 
Warwick Districts remain up to date. The Stratford-on-Avon Core Strategy is already 5 years old, 
and plans take a little while to prepare. We also need to rebuild the economy post COVID and the 
South Warwickshire Local Plan sets out how and where we will attract investment and create new 
jobs to grow and rebalance the local economy. Lastly, and most importantly, we need to have a 
plan that helps us move to Net Zero Carbon.
At the same time as consulting on this document, we are also running a ‘Call for Sites’ inviting 
suggestions for development and land use. Further information on the Call for Sites can be found 
in Section 3.7 and at Appendix 3.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 3Contents
4  1. How to get involved 
5  2. Introduction   
5  2.1 South Warwickshire Today
7  2.2 Process for preparing the Plan 
7  2.3 Next Steps 
9  2.4 Stakeholder Engagement 
10  3. About the Plan 
10  3.1 A new Local Plan for South Warwickshire 
10  3.2 Scope of the Plan
12  3.3 Plan Period
12  3.4 Relationship to other Plans and Strategies
15  3.5 Updating the evidence base
16  3.6 Assessing the impacts of the Plan
17  3.7 Call for Sites
18  4. Key Strategic Issues
20  4.1 People
22  4.2 Housing 
24  4.3 Design
28  4.4 Transport
32  4.5 Economy
40  4.6 Utilities
44  4.7 Resources
46  4.8 Land
50  4.9 Climate
54  4.10 Water
56  4.11 Health
58  4.12 Cultural
60  5. Vision and Strategic Objectives
60  5.1 Vision for the Local Plan
61  5.2 Vision for Places
62  5.3 Strategic Objectives
64  6. Options for Growth
64  6.1 How much Housing Growth do we need?
64  6.2 How much Job Growth do we need?
65  6.3 Purpose of the Options for Growth
66  6.4 Potential Options for Growth
85  6.5 Alternative Approaches to the Growth options
  Appendices
88  Appendix 1: Glossary
94  Appendix 2: List of Consultation Questions
97  Appendix 3: Call for Sites FormSouth Warwickshire Local Plan41. How to get involved
Comments on any aspect of this consultation document are invited. The period for submitting 
comments and for responding to the Call for Sites is between Monday 10 May 2021 and 5pm 
on Monday 21 June 2021 . Comments received after the deadline will not be considered. 
How to View the Consultation 
Website  - The consultation document and supporting information is available to view at  
www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp
Paper Copies  - Subject to changing restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,  
the document is also available to view at:
• Stratford-on-Avon District Council offices (Elizabeth House, Church Street,  
Stratford-upon-Avon, CV37 6HX) 
• Warwick District Council offices (Riverside House, Milverton Hill, Leamington Spa, CV32 5HZ) 
• Main public libraries across Stratford-on-Avon and Warwick Districts. Please check the COVID-19 
restriction at your local library before visiting. 
How to Comment 
Do it online - use the interactive document which allows you to click on specific sections and 
comment online at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp
Do it by email  - download and fill in a comment form and email it to either:
swlp@stratford-dc.gov.uk  or swlp@warwickdc.gov.uk 
Do it by post  - post your completed comment form to either:
Stratford-on-Avon District Council
Address: Elizabeth House, 
Church Street, 
Stratford-upon-Avon, CV37 6HX
Email:  swlp@stratford-dc.gov.uk  
Telephone:  01789 267575
Call for Sites
The Call for Sites form (Appendix 3) can be found separately at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp . 
Once downloaded and completed please submit via email. More information is available in section 
3.7 of this document.
If you have any queries regarding this document or the consultation please contact us at  
swlp@stratford-dc.gov.uk  or swlp@warwickdc.gov.uk . If you find the text in this document difficult to 
read, we may be able to supply it in a format better suited to your needs.Warwick District Council 
Address: Riverside House, 
Milverton Hill, 
Leamington Spa, CV32 5HZ
Email:  swlp@warwickdc.gov.uk
Telephone:  01926 456525 Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 52. Introduction
2.1  South Warwickshire Today
Located to the south of the West Midland’s conurbation, South Warwickshire covers 
488 square miles of predominately open countryside. Its 2019 population is estimated 
as just nearly 273,000 people representing some 47% of Warwickshire .
It has a dispersed settlement pattern, with the main towns of Royal Leamington Spa , Warwick, 
Stratford-upon-Avon , Kenilworth and Whitnash accompanied by smaller historic market towns 
such as Alcester, Henley-in-Arden, Shipston-on-Stour and Southam and well in excess of a 
hundred villages of varying size. Royal Leamington Spa (population 52,002) is the largest town 
followed by Warwick (population 32,623) and Stratford-upon-Avon (population 29,984). 
South Warwickshire includes parts of the following national landscape character 
areas, the most important of which being the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty, comprising approximately 8% of the total area of South Warwickshire):
• NCA Profile: 95 Northamptonshire Uplands - NE565  (naturalengland.org.uk)
• NCA Profile: 96 Dunsmore and Feldon - NE469  (naturalengland.org.uk)
• NCA Profile: 97 Arden - NE337  (naturalengland.org.uk)
• NCA Profile:106 Severn and Avon Vales  - NE336  (naturalengland.org.uk)
• NCA Profile:107. Cotswolds - NE420  (naturalengland.org.uk) 
South Warwickshire’s central geographic feature is the River Avon which flows northeast to 
southwest together with its tributaries of the Arrow, Dene, Leam and Stour being main rivers in 
their own right. Historically, the Fosse Way has been and remains an important route. 
South Warwickshire is traversed by the A46 which like the River Avon runs on a northeast – 
southwest axis. The M40, the Chiltern mainline railway and the route of High Speed 2 run on a 
southeast-northwest axis. Other key route corridors include the M42, A422, A425, A429, A435, 
A445 and A452.
Nearly a third of South Warwickshire is designated as part of the West Midlands Green Belt, 
designed to prevent the unplanned expansion of urban areas. 
South Warwickshire is home to several major businesses including the automotive brands of Aston 
Martin Lagonda and Jaguar Land Rover. The town of Stratford-upon-Avon is internationally 
famous as the birthplace of William Shakespeare attracting over 2 million visitors to the town alone. 
Warwick and Kenilworth, with their castles are also tourist destinations in their own right. In recent 
years, Royal Leamington Spa has reinvented itself from an eighteenth century spa town to the 
creative centre of the UK gaming industry. 
In 2019, some 83% of the working age population were economically active. Educational 
attainment is above both the West Midlands and national average. South Warwickshire is also 
home to the University of Warwick, and will be the location for one of two UK COVID ‘megalabs’, 
and is the preferred location for a battery ‘gigafactory’. South Warwickshire Local Plan6
South Warwickshire Key Diagram (as existing)
Figure 1 - South Warwickshire Key DiagramScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 72.2  Process for preparing the Plan
National Planning Policy
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out how Local Authorities should achieve 
sustainable development through the preparation of Local Plans and decisions on planning 
applications taking into account the economic, social and environmental roles of sustainable 
development. Local Plans are considered to be ‘sound’, where they have been:
• Positively prepared 
• Justified 
• Effective
• Consistent with national policy.
The preparation of the South Warwickshire Local Plan will be guided by national planning policy 
and legislation in this respect. The Local Plan will set out the strategic policies for development and 
at a later stage, will provide detailed policies on matters such as the design of development.
Stages in the Plan process
Figure 2 outlines the eight stages we are required to follow to prepare the South Warwickshire 
Local Plan. This Scoping and Call for Sites consultation is the first stage in the plan-making process. 
The timetable will be set out following feedback from this initial Scoping consultation. 
2.3  Next Steps
Following the Scoping and Call for Sites consultation, we will consider all of the responses 
received, along with other sources of evidence and information. We will make any amendments 
to the proposed scope of the Local Plan as necessary. We will then prepare an updated “Issues 
and Options” consultation document for the next stage of development of the Local Plan. This 
will propose more specific issues for the Plan to address, taking into account the consultation 
responses to this scoping document. In addition, it will identify some potential options as to how the 
South Warwickshire Local Plan could address these issues. 
Further rounds of consultation on the Local Plan will take place following this Scoping and Call 
for Sites Consultation, as summarised in Figure 2. When finished and formally adopted by both 
Council’s it will replace the equivalent policies in the adopted Stratford-on-Avon District Core 
Strategy and the Warwick District Local Plan. It can then be used to shape development and 
assess planning applications across the South Warwickshire Plan area. South Warwickshire Local Plan8Scoping and Call for Sites –  
public consultation (Reg 18)
Issues and Options –  
public consultation (Reg 18)
Preferred Options –  
public consultation (Reg 18)
Publication consultation (Reg 19)
Submission to the Secretary of State (Reg 22)
Examination (Reg 24)
Adoption (Reg 26)Consultation on proposed modificationsWe are here
Figure 2 - Stages in the South Warwickshire Local Plan process2STAGE 1  
STAGE 2  
STAGE 3  
STAGE 4  
STAGE 5
STAGE 6
STAGE 7
STAGE 8  
2The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 (legislation.gov.uk)  as amended Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 92.4  Stakeholder Engagement
The meaningful involvement of local communities, businesses and other interested parties in the 
preparation of the Local Plan will ensure that a wide variety of views can be taken into account.  
We have set up a number of discussion groups and forums that will operate at key stages 
throughout the Plan-making process so that we can capture as many views as possible. The 
purpose of these groups is threefold:
• to keep stakeholders informed of progress on the South Warwickshire Local Plan
• to seek a steer on key aspects of the Plan as it progresses ahead of any formal public 
consultation on the South Warwickshire Local Plan
• to enable stakeholders to keep us informed of their plans and strategies
To help prepare the South Warwickshire Local Plan, the following 
stakeholder groups have been established:
• Business Forum
• Citizens Forum
• Developer Forum
• Green & Blue Infrastructure Partnership
• Infrastructure Partnership
• Parish Forums
• Place Board
• Youth Forum
Preparation of the South Warwickshire Local Plan is being led by an advisory group comprising 
District Councillors from both Stratford-on-Avon and Warwick District Councils.
In January 2021 we ran a series of sessions with these groups to provide an overview and to invite 
initial thoughts on the scope of this consultation document. The views gained from these sessions 
have been taken into account as much as possible in preparing this document.
The preparation of the Local Plan is also subject to a ‘Duty to Co-operate’ requirement. This means 
we need to engage with other strategic policy-making authorities to ensure that relevant strategic 
and cross boundary issues are considered. In order to help identify the key issues that the Local 
Plan will need to address we have undertaken some early engagement with our strategic partners.
Both the Stratford-on-Avon District Council Statement of Community Involvement and the Warwick 
District Council Statement of Community Involvement set out how and when we will consult during 
the preparation of the Local Plan. 
Stratford-on-Avon District Council Statement of Community Involvement -  
www.stratford.gov.uk/sci  
Warwick District Council Statement of Community Involvement –  
www.warwickdc.gov.uk/sci
 South Warwickshire Local Plan103.1  A new Local Plan for South Warwickshire
A Local Plan is a legal document that councils are required to prepare, and which sets 
out the future land use and planning policies for the area over a set period of time.
A Local Plan typically corresponds to the boundaries of local planning authorities e.g. Stratford-
on-Avon District Council and Warwick District Council. Both Councils have committed to 
undertaking reviews (i.e. replacements) of their existing respective Core Strategy and Local Plan. 
The Stratford-on-Avon Core Strategy runs to 2031 and the Warwick District Local Plan runs to 
2029. New plans are needed to plan for the development challenges beyond these dates. 
Aside from the common history of being within Warwickshire, Stratford-on-Avon District 
and Warwick District have similar economies, demographics and face common challenges. 
Many of these challenges such as climate change, biodiversity and infrastructure, do 
not stop at the District boundaries. Plan-making is also expensive. We think preparing 
a single plan for a larger geography will be both more effective and efficient. 
We think that we should prepare a single Local Plan for the whole of South Warwickshire.
This work is being done in advance of any formal merger between Stratford-on-Avon and 
Warwick District Councils. It is entirely separate to the proposal that sees Stratford-on-Avon 
and Warwick District Councils becoming one single organisation. Many councils across the 
country work together on joint plans for their areas e.g. South Worcestershire Development 
Plan, Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan. A single South Warwickshire Local Plan could still 
be prepared therefore, even if the merger between the two councils were not to go ahead.
Q1. Do you agree that we should prepare a Local Plan for South Warwickshire?  
If not, why not?  
3.2  Scope of the Plan
The scope is the content of the Plan and what planning policies it should contain. 
Rather than prepare a single comprehensive plan, we think we should 
break the plan-making process into at least two separate parts. 
• Development Strategy and Strategic Policies (Part 1)
• Detailed Policies and specific site allocations 
Part 1 will establish a robust and flexible framework, setting out where and how much 
development should take place across South Warwickshire. It will include the core principles 
and strategic policies that can provide the context for more detailed policies to follow. Figure 
3 shows the different scales at which planning and plan-making operate, and how policies 
can relate to individual buildings right up to whole areas such as South Warwickshire.3. About the PlanScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 11This approach will enable us to prepare the first part of the Local Plan much more quickly. This 
will provide clarity and certainty to communities and landowners. It will also ensure that we can 
continue to pro-actively manage development pressures facing South Warwickshire. Such an 
approach – splitting strategic policies from detailed policies - also enables a flexible approach 
to those remaining more detailed aspects of plan-making. Firstly, it provides a clearer and more 
meaningful context for neighbourhood plans to establish detailed policies on issues of local 
importance to residents within the overall framework for growth established by Part 1. Secondly, 
it would allow for other local plans to deal with detailed or specific policies and be prepared on 
the most appropriate geography – whether South Warwickshire, district, or local area (e.g. town 
and its rural hinterland). For example, a particular local issue in Royal Leamington Spa, but not 
necessarily South Warwickshire, is the need to manage purpose built student accommodation. 
 In summer 2020 the Government consulted on a package of proposals for fundamental reform 
of the planning system through the ‘Planning for the Future’ White Paper . Whilst we don’t yet know 
the full extent of the changes or when they will be implemented, the Government has advised us to 
carry on with preparing our Local Plan. The creation of a high-level plan means we are more able 
to respond to changes when they are enacted, reducing the risk of wasting time and resources.
Q2. Do you agree with our approach of starting with a high-level, strategic part 1 
Local Plan? If not, why not?BuildingStreetNeighbourhoodTown / ParishSouth Warwickshire
PART 1
Figure 3 – Different Scales of Plan-makingSouth Warwickshire Local Plan123.3  Plan Period
The plan period is the length of time the policies in the Local Plan should remain valid for. 
We think the Plan should run to 2050 and establish a flexible, robust and long-lasting framework 
for development across South Warwickshire. 
National planning policy requires local plans to cover at least 15 years. Proposed changes to 
national policy  suggest that plans can run for up to 30 years. By planning over a longer time period, 
we will be able to align more easily with infrastructure providers who typically take a longer-term 
view on investment decisions. This will help ensure that new developments are supported by the 
necessary improvements in infrastructure. 2050 is also the date of the Government’s goal to 
achieve a 100% reduction in net greenhouse gas emissions (relative to 1990 levels).
Q3. Do you agree that the Local Plan should run to 2050? If not, what alternative 
end date do you suggest and why? 
3.4  Relationship to other Plans and Strategies
Local Plans
The South Warwickshire Local Plan will replace the strategic policies in the existing Stratford-on-
Avon Core Strategy and Warwick Local Plan. Remaining policies in these plans will continue to 
have effect until they are superseded in due course. For example, policies in the Warwick Local Plan 
relating to purpose-built student accommodation and houses in multiple occupation (HMO).
Both Councils are, individually, also preparing several other local planning documents (e.g. 
Stratford-on-Avon’s Site Allocations Plan and Warwick’s Climate Change Local Plan). Whilst 
there is some overlap, these plans tackle very specific planning issues; they do not address the 
fundamental issues relating to the development strategy or the housing and job requirements nor 
do they cover a plan period up to 2050. 
It is both Council’s current intentions to continue to prepare these plans alongside the preparation 
of the South Warwickshire Local Plan.
Find out more about these other local plans at:
www.stratford.gov.uk/corestrategy
www.warwickdc.gov.uk/planningpolicyScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 13Neighbourhood Plans
Neighbourhood plans are prepared by Parish Councils or Neighbourhood Forums. A number of 
communities across South Warwickshire have taken the opportunity to prepare a neighbourhood plan 
for their area. The strategic context for these plans is set by the Stratford-on-Avon Core Strategy and 
Warwick Local Plan (as appropriate).
The new South Warwickshire Local Plan will establish a new strategic context to 2050 and 
communities may wish to review their neighbourhood plans accordingly. Importantly, however, 
much of the detailed content of neighbourhood plans won’t be affected by Part 1 of the new South 
Warwickshire Local Plan and policies set out in neighbourhood plans will continue to be relevant. 
Neighbouring Authorities’ Plans
South Warwickshire sits in the wider West Midlands region, and in preparing the South Warwickshire 
Local Plan we need to take into account the plans and strategies of a number of neighbouring 
authorities, including the West Midlands Combined Authority (WMCA) and Warwickshire County 
Council, including the Local Transport Plan. 
Of particular relevance will be the emerging Local Plans for Birmingham and Coventry City Councils, 
as South Warwickshire sits within both the Coventry & Warwickshire and Birmingham & Black Country 
housing market areas. Helping address any shortfalls in housing from these areas will be a key 
challenge for the Local Plan. South Warwickshire also sits astride the wider M40 corridor. The South 
Warwickshire Local Plan will need to take into account any economic and functional relationships along 
this corridor. 
Infrastructure Providers
The South Warwickshire Local Plan will also need to take account of the plans and proposals of 
infrastructure providers, to ensure that new development is supported by the necessary infrastructure. 
Using the approach set out in Section 2.4 we are working with infrastructure providers in the 
preparation of the Local Plan. Key plans and strategies we are taking account  
of include:
• Regional Energy Strategy for the West Midlands 2018
• West Midlands Local Transport Plan: Movement for Growth  
• The West Midlands Rail Investment Strategy  
• WM2041 Action Plan – A Programme for Implementing an Environmental Recovery  
• West Midlands Key Route Network Studies  
• West Midlands Combined Authority Design Charter  
• West Midlands Local Industrial Strategy (2019)  
• West Midlands Regional Tourism Strategy 2019-2029  
• Warwickshire, Coventry and Solihull Green Infrastructure Strategy2013
• Coventry & Warwickshire Local Enterprise Partnership: Strategic Economic Plan 2016)  
• Coventry & Warwickshire Local Enterprise Partnership Strategic Reset Framework 2020  
• Warwickshire County Council Local Transport Plan 2011-2026  
• Warwickshire County Council Local Transport Plan – key themes consultation  
• Warwickshire County Council Annual Education Sufficiency Update (September 2020)  
• Warwickshire County Council Visitor Accommodation Futures 
Study and Development Action Plan 2019  South Warwickshire Local Plan14• Warwickshire County Council Heritage and Culture Strategy 2020-2025  
• Warwickshire County Council Public Health Draft Health & Well-being Strategy 2020  
• Place Based Needs Assessments (All Areas in South Warwickshire – dates range from February 
2019-July 2020)  
• Environment Agency River Severn River Basin Management Plan 2015
• Severn Trent Water Resources Management Plan 2019
• Shakespeare’s England Destination Management Plan (2018) and covers the period  
2015-2025  
Community Infrastructure Levy
Both Stratford-on-Avon and Warwick District Councils charge a Community Infrastructure Levy 
or CIL on new development. Monies obtained from CIL are then spent by each Council on key 
infrastructure projects that help support new development within each District. Given that we 
are proposing a single Local Plan for South Warwickshire, it makes sense to operate a single 
CIL charging regime to ensure that the growth set out in the South Warwickshire Local Plan is 
accompanied by the necessary infrastructure across South Warwickshire, and that it can be 
funded in a consistent and co-ordinated way.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 153.5  Updating the evidence base
Any plan must be based on up to date and robust evidence. The existing Stratford-on-Avon District 
Core Strategy and Warwick District Local Plan were adopted a number of years ago. The evidence 
base upon which they were based now needs to be reviewed. 
In addition to using existing and emerging information as well as studies produced by a wide range 
of our partner organisations, preparing a new Local Plan for South Warwickshire provides the 
opportunity to gather land-use planning evidence for the whole South Warwickshire area. There 
may also be opportunities for some information to be collected and applied across the wider 
Coventry and Warwickshire area. Work is ongoing to determine the best option for updating the 
data to inform the Local Plan.
We think the following new evidence is needed to support the South Warwickshire Local Plan:
• Biodiversity & Green Infrastructure Assessment
• Economic Needs Assessment (including Retail, Leisure and Tourism)
• Habitats Regulations Assessment
• Housing Needs Assessment
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Landscape Character Assessment 
• Settlement Design Analysis
• Site Delivery & Viability Studies
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
• Strategic Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment
• Transport Assessment
• Water Cycle Study
Depending upon the outcomes of some of this new evidence, it may be necessary to undertake a 
review of the Green Belt so that we can consider whether any land should be removed or added to 
the existing Green Belt to best meet future development needs within South Warwickshire.
The South Warwickshire Local Plan will also need to take into account approaches set out in both 
Council’s existing strategies, such as the Housing Strategy and the Industrial Strategy. 
Q4. Do you agree that this is the right evidence that we need to inform the Local 
Plan? Is there further evidence that you think will be required?South Warwickshire Local Plan163.6  Assessing the impacts of the Plan
It is important that we consider the effects of the South Warwickshire Local Plan as it evolves, to 
make sure that it minimises any adverse impacts and optimises the positive effects. There are a 
number of ways this will be done. The impact assessments undertaken to inform this scoping and 
call for sites consultation are available to view at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp
Sustainability Appraisal 
The purpose of a Sustainability Appraisal and Strategic Environmental Assessment (also known as 
SA/SEA) is to assess the extent to which a local plan will help to achieve relevant environmental, 
economic and social objectives. It is required to be produced for the new South Warwickshire Local 
Plan. For this initial scoping and call for sites consultation, however, we have undertaken an initial 
high-level assessment of potential positive and negative effects of the options for growth (see 
Section 6) in relation to the 12 sustainability themes set out in Section 5.
Climate Change Impact Assessment
The importance of addressing Climate change is amplified in Government Legislation. This is set 
out Compulsory Purchase Act (S19 1A) (as amended 2008) and within the 2008 Planning and 
Energy Act. In order to maximise opportunities for climate change adaptation and mitigation, 
and to meet net zero carbon targets, it is critical that the evolving Local Plan is informed by 
assessments of its impact on climate change. To support this scoping consultation, an assessment 
of the options for growth (see Section 6) has been undertaken to assess their potential impacts on 
climate change.
Health Impact Assessment
To identify and optimise the health and wellbeing impacts of plans, a Health Impact Assessment 
considers how people and their health can be at the heart of the planning process. The assessment 
will be used to inform the content of the South Warwickshire Local Plan to address the barriers and 
enablers for creating healthy places. We are working in conjunction with public health officers at 
Warwickshire County Council to produce a Health Impact Assessment for the South Warwickshire 
Local Plan. There are a number of stages in the production of the assessment. An initial screening 
assessment on this scoping and call for sites consultation document has been undertaken.
Equalities Impact Assessment 
The purpose of an Equalities Impact Assessment is to ensure that strategies and policies contribute 
towards eliminating discrimination, promoting equality and fostering good relations. An initial 
screening assessment has been prepared for this scoping and call for sites consultation document. 
Q5. Do you have any comments on the impact assessments that accompany the 
South Warwickshire Local Plan?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 173.7  Call for Sites 
As well as setting out planning policies that will apply to development proposals, the South 
Warwickshire Local Plan will also meet our development needs by identifying new sites for 
development, and protecting existing sites, as appropriate. 
To help us do this we are issuing a ‘call for sites’. This is an opportunity to submit site suggestions for 
development and land use for consideration through the South Warwickshire Local Plan process. 
Sites deemed suitable may then be allocated in the plan. 
We only want to hear about sites that are larger than 0.4 hectares / 1 acre in size (for example 
will provide more than 10 homes or equivalent).
Q6. Please tell us about specific sites you wish to promote for: 
Q6a. Housing
Q6b. Employment / Industrial / Commercial 
Q6c. Retail
Q6d. Leisure / Community
Q6e. Gypsies and Travellers
Q6f. Open Space / Biodiversity / Green Infrastructure
Q6g. Utilities / Infrastructure (inc. renewable energy)
Q6h. Other uses
Please provide a map to accompany your suggestion clearly showing the  
boundaries of the site. 
Y ou do not need to tell us about sites you wish to retain for agricultural use. 
Please use the form at Appendix 3 to provide as much information as possible.
Please note: submitting a site to us does not guarantee that it will be allocated. The sites 
have to be subject to a technical assessment first. Even those that are deemed suitable 
following the technical assessment may not necessarily be allocated for development. 
Allocation for development will also depend on a range of policy and practical 
considerations, some of which may be unique to the requirements of South Warwickshire. 
In other words, the technical assessment will provide information on the range of sites 
potentially available to meet needs, but it’s for the Local Plan process itself to determine 
which of those sites are the most suitable and deliverable for a particular use. South Warwickshire Local Plan18People
Housing
DesignTransportUtilitiesResources
Land
ClimateW
aterCultural
Sustainable
Communities -
Living within
environmental limits
(Zero Carbon)
and improving
quality of lifeBuiltEnvironmentalEconomic
NaturalEnvironmentalSocial
IncreasingsenseIncreasingProsperityIncreasingBiodiversityIncreasingWellbeingofPlacePeople
Housing
esignTransportCultural
W
aterHealth
SustainableCommunitiesBuiltEnvironmental
Social
IncreasingSense IncreasingQuality
ofPlace of
lifeTourism
Culture
Water QualityLeisure &Recreation
Heritage
Education
Healthcare
Wellbeing (Mental
& Physical health)
Tranquillity
Air Quality
Water Supply
Flooding
Marine and
Coasts
Temperature
Climate
Change
Wildlife and
Species
Habitats
Landscape
Setting
Land Use
ContaminationGeology &SoilsAgriculture& Food
ForestryMineralsWaste &
RecyclingEnergyTelecommsBusiness
& IndustryInnovation& SkillsLocal Economy& JobsRetailing &
Town CentresHighways
& ParkingTransport
& FreightPassenger
TransportAccessibility and
ActiveTravelWalking and
CyclingStreets and
SpacesArchitecture and
Urban Design (Density)BuildingStandardsHabitation&AmenityHousing
MixSupply &AffordabilitySpecialistAccommodationDemographics
Safety
EqualityCommunity
Economy
UtilitiesResourcesLandClimateEconomic Natural
Environmental In
rceasingProsperity
IncreasingBiodiversityD
c
Figure 4 - Wheel of Sustainability4. Key Strategic Issues
Plan-making is important because it affects how we live our lives. Its ultimate goal is to create 
sustainable communities by ensuring that development needs are met in the context of achieving 
positive impacts for the environment, the economy and society. We have devised the Wheel of 
Sustainability to demonstrate the full spectrum of issues that the Plan, to varying degrees, will seek 
to address. 
Within each of these twelve sustainability themes we have explained what we think the key issues 
are and why that is the case, and set out the questions that we want you to help us answer.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 19
South Warwickshire Local Plan20
PeopleScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 214.1  Key Strategic Issues: People
We think…
Social isolation and loneliness can affect everyone, with some groups being more at risk 
than others, particularly those living in rural areas. As well as accessibility to key services and 
employment opportunities being an issue for some people, digital exclusion is increasingly a key 
factor in economic disadvantage and social isolation. The South Warwickshire Local Plan should 
address these issues by encouraging connectivity throughout developments and ensuring that 
key infrastructure, such as broadband, safe walking and cycling routes, and green space, is in 
place to support this. This will ensure people have access to facilities in their communities such as 
local groups, youth facilities, and community events all of which help to keep people connected. 
Development should seek to accommodate all user needs to provide healthy and inclusive 
communities, encourage independent living and allow people to maintain a high quality of life. 
The quality, condition and affordability of housing is important because problems with these can 
lead to health issues.
Why?
Nearly a third of people within Warwickshire live in rural areas that typically have poor public 
transport links, which makes it difficult for them to access services. Over one in three of the 
population over the age of 65 report they are lonely some or all of the time. Younger people are 
also more likely to report that they are lonely.
Those living in more deprived areas are more likely to have a lack of green space, to experience 
poor air quality and live in poorer quality housing.
The 2019 estimated population of South Warwickshire is nearly 273,000 people which 
represents 47% of Warwickshire. The population is expected to grow by some 57,500 by 2043 
representing 53% of the expected growth for Warwickshire as a whole over the same period. The 
age cohorts of this expected population growth will have a huge impact on planning for South 
Warwickshire, not just in terms of the size of homes we build but also the type of homes we build 
as well as in the provision of services such as education, health and social care.
Warwickshire has an increasingly older population and a higher level of homelessness than other 
areas in the UK. The prevalence of dementia in all ages is higher than the national average in 
the South Warwickshire Clinical Commissioning Group area which includes both Warwick and 
Stratford Districts.
Q7. Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should address social 
isolation and loneliness? How should this be done?
Q8. Do you agree with encouraging connectivity and ensuring key infrastructure is 
in place to support this? How should this be done? South Warwickshire Local Plan22
HousingScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 234.2  Key Strategic Issues: Housing
We think…
The affordability of housing across South Warwickshire is a key issue, particularly affecting the ability 
of younger people to get onto the housing ladder and for people who work in the area to live locally. 
This is a particular concern for those on lower incomes such as employees in the hospitality sectors. 
As well as tenure, the size of new homes is important, both in terms of the number of bedrooms and 
the size (i.e. square metres) of the home itself. Ensuring a mix of bedroom sizes provides choice in the 
market. 
Different sectors of the population also require different types of housing and we recognise 
that there is no ‘one size fits all’. The South Warwickshire Local Plan needs to cater for the full 
range of groups, whether older people, students, families, single people, people with disabilities, 
vulnerable people as well as specific communities such as Gypsies and Travellers, all of whom have 
development needs that we need to meet. An additional group of people whose needs we need to 
cater for, are those who wish to build their own homes.
Why?
Through the Local Plan we can ensure that a proportion of homes are built as affordable homes. 
However, the tenure (i.e. rented, shared ownership) of such homes is of critical importance and 
needs to reflect local circumstances and local house prices. Many first time buyers cannot afford the 
required deposit to obtain a mortgage, for example. 
One and two-bedroom homes are generally cheaper and therefore more affordable to first-time 
buyers and young families. Separately, ensuring that homes are built big-enough for our current and 
future needs has particular resonance recently, with the need for many of us to work from home in 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This trend is likely to continue; having dedicated space to work 
from home will be increasingly important in the future. The number of bedrooms is also important 
in respect of affordable tenures, with housing associations requiring flexibility of accommodation. 
Two-bedroom four person accommodation, as opposed to two-bedroom three person homes, is a 
common requirement. 
We have an ageing population; the demand for suitable accommodation that is purpose-built or 
able to be easily adapted (e.g. step-free access and floors, wet-rooms, doorways and turning space 
for wheelchairs etc) will increase. Such accommodation could be specialist where support services 
are provided onsite (e.g. extra care) or even simply suitable homes that encourage independent 
living. Bungalows, for example, remain a popular option. The aging population also has implications 
for accessibility to services and the provision of health services and facilities as older people 
generally have a disproportionate impact on the health service.
But we need to cater for all groups in society; not just older people. Those with disabilities; homeless 
people who may need specialist hostel accommodation as opposed to their own home; vulnerable 
people, students, and groups such as Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who may 
not require ‘bricks and mortar’ accommodation, all have needs that the South Warwickshire Local 
Plan needs to accommodate. In terms of self-build and custom-build, there are separate legal 
requirements requiring us to ensure that an adequate number of plots are provided for over the life 
of the plan. 
Q9. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to address these issues? If not, 
what is your alternative? Are there any particular approaches that we should 
consider? You may wish to cross refer to Question 42 to answer this question.South Warwickshire Local Plan24
DesignScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 254.3  Key Strategic Issues: Design
We think…
Strategic design principles have a role to play in informing locations for growth.  
These principles include:
• Connectivity – the number of potential connection points to the established movement network 
(prioritising opportunities for active and sustainable travel). Potential directions or locations for 
growth with insufficient connection opportunities in terms of number and/or quality would not 
be considered favourably.
• Barriers - the existence or otherwise of barriers to connectivity (a severance effect) – for 
example a railway line or a strategic road which would need to be crossed.
• Character and identity of place and its setting – this could include matters such as landscape 
setting, views and vistas, established street patterns and urban grain.
• Green and blue infrastructure – (i.e. parks, public open spaces, rivers and canals) opportunities 
for connections to the benefit of communities and the natural environment.
Connectivity transcends most of the strategic issues outlined in this chapter. The Local Plan will 
consider connectivity at all scales (see Table 1 below), both in considering the most appropriate 
locations for growth, and in defining strategic design principles for any sites subsequently allocated.
Scale Why?
To/from South Warwickshire in national and 
international contextTo be accessible for business, culture and 
tourism to the benefit of the local economy
South Warwickshire in a regional context As above
Between settlements within South 
WarwickshireExamine active and sustainable travel choices 
between different places for residents and 
visitors to access cultural, leisure and business 
or retail facilities.
Ensure that strategic growth is directed to 
well-connected places and/or that it has the 
potential to enhance interconnectivity.Table 1 – considering connectivity at different scalesSouth Warwickshire Local Plan26Within/across settlements: The overarching rationale is to ensure 
that any strategic growth is directed to 
the most connected locations (by active 
and sustainable travel), especially where 
that growth is peripheral to the existing 
settlement.
• Access to town centres Strategic connections to town centres 
in recognition of their current and future 
roles, whilst not generating congestion and 
associated issues.
• Access to the edge Potential strategic links to other settlements 
(e.g., cycle links) and leisure access to the 
countryside.
Neighbourhood scale (both linking into 
existing neighbourhoods or the potential 
creation of new neighbourhoods)Walkable and cyclable places are connected 
places. Strategic expansion or creation should 
ensure permeable street networks for active 
travel modes in particular.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 27Why?
Well-connected towns, settlements and neighbourhoods can3:
• Strengthen community cohesion 
• Make shops and facilities more viable
• Encourage walking and cycling
• Reduce vehicle emissions
• Encourage natural surveillance to create safer communities
• Enhance land values and encourage investment in communities
Connectivity, therefore, is a core strategic design theme, as well as a proposed overarching 
principle of the Local Plan. Street layouts and connections are generally one of the most enduring 
elements of our built environment. They are incredibly difficult if not virtually impossible to alter 
significantly once delivered. Street pattern is also a key determinant of character. 
The Plan will recognise and embed the ‘10 characteristics of well designed places’ set out in the 
National Design Guide  insofar as they relate to the strategic nature of the Plan. ‘Movement’ is one 
of these characteristics, as is ‘context’ and place ‘identity’ . These three characteristics/principles 
should guide locations and directions for growth, in addition to the detailed design of any future 
proposals.
Whilst high quality developments can cost more to design and build, these costs can be 
recovered through increased sales and land values. High quality neighbourhoods can also attract 
additional investment into the area creating a spiral of improvement.
Q10. Do you agree that the strategic design principles above should inform 
directions/locations for growth? If not, why not?
Q11. Do you agree with the emphasis on connectivity? If not, why not?
3See for example, The Value of Urban Design , Ministry for the Environment, New Zealand – synthesises international 
research on connectivity and other key urban design aspirationsSouth Warwickshire Local Plan28
TransportScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 294.4  Key Strategic Issues: Transport 
We think…
Transport, and access to transport, impacts on a wide range of issues including those related to 
the environment, personal wellbeing and the economy. It is a critical consideration in facilitating 
sustainable growth in the area.
Connectivity is central to the issue of transport, and is discussed under the design issue above. The 
emphasis on connected places is targeted primarily at improving opportunities for active travel, 
and a combination of active and sustainable travel, aimed at reducing regular reliance on private 
vehicles. As part of this, the specific needs of dispersed settlements, and enhancing rural-urban 
linkages will be important considerations.
An increase in the number of people working from home and flexible working may change both 
existing transport patterns and peak commuting times. The extent of the long-term impact of 
current trends remains to be seen, but the Local Plan will explore and respond as appropriate.
Town centre transport strategies will be considered, including encouraging people out of cars for 
their ‘last mile’ of travel in order to reduce congestion. These strategies are explored further in 
Section 4.5.
Warwickshire County Council is preparing a new Local Transport Plan to replace the existing Local 
Transport Plan 2011-2026. This will form an important part of the overall transport strategy 
context for the South Warwickshire Local Plan.
Active travel
The Local Plan should prioritise active travel modes, including walking and cycling. This recognises 
the benefits of active travel to the physical and mental health of communities, as well as reducing 
vehicular congestion and associated pollution.
To prioritise active travel, the Local Plan will seek to:
• Optimise the number and quality of connections at different scales (see Section 4.3)
• Use the strategic green infrastructure network and identify opportunities to expand it.
• Ensure that all new growth is designed as walkable neighbourhoods, with an appropriate 
connected street pattern, and conveniently located local services.
• Set out principles for the delivery of streets and public realm that are safe and attractive to use, 
and that encourage people to linger so that they may also act as social spaces. South Warwickshire Local Plan30Public transport/sustainable travel
Reducing the need for the use of private vehicles may include improving existing public transport 
links, including rail and bus services. The location of new development should be considered as a 
factor in making the best use of the existing public transport infrastructure. 
A lack of access to public/active transport options can increase isolation by reducing access to 
employment and services, and can have significant impacts on congestion and levels of air and 
noise pollution. It is important to consider how rural-urban linkages may be enhanced, taking into 
account the dispersed settlement pattern of much of the area.
Private vehicles
There will be circumstances where the use of private vehicles will still be necessary. We will explore 
ways, however, in which the uptake of low-emission and electric vehicles can be encouraged. This is 
expanded upon further in the section below.
Transport for business
Enhancing the connectivity and accessibility of the infrastructure network is critical to enabling 
economic growth and improving productivity in the area. The Local Plan will explore how best to 
accommodate freight and commuting transport whilst reducing carbon emissions and congestion. 
This may include for example, providing for ‘last mile’ delivery hubs. The interconnections of South 
Warwickshire as part of the wider regional and national transport network will be considered. 
Why?
Transport, and specifically vehicular transport represents the biggest proportion of our carbon 
emissions nationally and locally. It is important, therefore, to the application of the overarching 
principles and the achievement of the strategic objectives of the South Warwickshire Local Plan, 
that it seeks opportunities to encourage other modes of travel and provides opportunities to 
encourage electric and low-emission vehicles across South Warwickshire. 
Transport however plays a significant role in the economy of South Warwickshire, and in connecting 
people and places. This requires a balanced approach. Transport strategies will need to take into 
account the requirements of different groups of transport users and different types of journey. 
The existing settlement pattern of the area will also need to be considered, as well as how best 
the linkages, both internally within South Warwickshire, and as part of the wider regional transport 
network, might be enhanced.
Q12. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to explore ways in which 
the reliance on the private vehicle may be reduced? If not, why not?
Q13. Do you agree that enhancing connectivity and prioritising active and 
sustainable travel are the best ways to achieve this? Please explain your answer.
Q14. Are there any additional transport issues or priorities you think 
that the Local Plan should address? Please explain your answer. Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 31We think...
Embracing technologies in transport, such as electric and hydrogen vehicles and e-bikes, can 
have multiple benefits both to individuals and to wider society. These benefits include reducing 
carbon emissions, improving air quality, and providing a greater range of transport options. 
New petrol and diesel cars will be banned from sale in the UK from 2030. It is important, 
therefore, for the Local Plan to provide the infrastructure, such as electric vehicle charging 
points, that are required to support the increased uptake of electric and other low-emission cars, 
freight and passenger transport vehicles in South Warwickshire. 
Why?
Vehicle Licensing Statistics from the Department for Transport show that the number of Ultra-
Low Emission Vehicles in the UK has already increased from just under 9,000 at the end of 
Q1 2010 to 317,000 by the end of Q2 2020. These figures will grow considerably due to the 
Government ban on the sale of new petrol and diesel cars from 2030. It is important, therefore, 
that we have the infrastructure necessary to support the increase in electric and other  
low-emission vehicles on the road.
It is anticipated that low-emission technologies will grow in importance not just in relation to 
private cars, but also for freight transport and public transport vehicles such as zero-emission 
buses. In addition to electric vehicles, the Plan should also embrace other forms of low-emission 
vehicles, such as hydrogen-fuelled vehicles, and be able to adapt to future technologies that 
may also emerge.
Active travel such as walking and cycling provides a range of benefits for both individuals and 
society, including reduced congestion, improved health and better air quality. These forms of 
transport are not, however, always practical for longer distances and for all groups of people. 
E-bikes can encourage people to use these methods of transport for shorter distances instead of 
private cars. These forms of transport are more likely to be appropriate in the larger towns of the 
Local Plan’s area rather than the smaller towns and its many rural villages. 
Warwickshire County Council’s proposed new Local Transport Plan 4 will form an important part 
of the overall transport strategy context for the South Warwickshire Local Plan.
Q15. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to improve infrastructure, such 
as charging points, for electric vehicles and e-bikes? Please explain your answer.
Q16. Are there any other ways you think the Local Plan could encourage the 
increased uptake of electric and other low-emission vehicles? Please explain  
your answer.South Warwickshire Local Plan32
EconomyScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 334.5  Key Strategic Issues: Economy
We think…
There is a need to nurture employment growth and to ensure that there are a range of 
employment opportunities in accessible locations.
Providing a diverse range of employment opportunities in the area can enable growth by 
providing increased resilience to the local economy, and assist in increasing the retention of 
residents in the area. The Local Plan should encourage businesses across a diverse range of 
sectors, including those within the ‘green economy’ to provide for sustainable economic growth.
Many Stratford-on-Avon residents currently have to commute out of the District, as many of the 
jobs available within the District are low wage tourism or hospitality jobs. Both Stratford-on-Avon 
and Warwick District areas have ageing populations that could pose future challenges in terms of 
labour supply. Some sectors, such as the night-time economy, require custom from local residents 
to survive year-round, in particular supported by the retention of young people living within the 
area. The Local Plan should address these issues as part of its wider economic strategy.
Focussing development in existing locations where they are most accessible can improve 
employment opportunities, can help to reduce congestion, and can enable clusters of industries 
to arise that can in turn increase productivity and drive growth. It is acknowledged, however, that 
much of the South Warwickshire area is rural. New rural businesses should be encouraged where 
they are considered to be appropriate in scale, nature and location.
As part of the Local Plan’s evidence base, an Employment Land Study will be undertaken  
to determine the area’s employment land requirements. It will decide where future  
employment developments may best be accommodated to support the economic growth  
of South Warwickshire.
Why?
South Warwickshire currently has a number of particular economic strengths in a range 
of different sectors. Some of the most important industries to the local economy include 
the automotive sector, advanced manufacturing and engineering, the computer games 
and software industry, tourism and hospitality, retail, heritage and culture, education, 
research and development, and agriculture. The Midlands’ ‘Golden Triangle’ – the area 
within the M42, M1 and M6 - is one of the most important economic areas in the UK. It has 
a high demand for business space and possesses competitive advantages in advanced 
manufacturing and engineering and logistics. The South Warwickshire Local Plan area is 
well placed to capitalise on its locational proximity to this area of economic importance.
The green economy is identified as being important to the future of the South Warwickshire 
economy. Climate change is an important issue for South Warwickshire, with both Stratford-
on-Avon and Warwick District Councils aiming for the Districts to be carbon neutral by 2030. 
Innovation in green technologies could draw on the existing sectoral strengths of the area, 
such as education, research and development, automotive and advanced engineering and 
manufacturing, to help diversify the economy. For example, the movement of the automotive 
sector into developing electric and low emission (including hydrogen fuelled) vehicles is an 
example of an existing industry diversifying into using greener technologies. This diversification 
could also assist in growing the area’s ‘knowledge economy’, i.e., utilising knowledge-intensive 
activities to drive advancement and innovation in the technical and scientific sectors.South Warwickshire Local Plan34The future economic landscape, however, is uncertain, particularly in the wake of the COVID-19 
pandemic, as well as Brexit producing additional trade challenges for some businesses. As such, it 
is important that the Local Plan builds on the existing successes and strategic locational strengths 
of the area to nurture the growth of new and existing industries, and provide the opportunities for 
businesses to thrive.
In addition, there are also challenges currently facing agricultural businesses. These include having 
the capital to invest, planning legislation, connectivity, labour shortages and the uncertainty 
caused by Brexit. Appropriate diversification can enable such businesses to have greater resilience, 
by providing a range of income generating streams. For example, tourism accommodation, craft 
workshops, and farm shops can supplement agricultural income. Technological innovation can also 
support agricultural and rural businesses to adapt to changing circumstances.
Q17. Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should seek to 
diversify the local economy by supporting growth in new industrial sectors? 
If not, what other ways should the Local Plan support economic growth? 
Q18. Do you agree that new employment opportunities should mainly be focussed 
in existing employment locations? If not, what other locations should be considered?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 35We think...
Supporting the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and emerging businesses, 
is an important element of enhancing the area’s economy.
It is imperative that the Local Plan provides the appropriate support to these businesses, by 
encouraging the conditions for them to thrive and to contribute to the growth and diversification 
of the regional economy. This includes ensuring that there is enough affordable employment land 
to meet the needs of SMEs.
Why?
Warwick District has a strong SME base with the majority of businesses being within the Micro, 
Small and Medium category. Data from 2017 shows that approximately 90% of Warwick’s 
businesses employ fewer than ten people. In Stratford-on-Avon, SMEs also form a large part of 
the local economy, with the District having a higher proportion of start-up businesses than the 
national average. 
However, SMEs often fail due to their increased vulnerability compared to larger and more 
established businesses. It can also be difficult to start a new business in the first place. It is 
important, therefore, that the Local Plan provides the right support and conditions for such 
businesses, in order to generate opportunities for new SMEs and businesses to be established, 
as well as for existing SMEs to thrive. This includes the provision of sufficient and affordable 
employment land.
Q19. Do you agree that the affordability of employment land and premises is a key 
issue that the Local Plan should address? If not, why not?
Q20. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek specific opportunities to 
support small and emerging businesses? If not, what do you suggest?South Warwickshire Local Plan36We think...
There are opportunities to build on the success of existing heritage and cultural attractions, 
improve the night-time economy and strengthen the tourism sector in the area. We can build 
on the reputation of the historic towns in South Warwickshire by protecting and enhancing their 
existing cultural and heritage assets. We can also support the tourism sector through improving 
productivity levels – for example, by providing opportunities for the upskilling of residents to 
match the skills required by businesses.
There is currently a lack of sufficient affordable employment land in the area. This is an issue that 
needs to be addressed in order to encourage greater inward investment, and to build on the 
existing strengths of the area as an attractive place for businesses to locate to.
Why?
The heritage and cultural sectors constitute a large part of the South Warwickshire economy. 
Tourism Economic Impact Assessments from 2019 indicate that tourism accounted for 7% 
of employment in Warwick District, and 15.6% of employment in Stratford-on-Avon District. 
Warwick and Kenilworth Castles attract large numbers of both domestic and international 
visitors every year, whilst Stratford-upon-Avon is world renowned for its built heritage, theatres 
and its cultural importance as the birthplace of Shakespeare. 
More could be done, however, to reach the economic potential of these sectors. For example, 
by embracing the ‘post theatre’ economy, the night-time economies of the area’s historic towns 
could be enhanced. Providing educational opportunities for residents to match their skills to 
those required by businesses in and related to the heritage and cultural sectors could also assist 
in this aim. 
Furthermore, it is considered that the success of the area’s heritage and cultural assets could 
be exploited in order to expand the economic benefits into other sectors outside of tourism and 
hospitality. For example, the area of South Warwickshire is strategically located to attract inward 
investment, and the excellent reputation of the area’s historic towns and their cultural attractions 
could build on this locational advantage to attract additional businesses to the area. 
Q21. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to build on South 
Warwickshire’s existing cultural and heritage assets in order to enhance the 
economy? If not, what alternative do you suggest?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 37We think... 
It is important to match the skills of residents to the needs of businesses, and provide a range of 
employment opportunities with a broad skills base, so as to retain a greater proportion of residents 
living and working in South Warwickshire.
Reducing the area’s ‘skills leakage’ to other areas could have beneficial effects on congestion by 
reducing out-bound commuting, and assist in driving economic growth.
Factors that could assist in achieving this could include the diversification of the economy, building 
on partnerships between education and industry, and providing a greater amount of affordable 
housing in South Warwickshire so that residents can afford to stay living in the area.
Why?
There is a shrinking working population in Stratford-on-Avon. Many younger people feel compelled 
to move out of the District in order to find work that matches their skills. Conversely, many 
businesses in the District are reliant on in-bound commuting by employees who live outside the 
area in order to provide the skills they need. The Local Industrial and Economic Development 
Strategy (LIEDS) for Stratford-on-Avon District 2018-2031, published in 2018, found that only 
47% of Stratford-on-Avon residents actually worked in the District. The combination of relatively 
high house prices and low wages in certain key sectors means that many of those who work in the 
District cannot afford to live in the District. Additionally, the large proportion of jobs in Stratford-on-
Avon that are in the low paid tourism, hospitality and retail sectors drives many residents to seek 
skilled employment in other areas.
In comparison, Warwick District has a high proportion of highly skilled residents, in part due to 
the impact of the University of Warwick and the resultant flow of students into the District. It is 
important, however, to match the skills businesses need with those available locally in order to 
reduce unemployment, out-bound commuting and business failure rates. 
Q22. Do you agree that the Local Plan should aim to reduce skills ‘leakage’ and 
provide greater opportunities for education and training? If not, what alternative 
do you suggest?South Warwickshire Local Plan38We think...
The town centres of South Warwickshire will need to adapt to changes in the town centre economy 
resulting from the growth in internet shopping and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This could include allowing a wider range of uses in town centres than currently permitted. It is 
also considered that the night-time economy has further potential to be developed in South 
Warwickshire. This could enhance the vitality and viability of the area’s town centres.
The role of town centres as being largely car dominated, rather than prioritising the pedestrian, is 
another issue to be explored. Congestion in town centres is a major issue in South Warwickshire, 
and is costly to the economy through increased journey times. Congestion worsens air quality 
and affects the health and wellbeing of residents. Additionally, it poses problems for the historic 
towns and villages, as the high level of visitors to the area also contributes to congestion that can 
damage the historic environment. It is recognised, however, that there is a need to consider the 
requirements of the disabled and elderly who may need to park close to shops and facilities. It also 
poses a particular challenge as to how to enable accessibility into towns from the more rural areas 
of South Warwickshire.
Why?
The nature of high streets across the UK has been changing in recent years due to a range of 
trends and pressures, including the increased use of internet shopping and out-of-town retail 
centres. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic threatens the survival of many town centre 
businesses, not only from the immediate economic impact of the pandemic, but also from a 
potential long-term shift in working and shopping habits.
The Government has recently issued new Use Classes Regulations  to provide more flexibility for 
town centre businesses to adapt to changing circumstances, and to support the vitality and 
viability of high streets. The direction of Government guidance on the role of town centres will 
need to be considered in how we plan for the future of our town centres. This may include re-
imagining what our town centres are for and moving away from retail dominance towards a leisure 
orientated offer. Coupled with this, we may need to think about how we can increase the use of our 
town centres in the evenings. We need to not only attract footfall back onto our high streets but 
encourage visitors to stay in our town centres for longer.
Q23. Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to adapt to the changing role of 
town centres? What do you suggest?
Q24. Do you agree that congestion and the car-dominance of town centres are key 
factors to address when considering how town centres can be enhanced? If not, 
what alternative factors should be addressed?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 39
South Warwickshire Local Plan40
UtilitiesScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 414.6  Key Strategic Issues: Utilities
The biggest issue raised by residents relating to growth is the impact on infrastructure. Their 
concern is twofold; first, that infrastructure is already at capacity and second, that growth is not 
supported by the necessary infrastructure improvements.
In the same way that the planning system facilitates new homes and jobs, the South Warwickshire 
Local Plan must also facilitate the provision of new infrastructure to support those homes and jobs. 
Indeed, economic growth is predicated on infrastructure. 
Our collaborative approach to stakeholder engagement is set out in Section 2.4. 
We think…
Facilitating and supporting the provision of the appropriate utilities infrastructure is critical to 
enabling growth in South Warwickshire. Utilities infrastructure includes the following:
• Energy
• Water
• Communications (e.g. internet, phone reception)
• Waste and Recycling
• Foul sewerage
Power has already been identified as a major constraint to growth across South Warwickshire. The 
Coventry and Warwickshire Local Enterprise Partnership is leading on a study to assess the power 
constraints and opportunities. This work will need to feed into the South Warwickshire Local Plan.
Whilst we need to resolve the power supply issues facing South Warwickshire, ultimately we need 
to reduce our energy consumption. This is where the energy hierarchy is relevant (see below). 
The South Warwickshire Local Plan will consider how energy use can be minimised and the order 
in which these energy saving and ‘green’ energy measures should be prioritised. It is expected that 
new development should seek to reduce the need for energy.South Warwickshire Local Plan42
Reduce the need for energy
Use energy more efficiently
Use renewable energy
Use low carbon energy sources
Use fossil fuels more cleanly and efficiently
Figure 5 - Energy HierarchyScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 43Why?
The South Warwickshire Local Plan is planning for housing and economic growth in the area. It is 
important that we allow for the facilities to produce utilities, such as electricity, sufficient to meet 
the planned growth in demand. For example, the increased uptake of electric vehicles will require 
the supply of enough electricity to meet demand. It is anticipated that renewable energy sources will form part of the potential solution, and that energy strategies in new developments will, in the first instance, seek to reduce energy consumption. Newer forms of greener energy, such as 
hydrogen networks, may also contribute to the area’s energy supply.
In addition, the ability of existing facilities such as water processing plants and waste and recycling 
centres to manage the planned growth in the area will need to be considered.
Communication infrastructure, such as 5G and high-speed internet, is important for connecting 
people and providing greater opportunities for businesses and employment. This is particularly 
important in the rural areas which cover much of the South Warwickshire area, in order to improve 
access to services and employment as well as to support rural businesses.
Many of these issues will be outside of the direct remit of the Local Plan, as they will form part of 
the responsibilities of Warwickshire County Council and/or external utilities providers. However, we 
will work in conjunction with these organisations to ensure that the planned growth in the Local 
Plan is supported by the appropriate utilities infrastructure. 
Q25. Do you agree that the provision of sufficient utilities infrastructure is a key 
issue for the Local Plan to consider? If not, why not?
Q26. Do you agree that the Local Plan should encourage the use of the ‘energy 
hierarchy’ in developments, aiming to reduce the use of energy in the first instance wherever possible? If not, what approach do you suggest?South Warwickshire Local Plan44
ResourcesScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 454.7  Key Strategic Issues: Resources
We think…
A key challenge to the Local Plan will be to ensure that the natural resources of the area are 
taken into consideration throughout the development process. This will require us to preserve, 
and where necessary ensure that identified resources are used prudently.
Why?
Much of South Warwickshire is rural by nature, and, as a direct product of the areas 
underlying geology and soil characteristics, extensive areas are farmed for food production. 
It is important that in considering the growth requirements, that the best and most versatile 
land (categorised by soil quality) will, wherever possible be preserved to support the continued 
supply of local, sustainable produce and to also preserve the integrity of agricultural concerns 
and of the rural economy.
As the Local Minerals Authority, Warwickshire County Council is responsible for the 
preparation of a Minerals Local Plan. The South Warwickshire Local Plan will have to ensure 
that any land requirements for future development conform with the Minerals Local Plan and 
that development does not sterilise identified mineral extraction sites or areas safeguarded 
for possible mineral extraction. Historically, development allocations have proceeded on 
sites with identified mineral resources, such as sand and gravel, provided that a mineral 
assessment is undertaken and that appropriate measures are put in place for extraction 
before development begins.
Water is also a finite resource. It will be important that any growth requirements have 
an appropriate supply of water for the needs of the expanding population. It will also be 
necessary to ensure that development does not have a detrimental impact on natural 
aquifers. Similarly, wastewater will need to be effectively managed to ensure that there are no 
detrimental impacts on our river systems or the wider environment.
The South Warwickshire Local Plan must also protect against the contamination of natural 
resources. There is need to ensure that future development does not give rise to the 
contamination of soil or the pollution of air or water that could cause harm to the population 
or the environment. The many challenges of climate change will also have to be addressed in 
order to ensure that natural resources within South Warwickshire are not compromised, as  
far as practicable, by changes in temperature or by heavier rainfall and the threat of 
associated flooding. 
Q27. Do you agree that it is important to protect natural resources and that 
mineral resources are extracted before development commences? Please 
explain your answer.
Q28. Is it important to ensure that the development of best agricultural land is 
avoided wherever possible? Please explain your answer.South Warwickshire Local Plan46
LandScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 474.8  Key Strategic Issues: Land
We think…
A key challenge of the Local Plan will be to protect and enhance our most important historic and 
environmental assets. This will require us to protect the best of what already exists and to maximise 
opportunities for enhancement, particularly in relation to heritage, culture, landscapes, resources, 
biodiversity, and character landscapes.
Why?
The area includes many heritage assets and comprises landscape character areas that are 
intrinsically beautiful. They are the direct consequence of the areas underlying geology and the 
impact of development and farming practices that have occurred on the land over time. It is 
important that the South Warwickshire Local Plan recognises these identified areas and assets and 
ensures that the development needs are assimilated into these environments in a way that does 
not prejudice the very features that typify the environment of South Warwickshire.
The landscapes are also the home of many acknowledged biodiversity and geologically valuable 
features. It is important, therefore, that any new development recognises this and is distributed 
appropriately across South Warwickshire. Equally important is that development should be well 
designed and located to maintain the quality of the built and natural environments, particularly 
around our historic areas, sensitive wildlife habitats and areas of high landscape value.
There is a need for the Local Plan to ensure the provision of new and improved areas of habitat 
(both green and blue infrastructure) in conjunction with new development, and that this is provided 
over a range of scales from strategic (large areas) down to small areas at the local level as 
appropriate.
Q29. Do you agree that development should provide compensatory measures / 
enhancements to compensate for their impacts (including biodiversity offsetting/ 
landscape restoration)? Are there any other matters that should be considered? South Warwickshire Local Plan48We think…
The Local Plan should improve the green space network including biodiversity and tree planting.
Why?
The South Warwickshire Local Plan area comprises large areas of accessible natural and semi-
natural green space, including significant country parks, nature reserves and areas of the wider 
countryside that are accessible via public footpaths and bridleways. There are also significant 
areas of blue infrastructure (rivers, lakes, canal networks and pools) that also form valuable 
ecological assets. These areas perform several important roles. They are beneficial for the health 
and wellbeing of the population providing opportunities for active and passive recreation and 
associated benefits to mental health. These areas also provide a wide variety of habitats for 
wildlife, plant and tree species and may provide opportunities for future tree planting.
Such areas are multi-functional and therefore of great value to the local population. Of particular 
importance are those that are located on the periphery of our towns and villages where they can 
easily be accessed by walkers and cyclists. It is important that these areas are protected to ensure 
that they remain a valuable resource.
It is also important to appreciate and understand the value that linked networks of green spaces 
provide to both flora and fauna. They create wildlife corridors that enhance biodiversity.
As we begin to understand and identify the location of new development requirements it will be 
important to encourage the associated provision of new green space networks and enhancements 
to existing valuable areas. Where future greenfield development occurs, the careful consideration 
of new green space provision and biodiversity offsetting requirements will help to ensure that both 
existing and emerging communities and nature will still benefit from having appropriate habitat.
It will be important to provide new and improved areas of natural habitat (both green and blue 
infrastructure) in conjunction with new development on a range of scales from strategic (large 
areas) down to small areas at the local level. This may include an area-wide tree planting strategy. 
It is important that positive biodiversity offsetting requirements are applied and implemented within 
appropriate timescales.
Q30. Is the protection of, and enhancement of our green areas and associated 
habitat / biodiversity a high priority for the Local Plan? Are there any other matters 
that should be considered?
Q31. Do you agree that wherever possible and practical, large-scale developments 
should also deliver substantive areas of green space (such as country parks etc.)?  
If not, what is your alternative?
Q32. Is tree planting an important issue that the Local Plan should seek to 
encourage? How should the Local Plan achieve this?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 49
South Warwickshire Local Plan50
ClimateScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 514.9  K ey Strategic Issues: Climate
We think…
The Local Plan has an important role to play in contributing to the transition to a low-carbon future 
within South Warwickshire. This is centred on reducing carbon emissions and implementing climate 
change adaptation and mitigation measures.
The aim of contributing to Net Zero Carbon should run through all aspects of the Local Plan, 
including the vision, strategic objectives, growth strategy and individual policies. The South Warwickshire Local Plan needs to ensure that new developments are climate responsive, addressing both operational outputs and embodied carbon so that they do not create more 
carbon emissions than are offset or stored up.
Why?
In response to the climate crisis both Stratford-on-Avon and Warwick District Councils, along with 
Warwickshire County Council, have declared climate emergencies and are committed to achieving 
Net Zero Carbon output.
Within Europe and the UK, the following impacts of climate change are likely to be felt, even in the 
range of one to two degree Celsius increases: 
•More frequent high temperature extremes in the summer
•More hot days and nights with impacts on human health and mortality
•Impacts on the distribution and abundance of plant and animal life, with the potential to affectbiodiversity
•Changing patterns of plant and animal distribution could lead to impacts on crop yields andagricultural viability, as well as greater numbers of pests
•The capacity of the natural environment to provide key services could be diminished – such asreservoirs of water and natural erosion control
•Temperature increases could impact on economic wellbeing including agriculture, tourism,energy production, and supply of water and other natural resources
•Weather patterns are likely to become more unpredictable with potentially more extremeweather events such as damaging storms, floods and droughts
The main causes of climate change resulting from carbon emissions within South Warwickshire
4 
relate primarily to transport along with domestic, industrial and commercial energy. In addition, the processes involved in agriculture, food and waste also generate carbon emissions.
We think there are a number of ways in which the South Warwickshire Local Plan can tackle 
climate change.
4All data provided is derived from the SCATTER (Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions Reduction) 
emission tool and are based on 2017 data. South Warwickshire Local Plan52Increasing accessibility and reducing the need to travel by private car 
Private cars contribute towards a large proportion of the UK’s carbon emissions. Providing practical 
and sustainable alternatives to private car travel is critical to tackling the climate crisis. There are a 
number of ways in which the South Warwickshire Local Plan can maximise opportunities for more 
sustainable transport choices through well planned developments:
Mix ed use developments can provide a wide range of services and facilities within close
proximity thus reducing the need to travel. This can include employment opportunities, schools,
healthcare provision, recreational and leisure facilities, open green spaces and many more
•Density play s an important part in reducing people’s reliance on using a private car. Higher
density developments can make destinations easily accessible by walking or cycling and canbring people together to support local public transport, facilities and local services
•In tegrated active travel involves a well-designed and connected transport network which
maximises people’s travel choices for low-carbon modes of transport like rail, bus, other publictransport, walking and cycling
•W alkable and cyclable developments provide permeable networks that make it easier to move
both within and into and out of the area, encouraging walking and cycling and making placeseasy to navigate through, especially for visitors
Improving Energy Efficiency
In order to achieve low carbon development, the Local Plan needs to address how new development can minimise energy use and make more effective use of energy. This may include 
a passive-first or fabric-first approach. There is an overlap here with other regulatory frameworks 
such as building control legislation. 
Supporting the Generation of Renewable Energy
The UK reduced emissions by 44% percent between 1990 and 2019, two- thirds of which was achieved in the power sector. Additionally, renewable energy generation has increased since 
2010 and low-carbon electricity accounts for 50 per cent of generation. To ensure that energy 
requirements are met from the cleanest and most sustainable sources, the Local Plan should support decentralised, low carbon and renewable energy generation whether on site (e.g. solar panels on buildings) or proposals for standalone renewable energy generation in appropriate 
locations across South Warwickshire. This should also include community led initiatives.
Adapting to higher temperatures 
Future-proofing the design of new buildings and spaces to adapt to the effects of higher and more 
extreme temperature change is an important component of climate change adaptation. This can 
be achieved through shade and ventilation, the use of cool materials and the provision of green 
infrastructure.
Mitigating flood risk 
Adapting development to efficiently manage the use and storage of water is another critical component of effectively mitigating the effects of climate change. The location and design of new 
developments, along with the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) and water efficiency 
and harvesting measures have an important role in reducing the risk of flooding.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 53Mitigating biodiversity loss 
The effects of climate change are predicted to have particularly negative impacts on 
biodiversity and wildlife habitats. This will affect oxygen production, carbon storage and the 
natural filtering of toxins. As such, providing opportunities to mitigate against biodiversity loss 
and enable local plant and animal species to thrive is a key goal for new development. Bio-
enhancing existing green space, improving background wildlife capacity and creating new 
local wildlife areas and corridors are some of the ways in which biodiversity can be enhanced 
in conjunction with new development.
Retrofitting existing buildings
The role of retrofitting existing buildings can also have an important effect as it is possible 
to make significant reductions in carbon emissions through implementing solutions which 
improve the performance of existing buildings to make them more resilient to climate change. 
The existing building stock will continue to form the vast bulk of buildings in the area. As such, 
the appropriate adaptation and mitigation of existing buildings is an important element in 
achieving Net Zero Carbon.
Net Zero Carbon New Build
The Government has recently revised its target of reducing emissions. By the end of June 
2021, it will introduce legislation setting out its target of reducing emissions in the UK by 
78 percent by 2050. To deliver on this commitment in South Warwickshire, the Local Plan 
will require new development, and the construction processes of both residential and non-
residential development, to respond to the challenge of climate change by delivering net zero 
carbon new build development.
Q33. Do you agree with the proposed ways in which the Local Plan should 
tackle climate change? What other ways can the Local Plan help us achieve Net 
Zero Carbon?South Warwickshire Local Plan54
WaterScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 554.10  Key Strategic Issues: Water
We think…
The Local Plan should avoid or mitigate flood risk through location and design. In doing so, it will 
provide opportunities to create new habitats and open space.
Why?
South Warwickshire has a history of flooding caused by surface water flows, mainly attributed to 
the many watercourses and main rivers that interconnect across the area. In the last thirty years, 
parts of the area have experienced flooding to various degrees, most notably in the major events 
of 1998, 2007 and 2012, where area wide flooding was experienced. These events highlighted 
the many issues associated with development and modern farming practices, including channel 
capacity issues, the diverting and culverting of watercourses, building within the flood plain and 
removing woodlands and habitat areas. The implications of climate change will only increase 
the area’s vulnerability to such events. It is important, therefore, to appraise, manage and 
reduce the risk of flooding, directing development away from areas at risk of flooding whenever 
possible, and to encourage developments to work in harmony with the natural environment 
and surroundings. Development / redevelopment must be managed to minimise flood risks. 
Alleviation methods must be sustainable over the long term, for example, by making more space 
for rivers through urban areas via ‘blue corridors’ (ensuring flood plain capacity is not reduced).
It is important that major developments incorporate sustainable drainage systems (SuDS).  
If well designed, these can provide habitat and opportunities for wildlife, water quality and 
amenity benefits. In most instances it is preferable for SuDS to be located and designed within 
areas of public open space. These systems will require expert design. They should be installed 
and functional in the early stages of a sites development and should be visually attractive as 
well as functional. These spaces could provide valuable opportunities for passive recreation and 
enhance biodiversity.
There is a finite water capacity in the environment. It can’t keep providing more and more water 
to serve new development. Furthermore, there is a limit to the amount of wastewater that can be 
returned safely to rivers without affecting the environment. Climate change is a threat with more 
flooding and droughts leading to poor water quality with extreme rainfall overwhelming existing 
drains leading to flooding, pollution or damage to the environment.
As part of the Local Plan’s associated infrastructure provision there will have to be careful 
consideration of the future water supply requirements. If required, the provision of new water 
storage reservoirs will have to be factored into infrastructure planning.
Q34. Do you agree that flood mitigation should be a major priority for the Local 
Plan when delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan achieve this?South Warwickshire Local Plan56
HealthScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 574.11  K ey Strategic Issues: Health
We think…
There will be a significant increase in demand on general practice services, community health 
services and hospital provision in South Warwickshire over the Plan period. In order to create 
sufficient capacity to accommodate the increase, additional floorspace will be required and the 
Local Plan should look to address this.
Improving physical and mental wellbeing by encouraging walking, cycling, exercise, space for 
nature, social places, healthy food, areas for exercise and the role of heritage and culture in our communities is key.
The Local Plan should look to support the above by considering open spaces, sports facilities, 
playing pitch provision, outdoor recreational and community facilities, cycling and walking infrastructure, allotments and access to heritage and culture opportunities at an early stage. This will help in designing healthy inclusive communities thus leading to improvements to physical and 
mental health and well-being.
Poor air quality can cause lung disease, heart disease and other health issues which can affect 
everyone. The main cause is from road traffic emissions, particularly in congested town centre locations within Warwick, Leamington, Kenilworth, Studley and Stratford.
The South Warwickshire Local Plan should look at opportunities to reduce congestion in these 
areas through pedestrianisation of town centres, encouraging people to use alternative modes 
of transport and the use of electric vehicles as well as encouraging developments to incorporate green infrastructure.
Why?
The population growth across South Warwickshire as a result of the projected housing delivery will generate an increase in demand on existing health infrastructure. While the current estate 
is sufficient to meet future demand in some localities, in others demand will outstrip capacity 
unless greater capacity is provided whether through improvements to existing premises or the development of new facilities.
In 2019 almost two thirds (62.4%) of Warwickshire adults were classified as overweight or obese 
and 21.6% were physically inactive. Furthermore, there is a growing number of younger people 
who are either overweight or obese. 
Awareness of mental health issues is increasing. Currently one in four adults experience a mental 
health problem in any given year. In recent years, suicide rates in Warwickshire have been significantly higher than the rate in England.
Both Warwick and Stratford-on-Avon have Air Quality Management Areas, Stratford has two 
(Studley and Stratford-upon-Avon Town Centre) and Warwick has five (Leamington, Warwick, Warwick Road, New Street in Kenilworth and Coventry Road in Warwick). 
Q35. Do you agree that the provision of health facilities should be a major priority 
when delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan achieve this?
Q36. Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should look to  
address congestion in town centres in order to improve air quality? If not, what 
is your alternative? South Warwickshire Local Plan58
CulturalScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 594.12 Key Strategic Issues: Cultural
We think…
One of the biggest issues in South Warwickshire at present is the lack of tourist accommodation, 
both in Warwick and in Stratford Districts, as well as insufficient conference facilities. Tourists 
and visitors travel to the area to experience the rich history and many tourist attractions that 
the area has to offer. Market research suggests, however, that their stay is limited to a full day at best rather than an overnight stay or longer break. Large businesses and organisations have in the past had to seek an alternative location for their conferences and events outside 
South Warwickshire due to a lack of conference accommodation to support venues. 
Timing of education provision is particularly pertinent in order to ensure that schools are open 
in time for when homes are occupied. Consideration should also be given to existing capacity for primary, secondary and early year’s provision and how this will deal with future growth. 
Why?
Tourism and visitors to the area provide a significant contribution to the economy of South Warwickshire. If tourists and visitors only spend limited time in the area, however, their contribution 
to the wider local economy is significantly reduced. There is an opportunity to drive inward 
investment by attracting more overseas visitors and by increasing overnight stays in order to increase the amount of money spent by tourists visiting the Districts’ cultural attractions. The Local Plan should address this issue by prioritising and supporting the development of guest 
accommodation in South Warwickshire and acknowledging the long-term economic benefits to 
the area.
Homes are currently being occupied before schools have been built and this is causing issues 
for accommodating pupils temporarily at alternative schools. This is a particular concern for 
secondary provision as there are fewer secondary schools and it can mean that pupils are 
needing to be transported across districts (especially if in a rural location). This has an impact in terms of traffic, poor air quality etc. Existing secondary, primary and nursery provision can be stretched in certain locations particularly rural areas and there is not often enough space 
for them to expand to accommodate additional pupils. The Leamington area in particular 
is facing significant pressure over the coming years based on current housing numbers.
Q37. Do you agree that the Local Plan should prioritise and support additional 
guest accommodation in South Warwickshire? If not, why not?
Q38. Do you agree that the provision of education facilities should be a 
major priority when delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan 
achieve this?South Warwickshire Local Plan605. Vision and Strategic
Objectiv es
5.1 Vision f or the Local Plan
We need to develop a vision for the South Warwickshire Local Plan which sets out how we want to 
see the area grow and evolve up to 2050. This will be different for everyone, but common themes 
will be shared by all. We need a vision which reflects that change will happen. We want to manage 
that to achieve the best outcome for South Warwickshire. 
The vision and options for growth (see Chapter 6) are in many ways one and the same; the 
growth options being a spatial or geographic visualisation of what you think the future for South Warwickshire should be. 
Acknowledging that the vision is still evolving, we have set out what we consider to be a high-level 
ambition for South Warwickshire. Having analysed the strategic issues (see Chapter 4), we have identified four common themes or ‘golden threads’ that we think should sit at the heart of, and run throughout the South Warwickshire Local Plan.
The vision for South Warwickshire is to boost and to diversify the local economy by meeting 
our development needs by ensuring the provision of appropriate infrastructure, in suitable locations, at the right time. We will achieve this by applying the four overarching principles of: 
•Tackling climate change – contributing to Net Zero Carbon by adapting to and mitigatingagainst the effects of climate change demonstrated by rising temperatures
•Promoting wellbeing – enabling everyone to enjoy safe andhealthy lifestyles with a good quality of life
•Improving connectivity – ensuring that development is physically and digitallyconnected, provided in accessible locations and that it promotes active travel
•Increasing biodiversity - strengthening green and blue infrastructure andachieving a net increase in biodiversity across South Warwickshire
Q39. Do you agree that the four overarching principles will deliver the South 
Warwickshire you want? If not, what changes would you like to see? Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 615.2 Vision f or Places 
Understanding the functional role of our towns and key villages will be critical to ensuring their 
continued vitality and vibrancy. The South Warwickshire Local Plan will have a key role in shaping 
the future of places to 2050. 
We think…
Sitting below the high-level vision for South Warwickshire, we should establish visions for what we 
want individual places to be like in 2050. Although these visions should relate to land use and 
development, as far as possible, they should be expressed visually or diagrammatically, setting out 
what the role and economic function of the place should be and how it will develop and evolve over the life of the Plan. 
Why?
These visions should be limited to those places that will have a key role in shaping the future of South Warwickshire to 2050, either because of their economic importance or because they will 
accommodate significant growth. Establishing visions will ensure that growth is co-ordinated 
and managed to enable the objectives of the Local Plan to be achieved. They will provide further certainty to residents.
Such an approach ties into the need to strengthen and secure the future of our town centres 
and high streets. High streets across the country are facing serious challenges. They need to 
successfully adapt to the changes posed by structural changes in the retail sector including the 
shift to online retail as well as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We don’t yet know which places will have place visions because the options for growth (see Section 
6) have not yet been decided. As a minimum, however, because of their economic importance
alone, we expect that the five largest towns of Leamington Spa, Warwick, Stratford-upon-Avon,Kenilworth and Whitnash would have place visions.
Q40. Do you agree with this approach to establishing visions for those key places 
identified in the South Warwickshire Local Plan? If not, what is your alternative?South Warwickshire Local Plan625.3 Str ategic Objectives
The Local Plan aims to deliver sustainable development across South Warwickshire. The key 
components are social, economic and the built and natural environment. These will be at the heart 
of how the South Warwickshire Local Plan meets the area’s needs of providing new homes, jobs 
and supporting infrastructure. 
Having analysed the key issues set out in Chapter 4, we have identified ten strategic objectives 
that we think the South Warwickshire Local Plan needs to address:
•Delivering homes that meet the needs of all our communities
Allowing for the growth in new homes that meet the diverse needs of all our residents,including affordable, student, specialist and self and custom build housing, along with the
accommodation needs of our gypsy and traveller and travelling showpeople communities.
•Creating attractive places
Focusing on the design of new development to create great buildings,
places and spaces that are of a high quality and cater for the needs of
all users and which respect the setting of our many settlements.
•Connecting people to places
Increasing and improving access to sustainable and active travel options that
connect to centres, cultural facilities and green spaces and the countryside.
•Developing opportunities for jobs
Accommodating the growth in employment opportunities that buildupon our strong and diverse economy, including innovative industries and
technologies, embracing the potential of the green economy.
•Supporting vibrant and distinctive centres
Responding to the changing roles of town centres given the growth in internet
shopping, and in the context of emerging from the COVID pandemic.
•Providing infrastructure in the right place at the right time
Ensuring that the infrastructure needed to support the growth in newhomes and jobs is secured through new development.
•Protecting and enhancing our most important historic and environmental assets
Protecting the best of what already exists and maximising opportunitiesfor enhancement including improvements to the green space network
through tree planting and other biodiversity initiatives.
•Contributing towards Net Zero Carbon targets
Focusing on reducing carbon emissions and setting out the adaptation and
mitigation measures that new developments will require to be incorporated.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 63•Improving the health and quality of life of our communities
Creating healthy places that contribute to physical and mental wellbeing,
combating loneliness and isolation, and lowering levels of pollution.
•Enriching the tourism potential
Enriching the quality of the visitor experience through the wealth of cultural,heritage and countryside assets that the area has to offer.
Q41. Do you agree that these should be the strategic objectives for the Local Plan? 
Are there any others?
South Warwickshire Local Plan646.Op tions for Growth
6.1 Ho w much housing growth do we need?
The minimum number of homes we need to build across South Warwickshire is set by the 
Government using their ‘standard methodology’ 5. 
As at May 2021, the figure for South Warwickshire is a minimum 1,230 new homes each year. For a Plan running to 2050, this equates to a figure in excess of 35,000 new homes.
We need to do further technical work to assess the size and type of homes we need and 
what tenure (e.g. ownership, rented) of homes we should provide. We are aware of the high unaffordability of housing across South Warwickshire and how many young people and those on lower incomes really struggle to access the housing market. The size of homes we need has an 
impact on infrastructure provision e.g. school places and GP surgeries. 
Currently, affordable housing is provided ‘off-the-back of’ market housing - i.e. a percentage (e.g. 
35% or 40%) of homes on each site is built as affordable housing. The Government’s approach to improving the affordability of housing is to increase supply (of market housing) so that more 
affordable homes are also delivered. We could consider increasing our housing figure to help 
address housing affordability.
We may also be required to help meet some of the shortfall in housing from the cities of Coventry 
and Birmingham (for example), if those cities cannot accommodate all of their own housing growth 
within their boundaries. 
Q42. How do you think we should best address the affordability of housing?
Q43. If we are required to meet housing shortfalls from elsewhere, how best should 
we accommodate such shortfalls? (You may wish to refer to the growth options set out below 
to help you answer this question). 
6.2 Ho w much job growth do we need?
There is a relationship between the number of homes and the number of jobs in an area. The 
planning system, through Local Plans, seeks to achieve a balance so as to minimise levels of 
commuting, reduce carbon emissions and, in broad terms, generally provide housing close to where 
jobs are located. 
We need to do further technical work to calculate how many new jobs we will need. However, 
this will very much depend on what we want our vision of South Warwickshire to be. If we want to promote significant investment and economic growth in South Warwickshire, and reap the benefits 
of a more prosperous local economy with more and potentially better job opportunities and 
potentially lower rates of unemployment, we may wish to consider increasing our minimum housing figure accordingly. 
5See Housing and economic needs assessment - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 65Q44. Do you agree with prioritising jobs by increasing employment opportunities 
and therefore potentially increasing the minimum housing requirement for South Warwickshire? If not, what alternative do you suggest?
6.3 Purpose o f the Options for Growth
As part of defining our vision for South Warwickshire, we need to set out an approach to 
managing the location of future development. This is called the spatial development strategy, 
i.e., how much development we put where. We want this strategy to be sufficiently robust and
flexible to last to 2050.
We have devised seven options for growth where development might best be located. To 
be absolutely clear; no decisions have yet been taken about where development might be located. This is a consultation to hear your views about where the new homes and jobs we 
need to provide for across South Warwickshire to 2050 should be located. Not having more 
development is not an option!
At this stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; 
this needs to be based on further technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of 
locations and sites and will play a role in determining the most suitable spatial strategy. We will 
consult on this in due course. 
The seven options shown on the maps below are purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange 
shading to represent the broad locations where growth may be located. The maps show the 
broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail and are not site specific. As well as new 
homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. One principle we would seek to continue to apply would be to retain the separate character and identity of existing settlements. Importantly, we still need to assess the suitability of the locations suggested at this 
stage. This more detailed technical work will follow. This consultation is about scoping out ideas, 
not having all of the answers. 
However, for us to start to explore potential locations it would be helpful to understand the 
pros and cons of potential development in particular areas. To assist in understanding what 
these benefits may be and what the effect of different spatial concepts on South Warwickshire 
could be like, we have set out some of the climate change and sustainability implications of the different approaches.
In delivering new homes and jobs, new development would be supported by the necessary 
infrastructure. We acknowledge that many of the locations identified are relatively small villages 
that lack existing infrastructure, or the existing infrastructure is already at capacity. Facilities such as schools, shops, parks and open spaces would be provided as part of any new development or as improvements to existing facilities. We would also seek to secure improvements in respect 
of highways, public transport, flood mitigation and broadband connectivity. Further work, in 
liaison with the infrastructure providers is required to determine what additional infrastructure is required and in which locations to inform decisions about which locations are indeed suitable for 
additional growth. The timing of any such infrastructure will also be key.
Q45. Are there any locations in South Warwickshire where you have specific 
infrastructure concerns? Please specify.South Warwickshire Local Plan666.4 P otential Options for Growth
The seven initial options for growth that we have identified are as follows:
•Option A: Rail Corridors
•Option B: Main Bus Corridors
•Option C: Main Road Corridors
•Option D: Enterprise Hubs
•Option E: Socio Economic
•Option F: Main Urban Areas
•Option G: Dispersed
They are set out in more detail below. 
There is no right or wrong answer in respect of these Growth Options. Each option generates 
different impacts and has a range of pros and cons.
To assist in understanding how the options differ, we have included a summary of the climate 
change analysis and sustainability assessment. The full impact assessments that accompany this consultation can be viewed online at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp.
It should be noted that these options are not necessarily mutually exclusive, and a combination of 
several approaches could ultimately prove to be the best strategy for South Warwickshire. 
Whilst many locations feature in more than one option, what we are trying to do is present different 
ways of achieving the same overall outcome - that is of meeting our development needs to 2050. The seven Growth Options and alternative approaches (see Section 6.5) demonstrate that there 
are some very different ways of achieving that outcome. 
Indeed, as stated in Chapter 5, the vision and options for growth are in many ways one and the 
same; the Growth Options being a spatial / geographic visualisation of what you think the future for South Warwickshire should be.
Q46. Do you agree with the initial findings of the high-level Sustainability 
Assessment of the Growth Options? If not, why not?
Q47. Do you agree with the initial findings of the climate change analysis of the 
Growth Options? If not, why not?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 67Preliminary sustainability assessment of Growth Options
Summary of the likely effects of the growth options based on the 12 sustainability themes:
Spatial Option
People
Culture
Health
Water
Climate
Land
Resources
Utilities
Economy
Transport
Design
Housing
A: Rail Corridors - 0 + - + - - - +? + + -
B: Main Bus Corridors - 0 + - +/0 - - - +? ++ + -
C: Main Road Corridors - 0 -- - 0/- - - - +? -- + -
D: Enterprise Hubs + 0 -- - + -? -? - +? +? + -
E: Socio-Economic + - + - +/0 -? - - +? ++? + ++
F: Main Urban Areas + - + - + -? - - +? ++? + ++
G: Dispersed + - + - - -- - - +? -- + -
Symbol Likely effect Symbol Likely effect
++ Significant Positive - Minor Negative
+ Minor Positive -- Significant Negative
0 Neutral ? Unknown
The sustainability assessment that accompanies this consultation can be viewed online at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp  .
Please note: this assessment represents an initial high-level assessment of the growth options. Its purpose is to try and tease out some key 
differences between the options. A full Sustainability Appraisal / Strategic Environmental Assessment (SA/SEA) will be prepared to inform 
and accompany the next stage of the South Warwickshire Local Plan. South Warwickshire Local Plan68Climate Change Summary Analysis of the Growth Options
Mitigation refers to efforts to reduce or prevent emission of greenhouse gases. Mitigation 
can mean preventing the causes of climate change, using new technologies and renewable 
energies, making older equipment more energy efficient, or changing management practices 
or consumer behaviour.
Adaptation means anticipating the adverse effects of climate change and taking appropriate 
action to prevent or minimise the damage they can cause, or taking advantage of opportunities that may arise.
A: Rail Corridors
B: Bus Corridors
C: Main Road CorridorsD: Enterprise Hubs
E: Socio-economic
F: Main Urban Areas
G: Dispersed
Mitigation Rating 2/3 2/3 3/4 2 2/3 2 4
Adaptation Rating 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
The climate change analysis that accompanies this consultation can be viewed online at  
www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp 
Mitigation Rating
1= Zero/very low carbon emissions
2= Reducing carbon emissions over and above consequences of national policy 
3= Neutral carbon emissions (except for consequences of national policy)
4= Increasing carbon emissions
Adaptation Rating
1= Enables effective adaptation to climate change2= No impact on adaptation3= Prevents effective adaptationScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 69
Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan70 71
Growth Option A ‒ Rail Corridors Growth Option A. Rail Corridors 
Growth Option A would see new homes and jobs focused in and around those settlements on the 
railway network. 
There are a number of aspects to this Option:
•Includes 4 of the 5 urban areas
•Existing stations are all in the Green Belt / inset from the Green Belt
•Includes two currently freight-only branch lines (to the Quinton rail facility, Long Marston and to
the Ministry of Defence site at Kineton).
•Includes potential for re-instating the line between Long Marston and Stratford-upon-Avon
•Includes potential re-opening of stations on the Chiltern Main Line (e.g. Fenny Compton,Southam Road & Harbury)
This Option could potentially achieve the greatest modal shift away from car use as it would 
provide residents with a choice of travel modes. Development along the rail corridors would also 
most likely be a stimulus for investment and improvement in train services e.g., frequency and quality of trains. Further detailed discussions with Network Rail and the rail operators would be required to confirm the operational implications of any line or station re-opening.
Identified Potential Locations:
•Bearley
•Claverdon
•Earlswood / The Lakes
•Hatton
•Henley-in-Arden
•Kenilworth
•Lapworth
•Royal Leamington Spa
•Stratford-upon-Avon
•Stratford-upon-Avon Parkway
•Warwick
•Warwick Parkway
•Whitnash
•Wilmcote
•Wood End / Danzey
•Wootton Wawen
Figure 6 - Growth Option A - Rail CorridorsThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan72 73
Growth Option B ‒ Main Bus Corridors Growth Option B. Main Bus Corridors 
Growth Option B would see new homes and jobs focused in and around those settlements 
located on the main bus route corridors. These corridors are based on those routes with a service 
frequency of at least an hour. This Option could engender modal shift providing a choice for non-
car travel. Compared to Option A, it would also see development in a number of settlements not on the railway network. 
It would focus development in locations currently well-served by buses and in locations that can 
generate the critical mass to see significant improvements to services both in terms of frequency 
and hours of operation. This latter point is particularly important given the service economy and lower paid shift-workers who may not be able to afford to run a private car. 
Identified Potential Locations:
•Alcester
•Alderminster
•Alveston
•Barford
•Bearley
•Bidford-on-Avon
•Bishop’s Tachbrook
•Clifford Chambers
•Cubbington
•Harbury
•Henley-in-Arden
•Kenilworth
•Lighthorne Heath
•Newbold-on-Stour
•Quinton
•Radford Semele•Royal Leamington Spa
•Salford Priors
•Sherbourne
•Shipston-on-Stour
•Snitterfield
•Southam
•Stockton
•Stratford-upon-Avon
•Studley
•Tiddington
•Tredington
•University of Warwick
•Warwick
•Wellesbourne
•Whitnash
•Wootton Wawen
Figure 7 - Growth Option B - Main Bus CorridorsThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan74 75
Growth Option C ‒ Main Road Corridors Growth Option C. Main Road Corridors 
Growth Option C would see new homes and jobs focused in and around those settlements 
located on the existing main road network (i.e., the A46 and 3-digit A-roads). The rationale 
for this approach is, given that South Warwickshire is largely rural and the use of the private 
car will still be the dominant mode of travel, that new development should be focused in 
those locations accessible by roads designed for high volumes of motor traffic. By limiting 
development in the more rural areas, traffic on narrow country roads would also be limited. 
Identified Potential Locations:
• Alcester
• Barford
• Ettington
• Halford
• Hatton Park
• Kenilworth
• Long Itchington
• Mappleborough Green
• Napton-on-the-Hill
• Royal Leamington Spa
• Salford Priors 
• Sherbourne
• Snitterfield
• Southam
• Stockton
• Stratford-upon-Avon
• Studley
• Tredington
• Warwick
• Wasperton
• Wellesbourne
• Whitnash
Figure 8 - Growth Option C - Main Road CorridorsThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail 
and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this 
stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further 
technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due 
course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore 
potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan76 77
Growth Option D ‒ Enterprise Hubs Growth Option D. Enterprise Hubs 
Whilst all Options seek to balance homes and jobs, Growth Option D focuses new development 
in and around those locations that are and could be major sources of employment in South 
Warwickshire i.e., locations where business and industry want to invest significantly. As such, it 
could result in a better balance of homes and jobs than under the other Options. Further, it could 
reduce the need for travel if employees have and want to take the opportunity to live close to 
where they work.
Identified Potential Locations:
• Coventry Airport 
• Quinton Rail Technology Centre near Long Marston
• Royal Leamington Spa
• Stoneleigh Park
• Stratford-upon-Avon
• University of Warwick 
• University of Warwick Wellesbourne Campus
• M40 J12/ B4451 Gaydon junction
• M40 J13/ A452/B4100 Grey’s Mallory junction
• M40 J15/ A46 Longbridge junction
• M40 J16/ A3400 Hockley Heath junction
• M42 J3/ A435 Portway junction
Figure 9 - Growth Option D - Enterprise HubsThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail 
and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this 
stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further 
technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due 
course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore 
potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan78 79
Growth Option E ‒ Socio Economic Growth Option E. Socio Economic 
One of the benefits of development is that it can be a stimulus for socio-economic change by 
focusing new jobs and affordable housing in those locations that need it most. 
Although South Warwickshire is generally affluent, there are pockets of relative deprivation. 
Growth Option E would focus new homes and jobs in those areas that have relatively higher 
unemployment, lower qualifications and greatest need for affordable housing based on the 
housing waiting list. One benefit of this Option would be to enable residents to remain in their 
existing communities which could assist with community cohesion as well as wellbeing.
 Identified Potential Locations:
• Alcester
• Bidford-on-Avon
• Bishop’s Tachbrook
• Cubbington
• Henley-in-Arden
• Kenilworth
• Long Itchington
• Royal Leamington Spa
• Salford Priors
• Shipston-on-Stour
• Southam
• Stratford-upon-Avon
• Warwick
• Wellesbourne
• Whitnash
• Wootton Wawen
Figure 10 - Growth Option E - Socio EconomicThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail 
and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this 
stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further 
technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due 
course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore 
potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan80 81
Growth Option F ‒ Main Urban Areas Growth Option F. Main Urban Areas 
Growth Option F would see new homes and jobs focused in and around the five main urban areas 
in South Warwickshire as well as the edges of the adjacent urban areas of Coventry and Redditch. 
These locations are considered to be the most sustainable in South Warwickshire providing 
residents with the full range of services in close proximity thus reducing the need to travel by 
private car. 
Having said that, it is worth noting that given the size of these centres, peripheral development 
may be some distance from the central services and facilities. Ensuring that peripheral 
development achieves good connectivity to the existing built-form would be crucial. Also, in all 
likelihood, much of the new development provided under this option would be within the Green 
Belt that surrounds the majority of these locations. As with all Options we would seek to retain the 
separate character and identity of settlements e.g. between Kenilworth and South of Coventry and 
between Mappleborough Green and Redditch. 
Identified Potential Locations:
• Kenilworth
• Royal Leamington Spa
• Stratford-upon-Avon
• Warwick
• Whitnash 
• South of Coventry
• East / southeast of Redditch
Figure 11 - Growth Option F - Main Urban AreasThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail 
and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this 
stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further 
technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due 
course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore 
potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 South Warwickshire Local Plan82 83
Growth Option G ‒ Dispersed Growth Option G. Dispersed
Growth Option G would see new homes and jobs focused in and around all those settlements 
identified in the existing Local Plans as being suitable locations for development. Whilst the 
impact of development on any one location would potentially be minimised, it could lead to an 
urbanisation of the rural area and increased levels of traffic on country roads. It is also likely to be 
more challenging to deliver infrastructure improvements to support new homes and jobs. On the 
plus side, it could help sustain and revitalise a number of rural communities. 
Identified Potential Locations:
Main Towns, Main Rural Centres and Growth Villages:
• Alcester
• Baginton 
• Barford 
• Bidford-on-Avon
• Bishop’s Tachbrook 
• Burton Green 
• Cubbington 
• Hampton Magna 
• Hatton Park 
• Henley-in-Arden
• Kenilworth
• Kineton 
• Kingswood 
• Leek Wootton 
• Radford Semele
• Royal Leamington Spa
• Shipston
• Southam
• Stratford-upon-Avon
• Studley
• Warwick
• Wellesbourne
• Whitnash
Local Service Villages and Limited Infill Villages please see over page
Figure 12 - Growth Option G – DispersedThe option shown on the map is purely indicative / diagrammatic using orange shading to represent where the broad 
locations where growth may be located. The map shows the broad areas that we may want to explore in more detail 
and are not site specific. As well as new homes and jobs, the areas shown would include parks and open spaces. At this 
stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be; this needs to be based on further 
technical work to assess the suitability and appropriateness of locations and sites. We will consult further on this in due 
course. This consultation is about scoping out ideas; not having all of the answers. However, for us to start to explore 
potential locations it would be helpful to understand the pros and cons of potential development in particular areas.South Warwickshire Local Plan84Growth Option G:
Local Service Villages and  
Limited Infill Villages:
• Alderminster
• Alveston
• Ashow 
• Aston Cantlow
• Baddesley Clinton 
• Bearley
• Beausale 
• Bishop’s Itchington
• Brailes
• Bubbenhall 
• Chessetts Wood 
• Claverdon
• Clifford Chambers
• Earlswood
• Eathorpe 
• Ettington
• Fenny Compton
• Gaydon
• Great Alne
• Halford
• Hampton Lucy
• Hampton-on-the-Hill 
• Harbury
• Haseley Knob 
• Hatton Green 
• Hatton Station 
• Hill Wootton 
• Ilmington
• Lapworth 
• Lighthorne
• Lighthorne Heath
• Little Shrewley • Long Compton
• Long Itchington
• Long Marston
• Lowsonford 
• Loxley
• Mappleborough Green
• Moreton Morrell
• Napton-on-the-Hill
• Newbold-on-Stour
• Northend
• Norton Lindsey 
• Offchurch 
• Old Milverton 
• Oxhill
• Pillerton Priors
• Priors Marston
• Quinton
• Rowington 
• Rowington Green 
• Salford Priors
• Sherbourne 
• Shrewley Common 
• Snitterfield
• Stockton
• Stoneleigh 
• Tanworth-in-Arden
• Temple Herdewycke
• Tiddington
• Tredington
• Tysoe (Middle & Upper)
• Wasperton 
• Welford-on-Avon
• Weston-under-Wetherley
• Wilmcote
• Wood End
• Wootton Wawen
Q48. What is your favourite Growth Option and what do you particularly like 
about this option?
Q49. What is your least favourite Growth Option and what do you particularly not 
like about this option?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 856.5 Alternative approaches to the growth options
There are several ways that development can be accommodated even within each Growth Option. 
At this stage we don’t know what the quantum of development in any particular area will be. 
Decisions about this still need to be made based on further technical work to assess the suitability 
and appropriateness of locations and sites. 
One key distinction relates to the number of sites in any one location, and there will be any number 
of permutations to achieve a desired development target. For example, if we decide that we 
should build 1,000 homes over the Plan period in a particular location, we could achieve this in a 
variety of ways:
• 20 sites each of 50 homes
• 10 sites each of 100 homes
• 2 sites of 500 homes
• 1 site of 1,000 homes
Each approach will have different benefits and impacts, and will be dependent on the availability of 
land in any location. It will also need to take into account the full range of planning issues, including 
landscape and settlement character.
Densification
Densification, also known as intensification, is the approach of increasing the number of homes 
that can be built on a given piece of land, and increasing the number of homes within existing 
settlements through for example:
• Using vacant sites e.g. infilling
• Re-using underused employment land 
• Accommodating more homes in town centres e.g. above shops
• Re-using empty homes
• Focusing on brownfield land
Many new developments are typically built at a density of 30 dwellings per hectare. You can 
increase the density and therefore the number of homes in several ways:
• Build smaller sized homes (i.e. 1 and 2 bed homes instead of 4 and 5 bed homes)
• Reduce the plot size of homes (i.e. smaller gardens)
• Increase the number of storeys (i.e. town houses)
National Planning Policy is driving towards a denser form of development in order to maximise the 
effectiveness of land and minimise greenfield land-take. Benefits include climate change, reducing 
the need to travel as well as promoting active travel. Densification could also help to sustain and 
revitalise town centres by encouraging new uses as well as increased footfall.
Q50. Do you agree that we should be considering densification as part of our 
Growth Option? If not, why not?South Warwickshire Local Plan86New Settlements
Within the Growth Options A-G presented above there are potentially two sub-options to consider.
The first would be to distribute growth across all of the identified settlements within the Growth 
Option, subject to technical assessments to identify suitable sites. That is not to say that each 
settlement would get the same amount of growth, but rather that every settlement would get 
some growth.
The second approach would be to identify a very small number of key locations within the Growth 
Option for significant and large-scale development. Essentially, the focus of this approach would 
be the creation of a new settlement or new settlements where most of the development to 2050 
would be accommodated. 
The benefit of the new settlement approach is that it better allows for the integration of 
new infrastructure to accompany new development. It also reduces the pressure on existing 
infrastructure in existing towns and villages which can often be difficult to, or more costly to, 
expand.
The dis-benefit of new settlements is that they take a long time to start. Other smaller sites may be 
required elsewhere to deliver the homes and jobs needed in the first few years of the Plan period 
until such time that the new settlements are up and running.
Q51. Do you agree that we should be considering new settlements as part of our 
Growth Option? If so, where in South Warwickshire should they be located?
Green Belt
The Green Belt covers approximately the northern third of South Warwickshire i.e. the land north of 
the towns of Alcester, Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwick and Royal Leamington Spa. The purpose of 
the Green Belt is fivefold6 :
•To check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas
•To prevent neighbouring towns merging into one another
•To assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment
•To preserve the setting and special character of historic towns
•To assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other land
As such, development on Green Belt land is heavily restricted.
Whilst the presence of the Green Belt can be beneficial for those areas that it protects, one 
consequence is that it can increase growth in those locations beyond the Green Belt because the 
development needs that Green Belt areas generate have to be met further away in non-Green Belt locations. 
•the re-use of brownfield land
•optimised the density of new development, particularly in town centres and locations well-served by public transport
•determine whether neighbouring councils could accommodate any of our development needs
613. Protecting Green Belt land - National Planning Policy Framework - Guidance - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 87A number of settlements within the Green Belt (particularly the smaller villages) are covered by 
Green Belt designation. This is known as being ‘washed over’ by the Green Belt. Larger settlements, 
whilst they may be surrounded by Green Belt, are excluded or ‘inset’ from the Green Belt itself (e.g. 
Kenilworth) so that Green Belt policy does not apply to the town itself. 
In terms of development in the Green Belt, there are a number of approaches:
• Amending the boundaries around existing towns and villages by 
expanding these settlements into the Green Belt on a site-by-site basis 
as required. This is also known as ‘nibbling’ the Green Belt.
• Altering the boundaries around existing towns and villages by expanding these 
settlements into the Green Belt through larger ‘urban’ extensions.
• Removing a large area from the Green Belt to accommodate large-
scale development e.g. a new settlement on a railway line. 
• Removing existing settlements currently washed over by the 
Green Belt from the Green Belt, known as insetting.
It is important to note the different potential impacts on the Green Belt of the various approaches, 
as well as the consequential impacts on areas beyond the Green Belt.
Combined with the work on the spatial development strategy, we can then make decisions 
about whether or not any land should be removed from the Green Belt in order to best meet the 
development challenges facing South Warwickshire over the Plan period. We can also use this 
opportunity to consider whether additional land should be added to the Green Belt. 
Importantly, Green Belt is not an environmental or landscape designation. It contains land of 
varying quality including whole villages, brownfield sites as well as tracts of open countryside.
Q52. Notwithstanding your preferred Growth Option, do you agree that we should 
explore growth opportunities in Green Belt locations? If not, why not?
Q53. Are there any other options or approaches for meeting our development 
needs within South Warwickshire that we should consider? Please give details.South Warwickshire Local Plan88Appendix 1: Glossary
Word Definition 
Accessibility The ability of people to move around an area and reach places and 
facilities, including elderly and disabled people, those with young 
children and those encumbered with luggage or shopping
Active travel Transport of people or goods, through non-motorised means, based 
around human physical activity.
Affordable housing Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to 
eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility 
is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. 
Affordable housing should include provisions for it to remain at an 
affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be 
recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.
Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private 
registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008), for which guideline target rents are 
determined through the national rent regime. It may also be owned by 
other persons and provided under equivalent rental arrangements to 
the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the Homes and 
Communities Agency.
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered 
providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social 
rented housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require 
a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service 
charges, where applicable).
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost 
above social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the 
Affordable Housing definition above. These can include shared equity 
(shared ownership and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and 
intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable housing, 
such as “low cost market” housing, may not be considered as affordable 
housing for planning purposes. 
Biodiversity The variety of life on earth. It encompasses the whole of the natural 
world and all living things including plants, animals, and other 
organisms which, together, interact in complex ways with the inanimate 
environment to create living ecosystems.
Biodiversity & Green 
Infrastructure 
AssessmentAn assessment that will help guide and shape the planning and 
delivery of biodiversity and Green Infrastructure. It forms the baseline 
for a positive and proactive approach to the management and 
enhancement of natural assetsScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 89Word Definition 
Biodiversity Offsetting Biodiversity offsetting involves activities to create biodiversity benefits in 
order to compensate for biodiversity losses resulting from development. 
This is to ensure that when a development damages nature in a way 
that is unavoidable or cannot be mitigated, new nature sites will be 
created to offset the negative impact on biodiversity.
Blue Infrastructure Infrastructure involving water, for example canals, ponds, wetlands, 
streams, rivers
Brownfield Land Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, excluding 
agricultural buildings. Also known as previously developed land.
Call for Sites A period of time where landowners are encouraged to come forward 
with sites they are interested in developing
Climate Change A change in global or regional climate patterns, in particular a change 
apparent from the mid to late 20th century onwards and attributed 
largely to the increased levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide produced 
by the use of fossil fuels.
Climate Change 
AdaptationAdjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or 
expected climatic factors or their effects (including from changes 
in rainfall and rising temperatures) which moderate harm or exploit 
beneficial opportunities.
Climate Change 
MitigationAction to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system, 
primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Climate Change 
Impact Assessment An assessment to determine the impact any development may have on 
climate change
Connectivity The state of being connected or interconnected. In planning, 
connectivity can refer to road, rail, cycle and walking networks; 
digital connectivity; social connectivity; and the connectivity of green 
infrastructure 
Decarbonisation The process of removing or reducing the carbon dioxide (CO2) output 
of a country’s economy. This is usually done by decreasing the amount 
of CO2 emitted across the active industries within that economy.
Delivery and 
Viability StudiesAssessment to determine that the contents of the Plan and its 
development strategies can be achieved.
Demographics Statistical data relating to the population and particular groups within it
Duty to Co-operate The duty to co-operate is set out in section 33A of the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 . It puts a legal duty on local planning 
authorities and county councils in England, and prescribed public bodies 
to engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis to maximise 
the effectiveness of Local Plan and Marine Plan preparation in relation 
to strategic cross boundary matters.
Economic Impact 
AssessmentsA specific form of analysis which calculates the direct, indirect and 
induced benefits from various projects/developments.South Warwickshire Local Plan90Word Definition 
Economic Needs 
AssessmentAn assessment to determine the type and amount of employment land 
that is required to support the economic activities within the area.
Employment 
Land StudyEmployment Land Studies consider and makes recommendations 
regarding the level of future employment land provision, and identify 
potential broad locations for future employment development.
Energy Hierarchy The Energy Hierarchy is a classification of energy options that prioritises 
a sustainable approach. The top of the energy hierarchy aims to reduce 
the need for energy, and the bottom falls back on using conventional 
fossil fuels. The middle tiers look at using renewable energy sources and 
being efficient with the energy created to reduce waste.
Equalities Impact 
Assessment (EQIA) An assessment to ensure that strategies and policies contribute 
towards eliminating discrimination, promoting equality and fostering 
good relations.
Green Infrastructure A network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural, which is 
capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life 
benefits for local communities.
Habitats Regulations 
AssessmentAn assessment to determine the potential effects of the Plan on 
protected habitats
Health Impact 
Assessment (HIA) An assessment that puts people and their health at the heart of the 
planning process. It is used to identify and optimise the health and 
wellbeing impacts of plans.
Housing Market Area These illustrate the influence of an urban area on a wider geographical 
area. They are defined by analysing commuting and migration patterns. 
Significantly, these areas are not bound by administrative boundaries.
Housing Needs 
Assessment An assessment of housing needs in the local area. This assessment 
plays a crucial role in underpinning the planning policies relating to 
affordable housing. In addition, the information on local needs is 
required to determine the location of such housing and guide new 
investment.
Housing Strategy Document detailing how Councils and their partners plan to work 
together to ensure that more people get the opportunity to live 
independently in good quality housing of their choice
Infrastructure The network of essential physical services that most buildings or 
activities are connected to. It includes not only physical services in an 
area (eg. gas, electricity and water provision, telecommunications, 
sewerage) and networks of roads, public transport routes, footpaths 
etc. but also community facilities and green infrastructure. New or 
improved infrastructure will generally need to be provided where 
significant levels of new development are proposed.
Industrial Strategy A document that looks at the strengths and weaknesses of the local 
economy and sets out a plan of action to build on existing successes, 
and to develop and support areas that may be strugglingScoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 91Word Definition 
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan A ‘live’ document that details the strategic infrastructure required in 
order to deliver the growth planned for within the Local Plan. The IDP 
brings together a range of data from infrastructure providers in order to 
help ensure that the right infrastructure is prioritised.
Landscape Character 
Assessment An assessment undertaken to help identify various landscape types with 
a distinct character that is based on a recognisable pattern of elements, 
including combinations of geology, landform, soils, vegetation, land use 
and human settlement.
Local Plan The plan for the future development of the local area, drawn up by the 
Local Planning Authority in consultation with the community. In law this 
is prescribed as a Development Plan Document adopted under the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
Natural Surveillance The discouragement to wrongdoing by the presence of passers-by or 
the ability of people to be seen out of surrounding windows. Also known 
as passive surveillance (or supervision). See also Planning Out Crime.
Neighbourhood Plan A plan prepared by Parish/Town Councils or Neighbourhood Forums to 
establish general planning policies for the development and use of land 
within a particular neighbourhood area. Subject to conformity with the 
strategic policies of the Local Plan, an independent examination and 
support in a community referendum, a Neighbourhood Plan will become 
part of the planning framework for land uses in the local area.
Net Zero Carbon Having Net Zero Carbon dioxide emissions, either by balancing carbon 
dioxide emissions with removal, or simply eliminating carbon dioxide 
emissions altogether
Passive first approach An approach to building design that utilises the architecture and 
construction of buildings in order to reduce energy use and improve 
energy efficiency.
Renewable Energy Renewable Energy Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as 
generating electricity. Renewable energy covers those energy flows that 
occur naturally and repeatedly in the environment – from the wind, the 
fall of water, the movement of the oceans, from the sun and also from 
biomass and deep geothermal heat. 
Self and Custom 
build housing“Self-build” refers to projects where individuals or groups directly 
organise the design and construction of new homes. Custom 
housebuilding involves individuals or groups working with a specialist 
developer to deliver new homes that meet their specific aspirations and 
needs.
Settlement Design 
Analysis A form of analysis that looks at the structure and design of existing 
settlements to help identify where growth might best be integrated.
Severance Effect The term applied to the effects that roads and their traffic can have on 
social interaction. In particular it relates to the imposition of barriers that 
deter people’s movements.South Warwickshire Local Plan92Word Definition 
Social isolation Social isolation can be defined structurally as the absence of social 
interactions, contacts, and relationships with family and friends, with 
neighbours on an individual level, and with “society at large” on a 
broader level.
Soundness To be considered sound, a Development Plan Document must meet 
four tests, it must be positively prepared, justified (have a robust and 
credible evidence base and be the most appropriate strategy) as 
well as effective (deliverable, flexible and able to be monitored) and 
consistent with national policy.
Specialist Housing Specialised accommodation for any age group that is purpose designed 
and designated in a planning obligation for a specific client group. The 
delivery of support or care will not result in the categorisation of housing 
as specialised if it is not purpose designed and designated.
Standard Method The standard method is a government formula used to determine the 
minimum number of homes anticipated to be planned for, in a way 
which addresses projected house growth and historic under-supply.
The standard method identifies a minimum annual housing need figure. 
It does not produce a housing requirement figure.
Statement of 
Community 
Involvement (SCI)This sets out the standards to be achieved by the Local Authority 
in involving the community in the preparation, alteration and 
continuing review of all Local Development Documents (LDDs) and 
planning applications. The SCI is a clear public statement enabling 
the community to know how and when they will be involved in the 
preparation of an LDD and how they will be consulted on planning 
applications.
Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA)A high-level assessment of flood risk carried out by or for Local Planning 
Authorities with the purpose of assisting them to deliver sustainable 
development and to avoid development in areas that are at risk of 
flooding or that would increase flooding elsewhere.
Strategic Housing 
and Employment 
Land Availability 
Assessment A key component of the evidence required to support the delivery of 
sufficient land for housing and employment to meet the community’s 
need. 
Sustainable drainage 
systems (SuDS)The SuDS approach involves slowing down and reducing the quantity 
of surface water run off for a developed area to manage flood risk 
downstream, and reduce the risk of run off causing pollution. This is 
achieved by harvesting, infiltrating, slowing, storing, conveying and 
treating run off on site. SuDS allow water to become a more visible 
and tangible part of the built environment, which can be enjoyed by 
everyone.
Sustainable growth/
developmentMeeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 93Word Definition 
Sustainability 
AppraisalThe Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires Local 
Development Documents (LDDs) to be prepared with a view to 
contributing to the achievement of sustainable development. 
Sustainability appraisal is a systematic process that assesses the social, 
environmental and economic effects of the strategies and policies in a 
LDP from the outset of the preparation process. This helps to ensure 
that decisions are made that accord with sustainable development 
requirements.
Sustainability Themes The topics covered by the Wheel of sustainability. All topics need to 
be carefully considered within the Plan making process and are all 
necessary in the creation of sustainable communities.
Transport Assessment A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues 
relating to a proposed development. It identifies what measures will 
be required to improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particularly for alternatives to the car such as walking, cycling and 
public transport, and what measures will need to be taken to deal with 
the anticipated transport impacts of the development.
Urban Grain The ratio of built form to other areas of open space, and the way in 
which urban areas are subdivided into smaller plots or blocks. A ‘fine 
urban grain’ area would have a pattern of smaller plots connected to 
each other within a wider urban block.
Use Classes 
RegulationsThe Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) 
Regulations 2020  set out the broad planning use classes that different 
types of development belong to. These use classes are used in 
determining the types of development deemed appropriate in certain 
areas, and for planning applications for the change of use of land or 
buildings from one use class to another.
Water Cycle Strategy Document identifying the water services (incl. supply, and waste) 
required to support the development within the Plan. It establishes 
where any constraints exist and identifies measures to eliminate or 
mitigate these constraints.
Wellbeing The state of being comfortable, healthy, or happy
Zero-carbon Where no carbon emissions are being produced from a product/service
 South Warwickshire Local Plan94Appendix 2:  
List of Consultation Questions
Section 3: About the Plan
Q1 Do you agree that we should prepare a Local Plan for South Warwickshire? If not, why not?
Q2 Do you agree with our approach of starting with a high-level, strategic part 1 Local Plan?  
If not, why not?
Q3 Do you agree that the Local Plan should run to 2050? If not, what alternative end date do 
you suggest and why?
Q4 Do you agree that this is the right evidence that we need to inform the Local Plan? Is there 
further evidence that you think will be required?
Q5 Do you have any comments on the impact assessments that accompany the South 
Warwickshire Local Plan?
Q6 Please tell us about specific sites you wish to promote for:
Q6a Housing
Q6b Employment / Industrial / Commercial
Q6c Retail
Q6d Leisure / Community
Q6e Gypsies and Travellers
Q6f Open Space / Biodiversity / Green Infrastructure
Q6g Utilities / Infrastructure (inc. renewable energy)
Q6h Other uses
Please provide a map to accompany your suggestion clearly showing the boundaries of the site. 
You do not need to tell us about sites you wish to retain for agricultural use. 
Please use the form at Appendix 3 to provide as much information as possible.
We only want to hear about sites that are larger than 0.4 hectares / 1 acre in size (for example 
will provide more than 10 homes or equivalent).
Section 4: Key Strategic Issues
Q7 Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should address social isolation and 
loneliness? How should this be done?
Q8 Do you agree with encouraging connectivity and ensuring key infrastructure is in place to 
support this? How should this be done?
Q9 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to address these issues? If not, what is your 
alternative? Are there any particular approaches that we should consider?
You may wish to cross refer to Question 42 to answer this question. 
Q10 Do you agree that the strategic design principles above should inform directions/locations 
for growth? If not, why not?
Q11 Do you agree with the emphasis on connectivity? If not, why not?
Q12 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to explore ways in which the reliance on the 
private vehicle may be reduced? If not, why not?Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 95Q13 Do you agree that enhancing connectivity and prioritising active and sustainable travel are 
the best ways to achieve this? Please explain your answer.
Q14 Are there any additional transport issues or priorities you think that the Local Plan should 
address? Please explain your answer.
Q15 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to improve infrastructure, such as charging 
points, for electric vehicles and e-bikes? Please explain your answer.
Q16 Are there any other ways you think the Local Plan could encourage the increased uptake 
of electric and other low-emission vehicles? Please explain your answer.
Q17 Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should seek to diversify the local 
economy by supporting growth in new industrial sectors? If not, what other ways should 
the Local Plan support economic growth?
Q18 Do you agree that new employment opportunities should mainly be focussed in existing 
employment locations? If not, what other locations should be considered?
Q19 Do you agree that the affordability of employment land and premises is a key issue that 
the Local Plan should address? If not why not?
Q20 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek specific opportunities to support small and 
emerging businesses? If not, what do you suggest?
Q21 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to build on South Warwickshire’s existing 
cultural and heritage assets in order to enhance the economy? If not, what alternative do 
you suggest?
Q22 Do you agree that the Local Plan should aim to reduce skills ‘leakage’ and provide greater 
opportunities for education and training? If not, what alternative do you suggest?
Q23 Do you agree that the Local Plan should seek to adapt to the changing role of town 
centres? What do you suggest?
Q24 Do you agree that congestion and the car-dominance of town centres are key factors to 
address when considering how town centres can be enhanced? If not, what alternative 
factors should be addressed?
Q25 Do you agree that the provision of sufficient utilities infrastructure is a key issue for the 
Local Plan to consider? If not, why not?
Q26 Do you agree that the Local Plan should encourage the use of the ‘energy hierarchy’ in 
developments, aiming to reduce the use of energy in the first instance wherever possible? 
If not, what approach do you suggest?
Q27 Do you agree that it is important to protect natural resources and that mineral resources 
are extracted before development commences? Please explain your answer. 
Q28 Is it important to ensure that the development of best agricultural land is avoided 
wherever possible? Please explain your answer.
Q29 Do you agree that development should provide compensatory measures / enhancements 
to compensate for their impacts (including biodiversity offsetting/ landscape restoration)? 
Are there any other matters that should be considered?
Q30 Is the protection of, and enhancement of our green areas and associated habitat / 
biodiversity a high priority for the Local Plan? Are there any other matters that should be 
considered?
Q31 Do you agree that wherever possible and practical, large-scale developments should also 
deliver substantive areas of green space (such as country parks etc.)? If not, what is your 
alternative?
Q32 Is tree planting an important issue that the Local Plan should seek to encourage? How 
should the Local Plan achieve this?South Warwickshire Local Plan96Q33 Do you agree with the proposed ways in which the Local Plan should tackle climate 
change? What other ways can the Local Plan help us achieve Net Carbon Zero?
Q34 Do you agree that flood mitigation should be a major priority for the Local Plan when 
delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan achieve this?
Q35 Do you agree that the provision of health facilities should be a major priority when 
delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan achieve this? 
Q36 Do you agree that the South Warwickshire Local Plan should look to address congestion in 
town centres in order to improve air quality? If not, what is your alternative?
Q37 Do you agree that the Local Plan should prioritise and support additional guest 
accommodation in South Warwickshire? If not, why not? 
Q38 Do you agree that the provision of education facilities should be a major priority when 
delivering new housing? How should the Local Plan achieve this?
Section 5: Vision and Strategic Objectives
Q39 Do you agree that the four overarching principles will deliver the South Warwickshire you 
want? If not, what changes would you like to see?
Q40 Do you agree with this approach to establishing visions for those key places identified in 
the South Warwickshire Local Plan? If not, what is your alternative?
Q41 Do you agree that these should be the strategic objectives for the Local Plan? Are there 
any others?
Section 6: Options for Growth
Q42 How do you think we should best address the affordability of housing?
Q43 If we are required to meet housing shortfalls from elsewhere, how best should we 
accommodate such shortfalls? (You may wish to refer to the growth options set out below 
to help you answer this question).
Q44 Do you agree with prioritising jobs by increasing employment opportunities and therefore 
potentially increasing the minimum housing requirement for South Warwickshire? If not, 
what alternative do you suggest? 
Q45 Are there any locations in South Warwickshire where you have specific infrastructure 
concerns? Please specify.
Q46 Do you agree with the initial findings of the high-level Sustainability Assessment of the 
Growth Options? If not, why not?
Q47 Do you agree with the initial findings of the climate change analysis of the Growth Options? 
If not, why not?
Q48 What is your favourite Growth Option and what do you particularly like about this option?
Q49 What is your least favourite Growth Option and what do you particularly not like about this 
option?
Q50 Do you agree that we should be considering densification as part of our Growth Option? If 
not, why not?
Q51 Do you agree that we should be considering new settlements as part of our Growth 
Option? If so, where in South Warwickshire should they be located?
Q52 Notwithstanding your preferred Growth Option, do you agree that we should explore 
growth opportunities in Green Belt locations? If not, why not?
Q53 Are there any other options or approaches for meeting our development needs within 
South Warwickshire that we should consider? Please give details.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 97Appendix 3:  
Call for Sites Submission Form
What is the call for sites?
As part of the Plan making process, we are required by legislation to identify a future supply of 
land that’s “suitable, available and achievable” for use for housing and economic development 
and to meet other objectives of the Plan. Part of this involves inviting landowners to come forward 
with sites they are interested in developing. This is known as a call for sites. We will conduct a 
technical assessment of land put forward and look to identify any suitable land within the South 
Warwickshire Local Plan that accords with its objectives and spatial development strategy.
When are calls for sites usually made?
It is appropriate that we launch a call for sites at an early stage in the Plan making process. Usually, 
authorities are planning for the period of that particular Local Plan (a minimum of 15 years hence, 
but this may possibly be a longer term for the South Warwickshire Local Plan). 
Who can put forward a site?
Anyone, whether an individual or business organisation, can put forward a site for consideration. 
These can be sites that are being promoted by landowners, developers, agents, local businesses 
and individuals within the Plan area. . 
What kind of sites are local authorities looking for?
Typically, sites can be of any size or type, including occupied, vacant, derelict or undeveloped 
land. Proposals can be for any type of land use, including residential, gypsy and traveller sites, 
commercial, renewable energy sites, retail, leisure or recreation and green infrastructure.
How is the call for sites publicised?
Our call for sites exercise, forms an important part of the Scoping and Call for Sites consultation 
and will also be announced by posting details of how to put forward a site on the Plan’s website. 
We will use our network of contacts in the local property sector to also help them publicise the 
call for sites. This is why it’s useful for landowners to have a relationship with a planning agent 
or property agent, or other property professional, so they are aware when these call for sites 
invitations are published.
Are all submitted sites allocated for development?
No. The sites have to be technically assessed first. Even those that are deemed suitable following 
technical assessment may not necessarily be allocated for development. Allocation for develop -
ment will also depend on a range of policy and practical considerations, some of which may be 
unique to the requirements of South Warwickshire. 
In other words, the technical assessment will provide information on the range of sites potentially 
available to meet need, but it’s for the Local Plan process itself to determine which of those sites or 
broad locations are the most suitable and deliverable for a particular use.South Warwickshire Local Plan98Do I have to wait for a call for sites exercise to 
put forward a site for consideration? 
No. Sites within an existing Local Plan will be favourable from a planning permission 
point of view, but a site can be put forward and promoted for development 
consideration as part of the call for sites exercise at any time. Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 99Appendix 3:  
Planning for South Warwickshire  
South Warwickshire Local Plan
Call for Sites Pro-forma - May 2021
• Please complete and submit this form if you would like to suggest land for future development 
or infrastructure purposes in the South Warwickshire Local area. They will be assessed 
and considered for their suitability for inclusion as allocations within the emerging South 
Warwickshire Local Plan. Details of the emerging South Warwickshire Local Plan can be found 
at www.southwarwickshire.org.uk/swlp  
• Please only submit land or sites capable of delivering 10 or more homes or land that is more 
than 0.4 Hectares (1 Acre).
• Please complete a separate form for each site. Complete each section of the form clearly and 
give as much information as possible.
• You must attach a map indicating the precise boundaries of the land being forwarded for 
consideration.
• You must sign and date the declaration at the end of the form.
• You do not need to tell us about land or sites you wish to retain for agricultural use. 
• In submitting land, you consent to your name and postal address to be made publicly available.
• Please submit as much detail as possible as it will greatly assist the consideration of your site 
(note, boxes marked with a * must be completed).
1. *Y our Details (please provide details)
*Title *Name
*Organisation  
(if relevant)*Representing  
(if relevant)
*Address
*Post Code *Telephone
*EmailSouth Warwickshire Local Plan1002. Site Location (please provide details)
*Site Name
*Site Address  (Inc. 
postcode i f known)
OS Grid Ref:  
EastingOS Grid Ref:  
Northing
Total Site Area 
(Hectares)Estimate of the area 
of Site Suitable for 
Development
*Please attach a map clearly showing the precise boundaries of the site with a red line.  
If appropriate, show other land in your ownership in blue. If relevant, also provide details of land 
parcels where the site is under multiple land ownership (see Section 3).
3. Site Ownership (please tick as appropriate and/or provide details) 
*Ownership 
(please tick) Yes – sole owner
 Yes – part owner
  No  
  
*If you are a part 
owner or are not 
the owner, please 
provide name(s) and 
address(s) of the 
other landowners
*Have you notified the (other) landowner/s 
that you have submitted this site?Yes   No   Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 1014. Site Constraints (on site or on the boundary)  
(please tick as appropriate and/or provide details) 
*Current / Previous Use 
Adjacent Land Uses
Relevant Planning History  
(if any)
Existing InfrastructureElectricity Gas Mains 
Sewerage Mains 
WaterTelecoms
Access from the HighwayYes (classified road) Yes (unclassified road)
 No
Highway Works 
Ransom Strips
Legal Issues 
Existing Occupiers
Public Access /  
Rights of Way South Warwickshire Local Plan102Wildlife Designations 
(wildlife site, protected 
species)
Heritage Designations 
(e.g. listed buildings) 
Agricultural Land 
Classification 
(If appropriate) 
Environment Constraints  
(e.g. mature trees, TPOs, 
ponds, watercourses etc.)
Physical Constraints  
(e.g. flooding, potential  
land contamination)
Infrastructure Constraints 
(e.g. pylons, gas mains) 
 
Other Known Issues / 
Constraints  
 
Possible Interventions to 
Overcome Constraints?  
 Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 1035. Proposal Details (please tick as appropriate and/or provide details) 
Proposed 
Development
Proposed  
Intended use (s)
(tick all that you wish 
to be considered)Housing / Residential 
Employment/ 
Industrial / Commercial
Retail
Leisure/ Community
Gypsy and Travellers
Open Space/ 
Biodiversity/ Green 
Infrastructure
Other Uses (please 
specify)
Please note, you do not need to tell us about sites you wish to retain for 
agricultural use.
Site Capacity / 
Density 
(i.e. estimated no.  
of homes / floor 
space) 
Potential for 
DevelopmentMarketed for 
DevelopmentNegotiations with a 
DeveloperIn control of a 
Developer
Availability for 
Development Short-term   
(within 5 yrs.)Medium-term   
(6-10 yrs.) Long-term   
(11+ yrs.)South Warwickshire Local Plan104Estimated 
Development 
Timescale / 
Phasing (Inc. build 
rates) 
6. Continuation Section 
Please add any further information you wish to add here.
Please note: submitting a site to us does not guarantee that it will be allocated. The sites 
have to be technically assessed first. Even those that are deemed suitable following technical 
assessment may not necessarily be allocated for development. Allocation for development will 
also depend on a range of policy and practical considerations, some of which may be unique to 
the requirements of South Warwickshire. In other words, the technical assessment will provide 
information on the range of sites potentially available to meet needs, but it’s for the Local Plan 
process itself to determine which of those sites are the most suitable and deliverable for a 
particular use.Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 105South Warwickshire Local Plan106Scoping and Call for Sites Consultation May 2021 107*Signature 
In submitting a site, you consent for your name and postal address to be made 
publicly available and for a representative of the Council to access the site (if 
necessary) to undertake a site assessment with or without prior notification. 
Your details will also be added to the Council’s Planning Policy database and you 
may receive notifications of forthcoming public consultations and stages of plan 
preparation. You can request that your details are removed from the database at 
any time.  
*Name
*Signature 
*Address
*Date
Please return completed forms to the Planning Team 
By email  
swlp@stratford-dc.gov.uk  
By post
Stratford-on-Avon District Council
Address: Elizabeth House, 
Church Street, 
Stratford-upon-Avon, CV37 6HXWarwick District Council 
Address: Riverside House, 
Milverton Hill, 
Leamington Spa, CV32 5HZswlp@warwickdc.gov.uk