A Sustainable Town
Watford Local Plan
2021-2038
 2 Foreword
Foreword
The Local Plan is a framework for how we grow our town so that it continues 
to be a great place to live, work and visit. With many challenges facing the 
community – including climate change, the shortage of homes, revitalising 
the town centre, delivery of new infrastructure, providing more jobs and 
protecting the environment and heritage of the town – we must be bold and 
ambitious. A new Local Plan is our opportunity to be exactly that, facing these 
issues head on to ensure Watford continues to flourish and grow in the best 
possible way.
Watford remains a popular town, and rightfully so, with beautiful award 
winning parks, excellent transport connections, a host of quality shops and 
restaurants, good schools and great leisure and cultural facilities. Plus, we are 
home to a thriving business community, ranging from TK Maxx European HQ 
to a cluster of pharmaceutical companies and a host of creative SMEs. These 
are all the reasons why we are proud to call Watford home. 
It also means that our young people want to remain in Watford and others 
want to join our community. So we need to make sure we have the right 
homes in the right places and the much needed infrastructure to go  
with them.
The Local Plan sets out the best places to build homes and it protects and 
promotes the things that are important to people – like parks and green 
spaces, sustainable transport and community facilities.
Having a well thought through Local Plan in place means that we have our 
say on where development should be located. Otherwise, change will happen 
to our town in an unplanned way, with speculative development and little 
benefit to local community. A good Local Plan makes sure that decisions 
about the future of Watford are made here in the town and not by others.
Peter Taylor
Elected Mayor of Watford
3
Contents
How to use this document 6 
Chapter 1: A Spatial Strategy for Watford 9
Strategic Policy SS1.1: Spatial Strategy 23
Chapter 2: Core Development Area 24
Strategic Policy CDA2.1: Watford Gateway Strategic 
Development Area 30
Strategic Policy CDA2.2: Town Centre Strategic 
Development Area 37
Strategic Policy CDA2.3: Colne Valley Strategic 
Development Area 44
Chapter 3: Homes for a Growing Community 46
Strategic Policy HO3.1: Housing Provision 48
Policy HO3.2: Housing Mix, Density and Optimising 
Use of Land 50
Policy HO3.3: Affordable Housing 52
Policy HO3.4: Build to Rent 54
Policy HO3.5: Specialist Care and Supported Living 55
Policy HO3.6: Student, Co-living and 
Non-Self-Contained Accommodation 56 
Policy HO3.7: Self-build and Custom Housebuilding 574
Chapter 6: An Attractive Town 80
Strategic Policy QD6.1: Design for an Attractive Town 83
Policy QD6.2: Design Principles 85
Policy QD6.3: Public Realm 86
Policy QD6.4: Building Design 89
Policy QD6.5: Building Height 93
Chapter 7: The Historic Environment 94
Strategic Policy HE7.1: Enhancement and Protection of the 
Historic Environment 97
Policy HE7.2: Designated Heritage Assets 99
Policy HE7.3: Non-Designated Heritage Assets 101
Policy HE7.4: Archaeology 101
Chapter 8: A Climate Emergency 102
Strategic Policy CC8.1: Mitigating Climate Change and 
Reducing Carbon Emissions 104
Policy CC8.2: Sustainable Construction Standards for 
Non-residential Development 105
Policy CC8.3: Sustainable Construction and 
Resource Management 107
Policy CC8.4: Managing Air Quality 109
Policy CC8.5: Managing the Impacts of Development 110Policy HO3.8: Gypsies and Travellers 57
Policy HO3.9: Residential Conversions 58
Policy HO3.10: Building Standards for Healthy, Accessible 
and Adaptable Homes 61
Policy HO3.11: Private and Shared Private Amenity Space 62
Chapter 4: A Strong Economy 63
Strategic Policy EM4.1: Providing New Employment 65
Policy EM4.2: Designated Industrial Areas 67
Policy EM4.3: Office Development 68
Policy EM4.4: Economic Development Outside 
Designated Employment Locations 69
Policy EM4.5: Different Ways of Working 70
Policy EM4.6: Training, Skills and Professional Development 70
Chapter 5: A Vibrant Town 71
Strategic Policy VT5.1: Supporting Vibrant Retail Centres 74
Policy VT5.2: Watford Town Centre 78
Policy VT5.3: District and Local Centres 795
Chapter 9: Conserving and Enhancing the Environment 111
Strategic Policy NE9.1: The Natural Environment 113
Policy NE9.2: Green Infrastructure Network 115
Policy NE9.3: Blue Infrastructure Network 117
Policy NE9.4: Flood Risk and Mitigation 120
Policy NE9.5: Surface Water Management 122
Policy NE9.6: Protecting Open Space 123
Policy NE9.7: Providing New Open Space 124
Policy NE9.8: Biodiversity 125
Chapter 10: Infrastructure 126
Strategic Policy IN10.1: Integrated Infrastructure Delivery 128
Policy IN10.2: Providing Infrastructure to Support 
New Development 130
Policy IN10.3: Development Contributions 132
Chapter 11: A Sustainable Travel Town 133
Strategic Policy ST11.1: Sustainable Travel Town 136
Policy ST11.2: Protecting and Enhancing Future Public Transport
Routes and Watford Junction Station Area as a Transport Hub 138
Policy ST11.3: Providing Sustainable Transport Infrastructure 
for Major Development 142Policy ST11.4: A Walking and Cycling Infrastructure 
Improvement Town 145
Policy ST11.5: Electric Vehicles, Car Parking and Car Clubs 149
Policy ST11.6: Managing the Transport Impacts of Development 152 
Chapter 12: A Healthy Community 153
Strategic Policy HC12.1: Healthy Communities 156
Policy HC12.2: Health Impact Assessments 157
Policy HC12.3: Built Cultural and Community Facilities 158
Chapter 13: Site Allocations and New Development 159
Strategic Policy SA13.1: Allocated sites for delivery 162
Appendices 218
Appendix A: Monitoring Framework 219
Appendix B: Housing Trajectory 226
Appendix C: Transport Infrastructure Requirements 228
Appendix D: Cycle Parking Standards 231
Appendix E: Car Parking Standards 233
Appendix F: Marketing Requirements 235
Appendix G: Glossary 237
Appendix H: Planning Policies Superseded by the 
Watford Local Plan 2021-2038 2446 How to use this document
How to use this document
The Local Plan covers a wide range of complex and inter-related issues that 
need to be considered when new development is proposed to ensure change 
can be managed to deliver benefits for the community. The Plan sets out 
planning policies to guide planning decisions, identifies strategic areas for 
growth. Strategic policies are indicated in the policy titles, any policies that 
are not specified as strategic are local policies. Each policy issue has been 
assigned an icon. Where icons are shown at the top of a policy box, this 
broadly indicates that there are shared policy considerations.
Introduces the Local Plan and provides an overview of key planning themes through the document. Sets out the approach 
to growth and the principles behind the Core Development Area. Proposals for new development are to accord with the 
respective strategic development area policy and with the strategic and local planning policies elsewhere in the Local Plan.
Sets out the principles for development in the Core Development Area and locally specific opportunities and 
constraints in the Strategic Development Areas.Chapter 1: 
A Spatial Strategy for 
Watford
Chapter 2: 
Core Development AreaThe Local Plan and the Spatial Strategy
Introduces the Local Plan and sets out the objectives to be achieved when development comes forward.7 How to use this document
Provides a framework to deliver the housing needed in the borough, including types and sizes of homes for people 
with different needs, from single people to families, and those with disabilities.
Provides a structure to support economic growth and enable an economy that can adapt to changing economic 
conditions.
A framework to retain Watford Town Centre as the focus for retail, leisure, entertainment and cultural activities with 
flexibility to adapt to changing economic conditions. This will be supported by a network of sustainable local centres.  
This section sets out the design standards new development will be expected to achieve in order gain planning 
permission.
Sets out the key principles to protect Watford’s heritage and what proposals will need to consider if they affect a 
heritage asset, such as a listed building or conservation area.
Sets out requirements that new buildings need to achieve to reduce carbon emissions and contribute towards 
the borough becoming carbon neutral, while mitigating impacts associated with climate change, such as living 
environments, building quality and flood risk.
Policies to manage and improve the outdoor environment for people and wildlife, enhance biodiversity and manage 
impacts on the environment when new development comes forward. 
Provides the framework for delivery of the infrastructure needed to support new development.
Sets out an approach to enable better mobility and access to services and facilities, a more balanced reliance on 
different modes of transport and to encourage a shift towards greater use of public transport, walking and cycling.
The role of promoting good health in the built environment is increasingly recognised and this chapter discusses the 
key threads that run through the Plan.Chapter 3: 
Homes for a Growing 
Community
Chapter 4: 
A Strong Economy
Chapter 5: 
A Vibrant Town
Chapter 6: 
An Attractive Town
Chapter 7: 
The Historic Environment
Chapter 8: 
A Climate Emergency
Chapter 9: 
Conserving and Enhancing 
the Environment
Chapter 10: 
Infrastructure
Chapter 11: 
A Sustainable Travel Town
Chapter 12: 
A Healthy CommunityPlanning policies to guide development
Proposals for new development are to accord with strategic and local planning policies across different chapters in the Local Plan.8 How to use this document
The information used to support the policies and site allocations is set out 
in the Council’s evidence base which includes a diverse range of topic areas 
exploring local and strategic issues.
The diagrams covering the borough at the beginning of each chapter are 
included to provide context to the strategic objectives of the Local Plan and 
opportunities to consider when development comes forward. This also applies 
to the schematic diagrams for each of the three Strategic Development Areas. 
The strategic maps are not intended to demonstrate policy requirements 
and are indicative only. Where specific areas and sites within the borough are 
covered by particular policies, these are defined on the Policies Map. Identifies land suitable for new development and the types of land uses that would be acceptable, along with 
site-specific issues that should be considered by applicants.Chapter 13: 
Site Allocations and 
New DevelopmentSites for development
Proposals for new development are to accord with strategic and local planning policies across different chapters in the Local Plan.9
A Spatial Strategy 
for WatfordChapter 110
What is the Local Plan and what does it do? 
1.1  The Local Plan lies within the national town and country planning system. It 
sets out the policy framework for how land is used and guides development 
so that it comes forward in a way that is coordinated and planned for.1.2  The Local Plan is a ‘statutory’ or legally required document that forms part 
of the Council’s strategy to deliver sustainable development, tackle climate 
change and to deliver new homes, jobs and infrastructure for current and 
future generations. It covers the period from 2021 to 2038 and will guide new 
development so that it goes ahead in a co-ordinated manner, making the best 
and most appropriate use of land to meet the needs of the community. 
1.3  The Watford Local Plan sits within a wider structure of planning 
documents. This includes national guidance set out by the government, 
strategic plans, neighbourhood plans, supporting strategies and 
background studies. The hierarchical relationship between these policy 
documents is set out in Table 1.1.
1.4  Planning policies can be supported by additional guidance to explain 
how a policy is to be implemented in greater detail, these are referred to 
as Supplementary Planning Documents. Where required, the Council will 
prepare and update Supplementary Planning Documents to support the 
Local Plan.
Preparation of the Local Plan and stakeholder 
engagement 
1.5  When the Local Plan is being prepared, it goes through several stages 
from its inception, pulling together evidence to support decision-making, 
through to the adoption of the Local Plan, at which point the policies 
can be applied to manage change in the town effectively (Figure 1.1). 
The consultation has involved members of the public, the development 
industry, infrastructure organisations and other stakeholders that have an 
interest in the area. A Spatial Strategy for Watford
Table 1.1: Planning structure around the Watford Local Plan
Sets out the national guidance to which local 
plans must conform.
Provides a framework to deliver strategic needs 
across five local authority areas.
Sets out the growth strategy for the borough and 
policies to guide planning decisions and protect 
environmental and heritage assets.
Sets out policies on minerals and waste for new 
development to comply with (forms part of the 
Watford Local Plan).
Prepared by the members of the community to 
address locally specific planning issues (must be 
in conformity with Watford Local Plan).
These include documents which form part of 
the Development Plan such as Supplementary 
Planning Documents that support the Local Plan.
Provides a robust evidence base to inform the 
Local Plan and planning decisions.National Planning Policy 
Framework
South West Herts Joint 
Strategic Plan
Watford Local Plan
Hertfordshire Minerals 
and Waste Local Plans
Neighbourhood Plans
Local Development 
Documents
Background Studies11 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
South West Hertfordshire Joint Strategic Plan 
1.6  Watford is one of five authorities in South West Hertfordshire that share 
administrative boundaries and issues across the wider area, such as 
housing, employment and infrastructure. To plan strategically for growth in 
the area, Watford Borough Council, in conjunction with Dacorum Borough 
Council, Hertsmere Borough Council, Three Rivers District Council and St. 
Albans City & District Council, is preparing the South West Hertfordshire 
Joint Strategic Plan.
1.7  The Plan will influence the end phase of the current Local Plans and the 
direction of travel for the next generation of Local Plans that will follow. It 
is not a statutory document, however, local authorities that share cross-
boundary issues are encouraged by the government to prepare strategic 
plans as a way of maximising opportunities for growth and create greater 
benefits for communities.Figure 1.1: Stages in the preparation of a Local Plan
First draft Local Plan stages with public consultationIssues and Options stage with public consultationCollect evidence
Final draft Local Plan stage with public consultation
Submission of the final draft Local Plan 
to the Secretary of State for examination
Examination of the final draft Local Plan 
by an independent Planning Inspector
Adoption of the Local Plan
12
A brief portrait of Watford
1.8  In the middle of the nineteenth century Watford was a small market town 
in Hertfordshire with a population of around three thousand people. It 
saw growth from 1860 due to the introduction of the railways (various 
routes were developed in the years 1837 - 1925) and there was a rapid 
rise in the population from 1890 onwards. It was known for traditional 
industries including printing and brewing.
1.9  There are around 96,700 people (Office for National Statistics (ONS), 
2019) living in the approximate eight square miles of the borough. 
It is one of the smallest districts in England and the town has a high 
population density, averaging 45 people per hectare, compared to a 7 
people per hectare average in Hertfordshire (ONS, Census 2011). There 
are approximately 39,900 homes in the borough with an average 
household size of 2.4 persons per dwelling.
1.10  The town has a relatively young population and a high proportion 
of family-sized households compared to other areas in South West 
Hertfordshire (ONS, Census 2011). The town is ethnically diverse, with 62% 
of the existing population being White British, while 38% of people come 
from Black and Minority Ethnic backgrounds.
1.11  Watford is adjacent to North London and is facing similar growth 
pressures and related issues. Historical development has resulted in the 
built up area extending up to its boundaries and consequently much of 
the development taking place in the borough is located on previously 
developed land. Approximately 19% of the land in Watford’s administrative 
area is designated as Green Belt. Most of this performs a community 
function being designated as public open space with other areas 
important for wildlife habitats and biodiversity. 
1.12  There are four railway stations in the borough serving the mainline, 
London Overground and London Underground, connecting Watford 
to London, while the Abbey Line with two railway stations (in Watford) 
connects the town with St. Albans. The M25 is located just north of the 
town. Watford has long been a commuter town, yet one that maintains its 
independence and distinctive character.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
13
Sustainable development 
in England: The economic, 
environmental and social 
objectives
1.13  The National Planning Policy Framework 
states there are three overarching objectives 
to achieving sustainable development; these 
are economic, environmental and social. They 
are interdependent and need to be pursued 
in mutually supportive ways:
  An economic objective: to help build a 
strong, responsive and competitive economy, 
by ensuring that sufficient land of the right 
types is available in the right places and at the 
right time, to support growth, innovation and 
improved productivity; and by identifying and 
coordinating the provision of infrastructure.
  A social objective: to support strong, vibrant 
and healthy communities, by ensuring that 
a sufficient number and range of homes can 
be provided to meet the needs of present 
and future generations; and by fostering a 
well-designed and safe built environment, 
with accessible services and open spaces that 
reflect current and future needs and support 
communities’ health, social and cultural 
well-being.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
  An environmental objective: to contribute to 
protecting and enhancing our natural, built and 
historic environment, including making effective 
use of land; helping to improve biodiversity; 
using natural resources prudently; minimising 
waste and pollution; and mitigating and 
adapting to climate change, including moving 
to a low-carbon economy.
The key challenges and 
sustainability objectives for 
Watford: economy , society 
and environment 
1.14  Watford will see a lot of change in the 17 years 
covered by the plan period, as it grows and makes 
a transition towards being a more sustainable 
town, actively tackling climate change with the 
aim of becoming carbon neutral.
1.15  This will be achieved by promoting the 
three overarching objectives of the National 
Planning Policy Framework at a local level, 
thereby creating a different and better place in 
2038. The Council will work with organisations 
including Hertfordshire County Council to 
help implement the objectives set out in local 
and strategic strategies including the Local 
Transport Plan, Watford Council Plan and the 
Sustainability Strategy.
1.16  The following highlights the key economic, 
social and environmental characteristics of 
Watford now, and where the Council wants it 
to be in 2038.14
Watford’s economy and the 
key challenges 
•  New employment floorspace is important to 
support economic growth, and based on past 
trends, the East of England Forecast Model 
indicates that the number of jobs in Watford will 
increase by 11.4%.
•  There is limited land available in the borough 
to allocate new sites for industrial, storage and 
distribution uses with low plot ratios.
•  136,000sqm of office and industrial floorspace 
is needed in Watford. A variety of sites and 
floorspace of different quality are needed to 
support different sectors and employment skills.
•  Business start-up rates are well above the 
national and regional average, indicating there is 
a demand for flexible and affordable workspace 
to foster new businesses.
•  The Town Centre contains a mix of chain and 
independent retailers, creating a varied mix of 
retail, restaurant and leisure provision that make 
the area a retail and leisure hub for South West 
Hertfordshire.
•  The town supports a variety of different sectors, 
20% of jobs are in professional services and 
other large employers are in the retail and health 
care industries. Equally, there are also a number 
of people employed in industrial sectors, such as 
manufacturing, construction and wholesale.•  In Watford and across South West Hertfordshire 
there is a shortfall of land available for 
employment. Since 2015, changes to Permitted 
Development Right changes have coincided with 
a loss of employment floorspace.
•  The resident workforce in Watford is generally 
highly skilled overall (Nomis, 2019), however, this 
is not met with the same level of growth in high-
skilled jobs in the borough.
•  Watford developed as part of the London 
commuting belt in the 1850s and has retained 
that role, with 47% of outward commuters 
travelling into the London area.
•  Watford has good access to strategic transport 
rail routes and roads with the A41, M1 and M25 
while Luton and Heathrow airports are within  
20 miles.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
Watford’s economy in 
2038 – the sustainability 
objectives
•  The Plan will have helped attract business 
investment to support jobs growth, 
strengthening its key role in the sub 
regional economy.
•  The employment opportunities in the 
town will have increased with a highly 
skilled labour force and the provision of 
quality education facilities.
•  Employment areas will have been 
intensified, making more effective use of 
land and higher employment densities, 
with appropriate areas supporting a mix 
of complementary uses.
•  Watford Town Centre will have been 
enhanced as a place to socialise, as 
well as to shop, providing an enjoyable 
experience for people of all ages.
•  The town and wider area will have an 
attractive range of activities available, 
reinforcing Watford’s appeal as a 
destination for leisure and recreation.
•  Redevelopment and delivery of high 
quality office floorspace in Clarendon 
Road will have brought in new 
investment, facilitating growth.15
Watford’s society and the key 
challenges 
•  Watford is one of the most densely populated 
non-metropolitan districts in England.
•  The town experiences some of the highest levels 
of in-migration in Hertfordshire, reflecting its 
attractiveness as a place to live.
•  Watford has the lowest level of car ownership in 
Hertfordshire; a lot of its congestion is caused by 
through traffic.
•  Rising house prices mean that many people 
cannot afford a home of their own (the 
affordability ratio is 11.1 times the median average 
income (ONS, 2020)).
•  Life expectancy is marginally below the national 
average with males expected to live 79 years 
and women 83 years (NHS Health Profile), and is 
lower in more deprived areas.
•  Overall, Watford is ranked the 194th least 
deprived of 391 local authority areas in England, 
with no areas identified as being in the 10% most 
deprived parts of the country.
•  Despite areas of high prosperity, poverty is an 
issue in some wards.
•  There has been an increasing proportion of 
smaller one and two-bed homes built in recent 
years compared to family-sized housing.
•  There is limited space available for new social 
infrastructure such as new schools and 
healthcare facilities and to improve transport 
systems to encourage less car reliant travel.Watford’s environment and 
the key challenges
•  The River Colne and River Gade, along with the 
Grand Union Canal, provide structure to much of 
the green infrastructure network in the borough, 
but in places it is poor in quality.
•  Historical patterns of development have created 
constraints within the built up area that limit 
the potential to deliver new open space of any 
significant size.
•  Watford has the highest number of open spaces 
with Green Flag status in Hertfordshire, but some 
areas of the town have limited access to quality 
open space.
•  The number of heritage assets protected in the 
town as nationally and locally listed buildings 
make an important contribution towards the 
character of the town.
•  The built up area is traversed by a number of 
strategic road corridors that results in a vehicle 
dominated environment with air, noise and  
light pollution.
•  Traffic modelling shows that congestion and 
associated impacts on the environment will 
worsen without a modal shift in the town and 
also in the surrounding areas.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
Watford’s society in 
2038 – the sustainability 
objectives
•  New development will have met the needs 
of a population projected to increase to 
97,156 people in 2038 (ONS, 2018 based 
population projections).
•  The town will be characterised by mixed 
and balanced communities and new 
development that will have made a 
positive contribution towards this.
•  It will be a socially inclusive place for 
everyone, with a mix of homes for single 
occupancy, couples, families and older 
people including people with  
special needs.
•  There will be a high quality, safe, clean and 
attractive public realm that encourages 
people to be more active through 
walking and cycling, encouraging social 
interaction and better health.
•  Traffic congestion will be reduced and air 
quality improved, with priority given to 
public transport, shared car use, walking 
and cycling.16 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
1.19  The Local Plan is a roadmap of where 
we want to be, and when looking ahead 
to 2038, whilst it is difficult to predict the 
future, the Plan is aspirational and it seeks 
to lay the building blocks for a Vision that is 
both deliverable and achievable. It will help 
strengthen the town’s pre-eminent role in the 
South West Hertfordshire sub-region, in terms 
of being a desirable place to live, a desirable 
place to invest and a desirable place to visit. 
The overall growth strategy and sustainability 
objectives will help Watford with taking steps 
forward to deliver growth and embrace 
change in a positive and sustainable way.Helping to make Watford a 
better place for everyone 
1.17  The housing targets set by the government 
have placed considerable development 
pressure to deliver new homes in the town, 
increasing targets three-fold since 2013. In 
conjunction with this growth, the Local Plan 
needs to support economic development 
and make provision for infrastructure and 
community facilities to come forward 
alongside these developments. This change 
will need to be managed, which is one of the 
key roles of the Local Plan. 1.18  New development provides opportunities to 
not only meet future need but to also deliver 
facilities and improvements to support the 
existing community. To maximise these 
opportunities, it is important for the Local Plan 
to set out the key sustainability objectives that 
will contribute towards achieving the Vision 
for Watford, which will be delivered through 
a mix of corporate strategies and other 
approaches, with the Local Plan making the 
key contribution. 
•  The town will have a more sustainable pattern of urban development and transport, 
minimising the impact on the environment and reducing pollution.
•  New development will be high quality, designed to minimise impact on the environment 
through greater energy and resource efficiency and adapted to climate change. These 
adaptations and renewable energy opportunities will have been incorporated into new and 
existing developments.
•  The network of open spaces, parks and waterways, and the connections between them, will 
have been improved to support increased recreational activities.
•  Important biodiversity and wildlife habitats will have been protected and connections within 
the green and blue infrastructure networks improved, increasing their value for wildlife.
•  New development will also have made improvements to biodiversity and strengthened 
Watford’s ecosystems, reversing the national trend of biodiversity decline.
•  Important heritage assets, such as locally and nationally listed buildings, historic green spaces 
and conservation areas will have been protected and the historic environment enhanced. Watford’s environment in 2038 – the sustainability objectives17
At the edge of London, and also a part of the 
County of Hertfordshire, Watford will embrace 
its role as a major urban centre that acts as a 
focus for employment, homes, leisure, caring 
for its Town Centre and green spaces whilst 
making the most of its excellent connections 
to the capital and surrounding areas.
Watford will be an exemplar town in how it 
embraces the challenge of sustainability and 
climate change, with environmentally friendly 
construction and design, working towards 
being carbon neutral.
High quality design will be showcased as 
part of new development, with accessible 
and inclusive high density, mixed-use 
development and enhanced open spaces.
Green and blue infrastructure will be 
conserved and enhanced, maximising their 
value for biodiversity and other important 
ecosystem services. 
The Town Centre will retain its key role as a 
retail destination in the sub-region, home to a 
mix of uses including residential, commercial, 
cultural and leisure, creating a vibrant place 
for people to socialise, live and work. Helping to create a better Watford in 2038: our Vision
The town will have a comprehensive network 
of cycle and walking routes, encouraging a 
more active population. Public transport will 
also be enhanced, encouraging a move from 
car based travel for shorter journeys, reducing 
congestion and air pollution.
Watford’s social, cultural, built environment 
and heritage assets will be protected, and 
where possible their settings enhanced.
Local economies will be supported by 
creating opportunities for local businesses  
to access new markets and providing a mix  
of employment spaces to support  
business growth.
The population will be healthier, with more 
opportunities to get active, through walking 
and cycling and access to high quality  
open spaces.
Growth will be supported by a range of 
high quality infrastructure delivered in a 
comprehensive, timely and coordinated 
manner, making the most efficient use of land.
In 2038, Watford will continue to be a 
welcoming and vibrant place and home to 
a wide range of communities, where people 
enjoy a high quality of life.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
18 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
Planning for growth 
1.20  Many of the growth issues facing Watford are also being considered by other local 
authorities in South West Hertfordshire. All five authorities face different constraints 
making the delivery of development required over the respective plan periods 
challenging. In Watford, this challenge is primarily related to a shortfall of land 
available for development.
1.21  Watford has achieved 94% of its housing growth on brownfield land in the last ten 
years, reflecting the scarcity of greenfield land. Early in the stages of the Local Plan it 
was recognised that this trend of brownfield development would continue given the 
constrained nature of the borough. 
1.22  The borough was assessed against a number of criteria including access to public 
transport, employment areas, schools and local shopping centres. This led to the 
identification of three sustainability zones across the borough with the centre of 
Watford being significantly more sustainable than the rest of the town (Figure 1.2). 
These areas formed the basis for calculating housing capacity of the borough as 
part of the Watford Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (2021).
1.23  As demonstrated by the Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment, 
the majority of the land available for development is located in the area of highest 
sustainability. It is also the part of the borough that will see significant investment 
in the future and that will help facilitate infrastructure improvements integral to 
supporting the objectives of the Plan. Given its proximity to the Town Centre, business 
district and strategic transport hubs located at Watford Junction and Bushey this part 
of the borough has the greatest capacity to absorb new development in a way that 
will contribute towards achieving sustainable development.
1.24  The concentration of sites in the high sustainability zone led to the designation of 
three areas identified as being strategically important in the Local Plan; Watford 
Gateway, the Town Centre and the Colne Valley Strategic Development Areas. 
These are recognised as growth areas likely to experience transformative change. 
This area of growth encapsulating these designations is referred to as the Core 
Development Area, shown on the key diagram (Figure 1.3). In locations outside of 
these areas, while still likely to support development as areas of renewal, change will 
be more limited in scale and not transformative.Figure 1.2: Sustainability zones in Watford
19 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
N
Core Strategic Development Area
Clarendon Road Primary O/f_f.shortice Location
Designated Industrial Area
Community Parks
Safeguarded Transport Route
Green Belt
West Coast Main Line
Abbey Line
Transport for London
Railway Station
Underground Station
Overground Station
Major Bus Interchange
Grand Union Canal
Major River 
Motorway
RoadKey
OVERGROUNDOVERGROUNDFigure 1.3: Key Diagram20
A sustainable development 
strategy for Watford 
1.25  Sustainable development is integral to 
creating good places. To achieve it, proposals 
should seek to find a balance of economic, 
environmental and social considerations in 
order to ensure the town’s success without 
compromising the potential growth and use 
of resources in the future. For a development 
to be successful, these fundamental elements 
need to work together to benefit the scheme 
and the community.
1.26  The Spatial Strategy sets out the approach 
for development to contribute towards 
the Council Plan and long-term vision for 
Watford as an inclusive place for everyone 
and the aim to be a town that has embraced 
sustainability. As a largely urban borough, 
and given the findings of the Housing and 
Economic Land Availability Assessment 
and the trend for developing brownfield 
land in the last ten years this will continue. 
There will be a general presumption against 
inappropriate development in the Green Belt, 
so the extent of the Green Belt will be largely 
maintained. Other policies in the Plan support 
delivery of this strategy and will collectively 
ensure development takes place in the most 
appropriate way.1.27  To successfully achieve sustainable 
development, a wide variety of factors need 
to be balanced and delivered. One of the most 
important is climate change. This responds to 
the Climate Change Act (2008, as amended) 
when the government legislated that the 
United Kingdom will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by 100% by 2050. The Local Plan 
makes an important contribution towards 
achieving this target by guiding planning 
decisions to ensure they embrace and 
prioritise these principles.
1.28  In July 2019, Watford Borough Council 
declared a Climate Change Emergency. 
Key elements of the declaration included 
integrating climate change into planning 
policy and the Local Plan. This is to place 
greater focus on greener homes and 
buildings, taking into account climate impacts 
within Council decision making processes 
with the overall objective to be carbon neutral 
by 2030.
1.29  Addressing climate change is intrinsically 
linked to public health and wellbeing. Public 
health, physical and mental, is an important 
part of achieving sustainable development. 
Closely linked to this is the quality of homes 
people live in and how people feel included 
as part of their community. The design of 
buildings and the spaces around them is 
integral to encouraging people to be more 
active, have a greater sense of belonging 
in their community through more social 
interaction, and improving the perception of a 
place and in turn health and wellbeing.The Spatial Strategy
1.30  The approach is to meet a significant 
proportion of Watford’s future development 
needs in the Core Development Area. 
The residential character of the rest of the 
borough will largely see development that is 
more modest in scale.
1.31  This will enable a greater number of people 
to live in locations where there is good access 
to services and facilities, reducing the need to 
travel by car and making investment in public 
transport, walking and cycling infrastructure 
more viable and attractive by responding 
to demand. In turn, less reliance on private 
vehicles will help reduce traffic congestion to 
benefit the economy and reduce air and noise 
pollution. This will create space to support 
walking, cycling and public transport and 
encourage people to be more active and have 
healthier lifestyles, while improving the quality 
of the built environment.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
21 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
1.32  Creating sustainable neighbourhoods in this 
way has multiple benefits. New development 
can attract investment to the area as a business 
cluster, creating local jobs and providing 
opportunities for new skills and training 
through apprenticeships. New employment 
opportunities bring workers into Watford, which 
in turn, increases demand for ancillary goods 
and services supporting local businesses, 
particularly in the Town Centre and at the key 
employment areas. Delivering a mix of new 
homes to meet the needs of local people and 
those wanting to move here supports a more 
inclusive, equitable and balanced community. 
Alongside this growth the inclusion of 
measures, such as improvements to the green 
infrastructure network, will benefit people 
and biodiversity while making better use of 
resources and helps to create high quality 
places and habitats.
Collaborative working
1.33  Collaborative working is an integral part of 
preparing development schemes that will 
contribute towards delivering growth to 
help achieve sustainable development. Early 
engagement with the Local Planning Authority 
to discuss planning proposals is encouraged 
to ensure that schemes will comply with 
strategic and local planning policies that seek 
to achieve economic, environmental and social 
objectives. Engagement is also encouraged 
to help ensure that development comes 
forward efficiently from the time of its design 
to when it is completed, whilst minimising the 
risk of unforeseen delays and costs that could 
adversely impact upon a proposed scheme.
22
Monitoring the Local Plan
1.34  Monitoring of the Local Plan is important to determine the effectiveness of planning policies and 
whether they impact on Development Management decisions and contribute towards achieving 
the Council’s objectives and targets. The Local Plan will be monitored to ensure they are being 
successfully implemented and that the overall strategy is being achieved. These indicators are set 
out in Appendix A along with the source data to be collected to monitor the Plan. This findings will be 
presented in the Council’s Authority Monitoring Reports.
South West Hertfordshire Joint Strategic Plan
1.35  Watford forms part of the South West Hertfordshire Housing Market Area and Functional 
Economic Market Area. The Council will have an active role promoting and supporting high quality 
development that will benefit the community, support the economy, enhance the environment and 
is consistent with policies in the Local Plan. Development facilitated through the Local Plan will also 
contribute towards achieving strategic objectives set out in the future South West Hertfordshire Joint 
Strategic Plan.
1.36  Should monitoring, particularly the updated housing trajectory that will be published in the Authority 
Monitoring Reports, demonstrates that there will not be sufficient progress towards meeting housing 
need, the Council will consider the reasons for this and whether the extent of under-performance is 
sufficient to trigger a partial or full review of the Local Plan.A Spatial Strategy for Watford
23 A Spatial Strategy for Watford
Strategic Policy SS1.1: Spatial Strategy
These high standards and a positive and 
integrated approach to development will be 
expected across the whole of the borough. This 
will contribute towards creating attractive and 
inclusive neighbourhoods, supporting people to 
be more active, healthy and encourage greater 
social inclusion as part of a balanced community.
 
Across the borough, new infrastructure and 
improvements to existing infrastructure will be 
delivered to support development. Infrastructure 
proposals will be progressed collaboratively with 
relevant stakeholders and providers to maximise 
the benefits and success of any scheme.
Inappropriate development, as defined in 
national planning policy, in the Metropolitan 
Green Belt will not be approved except in very 
special circumstances.
The Core Development Area
The Core Development Area is expected to 
support 80% of allocated development in the 
borough and provides opportunities for further 
redevelopment. Proposals in this area will be 
supported where they optimise the use of land 
in this location through mixed-use high-density 
development, with excellent access to services, 
facilities and public transport. Development 
should deliver positive social and environmental 
gains, incorporating high quality design and 
innovation to ensure high environmental 
standards are achieved.The scale of change will be transformational 
in places. Collaboration between development 
partners and stakeholders on larger sites 
will be the key to unlocking the potential of 
the area. Ongoing and effective community 
engagement will also be required. Proposals 
should demonstrate a holistic approach 
to development, optimise opportunities 
for higher density development, create 
linkages to adjacent areas and ensure proper 
infrastructure provision.
Areas outside the Core  
Development Area
Outside the Core Development Area, 
proposals will be supported where they 
optimise densities to make efficient use of 
land and manage change with greater regard 
to the existing context and local character. 
Development should make the most of its 
location, such as access to public transport, 
cycling and walking and seek to provide 
off-site infrastructure to enhance them, and 
facilitate access to services and facilities.
High quality connections between people and 
destinations within the Core Development 
Area, wider town and locations outside of the 
borough will be sought.
The Core Development Area is defined on the 
Policies Map.From 2021 to 2038, the Local Plan makes 
provision for 13,328 net additional homes and 
110,514 sqm of net employment floorspace 
consisting of 25,206 sqm of industrial uses 
as classified by the B2, B8, E(g)(ii) and E(g)
(iii) Use Classes and 85,488 sqm of office uses 
as classified by the E(g)(i) Use Class between 
2021 and 2038, along with supporting 
infrastructure and facilities. Proposals for 
new development will be supported, where 
they demonstrate that they will contribute 
towards the Local Plan’s economic, social and 
environmental objectives.
Growth will be focused in the Core Development 
Area, which has excellent access to public 
transport and facilities, and where development 
can be accommodated sustainably, creating a 
high quality place to live, work and visit by 2038. 
Heritage assets and areas of green space will 
continue to be protected.
Development will make an effective and 
efficient use of land. This will need to support 
a mix of  uses compatible with each other, 
with high quality design, and innovative 
technology to address climate change and 
reduce carbon emissions.
Proposals will contribute towards a modal shift, 
greener travel patterns and minimising the 
impact on the environment. Pedestrian, cycling 
and passenger transport will be prioritised.24
Core Development 
Area
Chapter 225 Core Development Area
Core Development Area
2.1  The Core Development Area constitutes 8% of the built area of Watford (2,150 
hectares). It is an area where significant revitalisation and transformative change 
are expected to bring new investment into the town. The information set out in 
Figure 2.1 reflects these areas as defined on the Policies Map.
2.2  The Core Development Area comprises three distinct areas. These are based on 
their character and the opportunities that each presents to contribute towards 
making Watford a place that people want to be and where businesses want to 
invest (Figure 2.1). 
2.3 These areas are:
 •  Watford Gateway, which is focused on the transport hub of Watford Junction 
and business district of Clarendon Road;
 •  The Town Centre, where the majority of the retail and leisure offer in the 
borough is located; and
 •  The Colne Valley, which encompasses the out-of-town retail area, hospital and 
football stadium and adjoins the River Colne flowing through the area. 
2.4  The scale of development envisaged in the Core Development Area during the 
plan period provides opportunities to deliver new homes and provide more 
employment space for businesses, infrastructure to support new development 
and community facilities to make the area a focal point for the borough. To help 
achieve the vision and deliver the objectives of the Local Plan, the policies and 
site allocations have been informed by the Watford Sustainability Strategy (2019). 
Applicants will need to embed sustainability principles, such as; appropriate land 
uses, active travel, energy and water efficiency, and good design resulting in high 
quality buildings and public realm into their proposals.
2.5  The requirements set out in the policy for each Strategic Development Area are 
to be considered alongside other planning policies in the Local Plan and applied 
collectively. Further information about site-specific allocation considerations and 
requirements are set out in Chapter 13 ‘Site Allocations and New Development’.Figure 2.1: Core Development Area and the Strategic 
Development Areas
26
 Core Development Area
Watford Gateway Strategic 
Development Area
Context 
2.6  The Watford Gateway Strategic Development 
Area encompasses 31 hectares of land north 
of the Town Centre and comprises two key 
locations in the town: the Watford Junction 
railway and bus station, surrounding retail and 
employment land; and Clarendon Road, which 
is the primary business district in the area 
(Figure 2.2). Figure 2.2 is a schematic diagram 
to provide context for the area and is not to 
be interpreted as policy.
2.7  Nearly all of this Strategic Development Area 
sits within the High Sustainability Area (Figure 
1.2). Watford Junction is recognised by the 
Hertfordshire Growth Board as one of the key 
locations for regeneration in the county. 
Watford Junction Station area 
2.8  Watford Junction railway and bus station 
provides the main transport interchange for 
the town, in conjunction with five other railway 
stations in Watford. These provide excellent 
connections to London, Milton Keynes and 
further north to Birmingham and destinations 
beyond. With good access to local services, 
facilities, employment and leisure activities the 
Watford Gateway area provides a focal point 
for sustainable development. Figure 2.2: Watford Gateway 
Strategic Development Area, 
Illustrative Concept DiagramClarendon RoadStation Rd
St Albans RoadEmployment 
& Residential
Watford Junction 
Sustainable 
Transport Hub, Rail  
and Bus Station
Town CentreResidentialColonial Way 
Employment Area
Woodford Rd
Beechen GroveSt Albans Road
(Ring Road)SDA Boundary
Public Transport Priority
Walking and Cycling
Mixed-Use Development
Active and Positive Frontages
Primary Office Location
Indicative New Pedestrian/Cycle 
Crossing
Concrete Batching Plant and Rail 
Aggregates Depot
West Coast Main Line
Abbey Line
Watford Junction Railway Station 
Major Bus Interchange
Conservation Areas
Eastern Mobility Hub Area of 
SearchKey
27 Core Development Area
Eastern Mobility Hub 
2.9  The area to the east of the Abbey Line will 
support the delivery of the Eastern Mobility 
Hub. As part of a long-term objective to 
support active transport, this will include 
a new multi-storey car park and access 
for coaches and taxis. This could relieve 
the pressure on the entrance to Watford 
Junction rail and bus stations (the Sustainable 
Transport Hub) located on the west side of 
the West Coast Main Line. The bridge over 
the railway line will facilitate movement for 
pedestrians and cyclists between the two 
transport hubs.
2.10  The railway station and bus interchange, 
including the associated public realm, is to 
be improved to increase capacity and make 
for better access to services and facilities to 
help people intuitively find where they are 
going using rail, bus, cycle, pedestrian and taxi 
facilities, as part of a modern transport hub.
 
2.11  The area north of the station along Station 
Road and Bridle Path is characterised as 
an area with inconsistent urban grain. 
New schemes should make use of design 
opportunities to reinstate a network of streets 
that improve the layout of the area. Schemes 
should be designed to improve connections 
with the residential area north of St Albans 
Road, including the pedestrian link from the 
station along the railway line to St Albans Road.
Clarendon Road 
2.12  Clarendon Road acts as a sub-regional 
business centre that provides offices to businesses that require good access to 
London, but which do not necessarily need to 
be located in the city. The objective of the area 
during the plan period is for Clarendon Road 
to continue to be a focal point for high value 
office uses and the primary link between 
Watford Junction station and the Town Centre. 
2.13  Proposals should reflect the potential of 
Clarendon Road as an area of high density 
development, while having regard to its 
underlying character. Where buildings of 
greater height are proposed close to adjacent 
low lying residential areas, they will need to be 
designed so that they minimise their impact on 
the amenity of residents and demonstrate how 
they have embraced a transition from higher 
density development to areas of a different 
residential character. Where possible, taller 
parts of a building should be designed to have 
a frontage on the main road while the lower 
elements of a scheme should be located closer 
to areas characterised by lower building height.
2.14  To improve the quality of the environment 
along Clarendon Road, proposals should 
be designed to ensure there is a good 
relationship between new buildings, their 
frontages and street users. They should also 
create a positive route for people walking 
and cycling between the station and the 
Town Centre. Frontages along the side streets 
should also focus on making a positive 
contribution to the street scene.
Land east of the railway line 
2.15  Land east of Watford Junction Station and the 
Abbey Line consists primarily of industrial, storage and distribution uses including a 
concrete batching plant and rail aggregates 
depot. These premises generally support 
businesses that have low jobs per square 
metre. They make a contribution towards 
sustainable development by providing local 
jobs for industries where future land allocations 
is extremely limited in the borough. Consistent 
with Policy EM4.1 ‘Providing New Employment’, 
appropriate intensification to make more 
effective use of the land will be supported in 
this part of the Strategic Development Area. 
2.16  The transformation of the area from an under-
utilised employment area to a mixed-use 
area inclusive of new homes, employment 
space, community facilities and a new Watford 
Junction Sustainable Transport Hub will take 
place throughout the plan period. This will 
likely come forward in phases as infrastructure 
is delivered and development opportunities 
present themselves. 
2.17  In the first part of the plan period, proposals for 
the redevelopment of employment floorspace 
with either replacement or alternative forms 
of employment uses will be supported. Mixed-
use development that may include residential 
uses that contribute towards the long-term 
vision of the area will be supported and in 
such circumstances the loss of employment 
floorspace may be acceptable. The 
compatibility of new and existing uses will need 
to be carefully considered, particularly where 
when residential uses are proposed in the area 
as the ‘agent of change’ principle will need to 
be addressed.28 Core Development Area
2.18  The concrete batching plant and rail 
aggregates depot (including road access from 
Orphanage Road and rail sidings running 
parallel to the Abbey Line) is safeguarded 
by the Hertfordshire Minerals Local Plan and 
subject to a 250m Minerals Infrastructure 
Consultation Area. Re-location of the facility 
will be challenging to achieve and will only be 
supported where a suitable alternative location 
has been identified that meets the operational 
requirements and environmental criteria.
2.19  New development coming forward in the 
surrounding area should assume that 
the facility will remain for the long-term. 
New development will be required to be 
designed and mitigated to ensure that it will 
not prejudice existing or future use of the 
safeguarded site and associated operations 
in accordance with the ‘agent of change’ 
principle. Appropriate mitigation provided 
by new development may include locating 
non-residential floorspace in the lower storeys, 
orientating habitable rooms, balconies 
and gardens away from the safeguarded 
operations, and providing buffer development 
or screening between the sensitive uses and 
the safeguarded facility.
2.20   Re-provision of car parking, including access, 
will need to be considered at a strategic 
level across the area to avoid fragmentation 
and inefficient use of land. Large areas of 
scattered car parking throughout the Strategic 
Development Area should be avoided. 
Proposals for car parking that come forward 
will not be supported where they could 
compromise the road network or infrastructure for alternative forms of active travel, such as 
cycling and walking. A new multi-storey car 
park will be provided as part of the Eastern 
Mobility Hub east of the Abbey Line. Any 
proposals that come forward which include the 
loss of the existing multi-storey car park and 
surface parking will need to demonstrate how 
the replacement facility will be delivered.
2.21  The area is presently severed by the railway lines 
from other parts of the Strategic Development 
Area, including the station and Clarendon Road, 
and improved access is needed to mitigate the 
impact of this. The delivery of a new pedestrian 
and cycle bridge will connect Watford Junction 
station to the land east of the Abbey Line. This 
bridge will need to be accessible for commuters 
and local people to ensure that development 
is integrated into the existing built-up area. The 
location of the bridge landing points will be 
identified as part of discussions with landowners. 
The legal agreement for this will need to be 
in place before redevelopment can progress. 
When the area comes forward with more 
comprehensive mixed-use development in the 
second part of the plan period and longer-term, 
a route for a second bridge that connects Penn 
Road with Watford Junction is to be protected 
so that new development does not compromise 
potential access to the area in the future. 
Community infrastructure 
2.22  New development in the Watford Junction 
area is anticipated to include at least 2,718 
new homes and some additional windfall 
development. This will generate additional 
need for school places and increase demands 
placed on existing health facilities.2.23  A primary school has been identified as 
part of the scheme located in the north of 
the Strategic Development Area. Additional 
education facilities east of Watford Junction 
Station will be required. However, much of 
that area is sub-optimal given the constraints 
of the site including proximity to railway 
lines and the concrete batching plant and 
rail aggregates depot. A second primary 
school will be required east of the station 
and applicants are encouraged to work 
collaboratively to identify where it can be 
provided that provides good amenity for 
young children. If an alternative location for a 
new primary school is identified outside of the 
Strategic Development Area and will meet the 
needs of new residents this will be supported. 
2.24  The Herts Valleys Clinical Commissioning 
Group has indicated that a new health facility, 
with a floorspace area of approximately 
1,300sqm, is required in the Watford Gateway 
Strategic Development Area. Applicants 
should work collaboratively with other 
landowners and the Clinical Commissioning 
Group to identify how this facility can be 
delivered. Where provision is made on site, 
this will be considered in the context of 
other developer contributions. As part of the 
redevelopment of the area, a childcare facility 
should be re-provided within the Strategic 
Development Area. The location of this facility, 
and how it will be delivered, will need to be 
agreed with the Local Planning Authority prior 
to redevelopment of the existing premises.29 Core Development Area
Building height 
2.25  The Tall Buildings Study (2021) suggested 
that a suitable prevailing base building height 
in the Watford Junction and Clarendon 
Road area would be eight to ten storeys tall. 
Development will be required to comply 
with Policy QD6.5 ‘Building Height’ where 
proposals are above this base height on a 
street frontage, or more than ten storeys to 
the rear. Other Local Plan policies and the 
relationship with existing low lying areas will 
also be considered in determining acceptable 
building heights. 
2.26  Located adjacent to the east and west of 
the Strategic Development Area are the 
Estcourt and Nascot Conservation Areas. 
Developments will need to be considered 
with regard to how they may impact on these 
designations and their sensitivities, particularly 
where proposals are designed to exceed the 
base building height.
Delivery and managing development 
2.27  The Watford Gateway Strategic Development 
Area consists of two constituent parts; land 
around Watford Junction Station and the area 
of Clarendon Road.
  •    East of Watford Junction Station and west of 
the Abbey Line, site MU05 is a high density 
development with planning consent to be 
delivered over several phases to 2031. Site 
MU06 is located adjacent to the south and 
will come forward in phases across the plan 
period. The existing car park is expected to be 
re-provided as part of the Eastern Mobility Hub. 
This will help to unlock the central part of site 
MU06 and support the delivery of a mixed-use 
quarter in the later stages of the plan period. 
Road access to the facility will be from Clive 
Way and a pedestrian/cycle crossing over the 
West Coast Mainline will provide access to 
Watford Junction Station, which itself will be 
improved to increase capacity. The crossing 
may be delivered in either a single phase 
across both the West Coast Mainline and 
Abbey Line or in two phases with a crossing 
over the West Coast Mainline in the first part of 
the plan period alongside site MU06, followed 
with an extension to the crossing that would 
enable access to land east of the Abbey Line in 
the later stages of the plan period. If the latter, 
the crossing will need to be designed so that it 
may be adapted to support an extension at a 
later time.
  •    While sites MU07 and MU23 are likely to 
be redeveloped for industrial uses in the 
first part of the plan period, delivery of 
the aforementioned facilities will support 
redevelopment for mixed-use development  
on land located east of the Abbey Line in 
the latter stages of the plan period. With the 
crossing over the West Coast Mainline in place 
along with the Eastern Mobility Hub, a  
pedestrian/cycle crossing over the Abbey 
Line will be delivered to improve access from 
the east side of Watford Junction Station and 
reduce the pressure associated with access via 
the west entrance located opposite Clarendon 
Road. This will be supported by enhancements 
to the station, including the forecourt, in the 
early part of the plan period and ongoing 
improvements to Clarendon Road. •  Clarendon Road is well established as a 
commercial office district and is subject to an 
increasing number of proposals for higher 
density development. Much of the area is 
unallocated and proposals are anticipated to 
come forward as windfall as redevelopment 
opportunities arise. As the area continues to 
intensify, it is envisaged that further investment 
interest will be secured in the area reflecting 
the objectives for this part of the Strategic 
Development Area.30 Core Development Area
 
Strategic Policy CDA2.1: Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area
  The Strategic Development Area will see co-ordinated change around 
Watford Junction railway station/bus station and the Clarendon 
Road area, creating a mixed-use urban quarter of high quality design 
and place-making, with excellent connectivity to support a mix of 
housing, employment and other subsidiary land uses and community 
orientated facilities. To achieve this, applicants will be required to 
demonstrate how proposals will make provision for and contribute 
towards the following criteria:
 a)  The regeneration of land north of Watford Junction railway station 
and how they will help transform the area into new, high density 
development providing homes, jobs and other uses;
 b)  In locations where new development is of a scale and is notably 
different in character to adjacent existing residential uses, 
proposals will need to be designed so that they demonstrate a 
transition of taller urban form to lower lying character and mitigate 
any significant impact on neighbouring residential or community 
amenity;
 c)  A site for a new primary school within site MU05 ‘Land and 
Buildings at 94-98 St Albans Road’, and a site for a new 3 form entry 
primary school within Site MU06 ‘Land at Watford Junction’, to 
meet demands generated by development; 
 d)  Provision of a circa 1,300sqm of healthcare floorspace;
 e)  A high quality Sustainable Transport Hub located at Watford 
Junction connecting rail, bus, taxi, cycle and pedestrian facilities;
 f)  New development should contribute towards, and not compromise 
the delivery of the Eastern Mobility Hub to be located east of the 
Abbey Line; g)  New walking, cycling and public transport infrastructure will 
be required to contribute towards the Local Transport Plan and 
supporting strategies;
 h)  Prior to the implementation of a planning permission which 
includes residential uses on land east of the West Coast Mainline, 
a pedestrian and cycle bridge for commuters and residents from 
the east side of the Abbey Line to Watford Junction Station must be 
agreed. Development proposals will need to be designed to ensure 
they do not compromise delivery of the bridge;
 i)  As part of a comprehensive mixed-use redevelopment of the area 
in the second part of the plan period, a route for a pedestrian and 
cycle bridge that will enable access to Watford Junction station 
via Penn Road must be shown to be feasible and achievable when 
redevelopment proposals are submitted;
 j)  The land east of the West Coast Mainline will support a mix of uses 
including replacement car parking, new homes and  
employment uses; 
 k)  On land east of the West Coast Main Line and within the Strategic 
Development Area, redevelopment of existing employment 
floorspace for replacement or other employment uses will 
be supported in the first part of the plan period. Where it is 
demonstrated that proposals for residential-led mixed-use 
development will contribute towards the delivery of the wider 
objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area, 
and the proposed use will not undermine existing uses through the 
‘agent of change’ principle, the loss of employment floorspace may 
be acceptable;
Continued on next page >31
 
 l)  If a proposal is to include the loss of a child care facility, a 
replacement facility should be reprovided as part of the commercial 
floorspace;
 m)  In the first part of the plan period, employment redevelopment 
proposals will be supported as will further redevelopment that 
will enable a transition towards increased mixed-use schemes and 
supporting infrastructure in the second part of the plan period;
 n)  A new multi-storey car park as part of the Eastern Mobility Hub will 
be provided on land to the east of the Abbey Line. Proposals that 
include the loss of the existing multi-storey car park will be required 
to set out how the replacement facility will be delivered, including 
delivery phases, as part of the planning application;
 o)  New development will not compromise vehicle access from Clive 
Way via Colonial Way into the area and access to the Eastern 
Mobility Hub; p)  Future development in the Strategic Development Area will take 
into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s 
Heritage Impact Assessment Screening Report for this area and 
where prepared for individual sites;
 q)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the 
preparation of further detailed Heritage Impact Assessments for all 
sites to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
 r)  The concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot, including 
its rail sidings and road access, will be safeguarded as significant 
mineral infrastructure, as shown on the Policies Map. Proposals for 
development will be required to demonstrate that the proposed use 
will not undermine the existing safeguarded uses through the ‘agent 
of change’ principle.
  The Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area is defined on the 
Policies Map.Strategic Policy CDA2.1: Watford Gateway Strategic Development AreaCore Development Area
Continued from previous page >
32 Core Development Area
Town Centre Strategic 
Development Area
Context 
2.28  The Town Centre Strategic Development Area 
encompasses 52 hectares of land at the heart of 
Watford (Figure 2.3). The area is a sub-regional 
destination for Town Centre uses including retail 
and leisure, and supports a significant number 
of jobs. Its historical importance is reflected in 
the high number of heritage assets present. This 
area of high sustainability is home to a growing 
residential community. Figure 2.3 is a schematic 
diagram to provide context for the area and is not 
to be interpreted as policy.
2.29  The Strategic Development Area extends from 
Watford High Street overground station in the 
south to West Herts College in the north. It has 
good access to rail and bus links and strong 
connections to the other Strategic Development 
Areas. The Town Centre does, however, suffer 
from an ‘island effect’ created by the severance 
caused by the surrounding ring road.Figure 2.3: Town Centre 
Strategic Development Area, 
Illustrative Context Plan 
SDA Boundary
Public Transport Priority
Walking and Cycling
Conservation Areas
Mixed-Use Development
Active Frontages
Indoor Shopping CentreSt Marys Church
Town Hall
Public Transport Improvements
Transport for London
Watford High Street Station
Watford Junction Station 
Major Bus InterchangeKey
Vicarage RoadMarket Street
Clarendon Road
Queen’s Road
Watford General 
HospitalWatford Junction
Rickmansworth Road
Watford High 
Street StationSt Albans Road
(Ring Road)
OVERGROUNDOVERGROUNDKing StreetAlbert Road North33 Core Development Area
A thriving Town Centre 
2.30  The Town Centre has existing residential 
areas alongside a wide range of facilities with 
large amounts of comparison retail alongside 
a variety of leisure, cultural and entertainment 
provision. The evening economy is strong 
and draws visitors from a wide area to the 
restaurants, bars and in particular the  
Watford Colosseum and Watford Palace 
Theatre venues.
 
2.31  To continue to thrive, Watford Town Centre 
will need to evolve and diversify in response 
to current and future retail and social trends, 
be adaptable to changes in technology, 
consumer behaviours and the shift from  
9am - 5pm towards longer, flexible, active 
hours. This need for adaptation and 
diversification, together with access to good 
public transport, makes the Town Centre also 
appropriate for residential-led or mixed-use 
high density development.
 
2.32  The Strategic Development Area contains 
three distinct character areas: the North High 
Street from the Exchange Road flyover north 
to Rickmansworth Road; the central part of 
the High Street from the flyover, south to 
Queens Road; and the south part of the High 
Street, which extends south of King Street to 
the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area.
 Development in the Town Centre 
2.33  The Town Centre provides opportunities for 
further residential development as part of a 
wider mix of uses. This additional footfall will 
contribute towards the vitality in the Town 
Centre through the day and into the evening, 
particularly to support convenience and retail 
leisure uses. More people living in the area 
also encourages a sense of ownership. 
2.34  Achieving an appropriate mix of residential 
types, sizes and tenures, including family-
sized units, across the area, will be of great 
importance to meet Watford’s housing 
need, as will providing essential services to 
ensure the area is an attractive place to live. 
The growth in the number of people living 
in the area will mean a need for additional 
community facilities to support the new 
residents of the town as well as providing 
community uses for the whole borough.
2.35  The importance of the retail offer in the 
Town Centre is reflected in the South West 
Hertfordshire Retail and Leisure Study (2018). 
Retaining active and positive ground floor 
shop frontages will be the key to maintaining 
this position. Further discussion is provided in 
Chapter 5 ‘A Vibrant Town’ and Chapter 6  
‘An Attractive Town’. 2.36  New development, particularly new homes, 
will need to be sensitive to potential 
environmental issues, noise and light pollution 
that occur with some Town Centre uses. 
Applicants will need to design building 
servicing and waste management facilities 
into schemes to avoid adverse impacts on 
amenity and the public realm.
   
2.37  It is important that development proposals 
consider how they are integrated with other 
projects in the Town Centre and nearby. In 
this context, proposals will be expected to 
contribute towards the vision for Watford 
to 2038, which has been informed by 
Watford’s Cultural Strategy and reinforces 
the importance of the Town Centre as 
a destination with an improved visitor 
experience.
34 Core Development Area
North High Street area 
2.38  This area from the Exchange Road flyover to 
Rickmansworth Road is currently the focal 
point for the evening economy in Watford. 
The north part of the High Street itself is a 
wide boulevard with listed buildings at the 
north end but much of the area’s character 
has been compromised by low-quality 
development and public realm. The area 
lies outside of the core shopping area, and 
a mix of uses that provides positive and 
active frontages, quality public realm and 
contributes towards the vibrancy of the Town 
Centre will be supported. Proposals to make 
better use of the public space along the 
High Street in the area north of Albert Road 
South will be supported, where they meet the 
requirements of licensing and do not create 
conflict with other uses in the vicinity.
 
2.39  At the north end of the High Street is the 
area known as The Parade, where several 
listed buildings are located. Proposals will 
need to be designed to minimise impact on 
the listed buildings and use heights that are 
sympathetic to the surrounding character.
2.40  The Civic Core Conservation Area 
encompasses several listed buildings, 
including the Town Hall and Watford library. 
A number of cultural facilities are also located 
within the Conservation Area including the 
Colosseum, leisure centre and West Herts 
College. Development in this area will seek 
to deliver a variety of facilities reflecting 
the cultural and heritage value of the area. Development proposals will need have 
regard to the Heritage Impact Screening 
Assessment and other heritage-related 
Supplementary Planning Documents and 
undertake a full Heritage Impact Assessment 
of the proposals. They must also improve the 
function and setting of the buildings, reduce 
the dominance of the road system around 
the Avenue Car Park, and make more efficient 
use of land. A short distance to the west 
is Cassiobury Park, the largest park in the 
borough. Proposals for the wider area should 
seek to improve connectivity to this area 
given the limited recreation space available in 
the Town Centre.
 
2.41  East and west of the north part of the High 
Street are areas that have a low quality urban 
grain that does not relate well to the main 
retail area. Proposals in these areas should 
consider the potential for high-density 
development that will reinstate a street 
pattern that improves connectivity through a 
high-quality public realm, and uses building 
design to create a balanced approach to 
openness, enclosure and natural surveillance. 
2.42   Development around Albert Road South will 
provide an opportunity for comprehensive 
redevelopment of this area to create a 
distinct identity with improved public realm. 
Proposals in this area will be supported to 
provide pedestrian and cycle connections 
across Beechen Grove. Central High Street area
2.43  The central High Street area lies within the 
core shopping area and is a focus for retail and 
leisure uses, to encourage a variety of activities 
for all ages and a positive visitor experience. 
Development proposals should reinforce these 
uses and make a positive contribution towards 
the Town Centre as a destination.
2.44  The east side of the High Street is dominated 
by the indoor shopping centre, atria Watford, 
where the extension into Charter Place, which 
opened in 2018, has also created a significant 
leisure draw. Flexibility for retail and leisure uses 
will be required to help ensure that the complex 
continues to make a positive contribution 
towards the Town Centre, while complementing 
the more traditional High Street retail offer.
2.45  Towards the south end of the area is the St 
Mary’s Conservation Area, which includes St 
Mary’s Church, the oldest building in Watford, 
and several other listed buildings. Proposals 
in this area will need to be designed to reflect 
the sensitivity of the historic environment and 
the setting of the listed buildings.
2.46  Located at the north end of this area is Watford 
Market. The market has two elements, with a 
covered ‘box park’ facility of retail and eateries 
and outdoor stalls on the open High Street. 
There are aspirations to improve the market and 
make it a more attractive destination for local 
people. Proposals to relocate the market will be 
supported where they align with the ambition 
to improve the quality of the Town Centre as a 
vibrant retail destination and visitor experience.35 Core Development Area
2.47  Adjacent to the High Street are the distinctive 
street areas of Market Street (to the west) 
and Queens Road (to the east). These are 
local retail areas that complement the High 
Street offer and have pedestrian and cycle 
links to other parts of Watford. Both reflect 
the residential character around them, being 
characterised by low-level built form and 
shops operated as private enterprises, rather 
than national operators. Development in 
these areas should enhance the retail offer 
and community-orientated facilities. Projects 
that will improve the public realm and 
the pedestrian experience through urban 
greening and street works will be supported. 
The Council encourages engagement with 
local stakeholders in a coordinated approach 
to enhancing Market Street and Queens Road.
2.48  The Local Plan also encourages increasing 
accessibility for people using public transport, 
walking and cycling. However, private vehicles 
will still be the choice for some. Should the 
redevelopment of large-scale parking facilities 
be considered in the future, proposals must 
be supported with evidence setting out the 
potential impacts and benefits for the Town 
Centre as a thriving retail destination and a 
place people want to visit. This will need to 
consider good access to retail, recreational 
and leisure facilities and the relationship to 
other strategies associated with walking, 
cycling, taxis and public transport.South High Street area
2.49  The south High Street area is more reflective 
of a traditional High Street, characterised by 
smaller independent units and specialised 
retail that create a continuous active frontage. 
The existing built form consists of buildings 
with a small footprint and is generally two 
storeys in height.
 
2.50  Much of the south part of the High Street 
lies within the High Street / King Street 
Conservation Area and includes several listed 
buildings. Proposals will need to consider their 
potential impact on these heritage assets, and 
be designed using high-quality and innovative 
approaches to improve the built environment 
and contribute towards the distinctiveness  
of Watford.
2.51  At the base of the south High Street area 
is the junction with Beechen Grove and 
Exchange Road, creating severance between 
the Town Centre and Lower High Street 
and is a poor-quality and vehicle-dominated 
environment. Highways improvements to the 
junction will be supported, particularly where 
they prioritise walking and cycling. This area 
acts as a gateway to the Town Centre from 
the Watford High Street Overground Station 
and provides opportunities to improve local 
transport with connections to a future Mass 
Rapid Transit System being supported. Where 
necessary the Council may use land assembly 
powers to secure proposals that are of  
high quality.
36 Core Development Area
Improving connectivity
2.52  The Local Plan reflects objectives set out in 
the Local Transport Plan and will be further 
informed by the Local Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plan and Sustainable Transport 
Strategy ‘Transforming Travel in Watford’. One 
of the overarching objectives of the Local Plan 
is to improve the environment for people to 
move through and make it an attractive place 
to live, work and visit.
2.53  The Town Centre is bound by the ring road, 
creating significant severance for people 
not using private vehicles to get around. Of 
particular importance are improvements to 
key junctions that should prioritise non-
vehicle users (except for buses), including the 
junctions at the High Street/Rickmansworth 
Road, Albert Road South /Beechen Grove, 
Clarendon Road/Beechen Grove, south part 
of the High Street/Beechen Grove and Market 
Street/Exchange Road. 
Community infrastructure
2.54  New development in the Town Centre 
Strategic Development Area is anticipated 
to include at least 546 new homes. This will 
generate additional need for school places 
and increase demands placed on existing 
health facilities.
2.55  Applicants are encouraged to work 
collaboratively to identify where a new 
primary school can be provided that 
provides good amenity for young children. 
If an alternative location for a new primary 
school is identified outside of the Strategic Development Area and will meet the needs of 
new residents this will be supported.
2.56  Applicants will need to demonstrate 
collaborative working with other landowners 
and the Clinical Commissioning Group to 
identify how additional health facilities can be 
delivered. Where provision is made on site, 
this will be considered in the context of other 
developer contributions.
Building height
2.57  Developments within the Town Centre will 
need to consider how they relate to their 
surroundings, including heritage assets, and 
the impact they may have on the character 
and function of the area. Schemes will need 
to comply with policies set out in Chapter 6 
‘An Attractive Town’ and consider how they 
relate to the existing built form. Informed by 
the Tall Buildings Study the future base height 
in the Town Centre is considered to be up 
to five storeys on the High Street, stepping 
up to eight storeys to the rear, although this 
may not always be achievable on sites in 
close proximity to heritage assets. Proposed 
buildings taller than this will need to satisfy 
the requirements set out in Policy QD6.5 
‘Building Height’.
Delivery and managing development
2.58  The Town Centre has an established character 
and dispersed redevelopment opportunities 
identified in the Local Plan reflect the evolving 
nature of the Strategic Development Area. 
It is envisaged that windfall redevelopment 
opportunities will come forward on unallocated 
sites during the plan period and it is important 
that these are coordinated and contribute 
positively towards the area. To support the 
delivery of new development that will enhance 
the Town Centre, planning guidance such 
as a Supplementary Planning Document 
will be prepared. This should be applied in 
conjunction with other planning tools, such as 
the Council’s 3-D visualisation model, to inform 
the preparation of development proposals and 
best understand the impact new development 
may have on the townscape and heritage 
assets and assist with decision-making.37 Core Development Area
   Strategic Policy CDA2.2: Town Centre Strategic Development Area
  Proposals in the Town Centre Strategic Development Area will be 
supported where good design contributes positively towards creating 
a vibrant town centre, focused on people, healthy lifestyles and 
quality of life. To achieve this, proposals will need to have regard 
to Supplementary Planning Documents and strategies supporting 
redevelopment and enhancements to the Town Centre. These are 
intended to guide the co-ordinated delivery of development that will 
contribute towards achieving the objectives for the area and provides 
greater detail about specific proposals in the Local Plan that may be 
relevant. Applicants will be required to demonstrate how proposals 
will make provision for, and contribute positively towards, the 
following criteria:
 a)  New development will make effective use of land to intensify 
Town Centre uses and increase the amount of people living in the 
Town Centre, intensifying footfall and adding vitality to the town 
throughout the day and evening;
 b)  New uses should make a positive addition to the vitality and 
functionality of the Town Centre. Residential uses should be 
sensitively designed and located to avoid negatively impacting on 
existing Town Centre uses. Leisure uses that contribute towards the 
vibrancy and functionality of the Town Centre will be supported;
 c)  Development along the High Street, Market Street and the north 
part of the High Street should retain and enhance active frontages 
on the ground floor. Uses, such as flexible workspace, where activity 
occurs throughout the day, will be supported in these areas; d)  Public realm should be improved to create distinct places 
throughout to increase dwell time. Proposals should support the 
delivery of green infrastructure, and in particular, tree planting, to 
enhance the visitor experience;
 e)  Proposals should contribute to clear and coordinated wayfinding 
across the Town Centre and permeability into surrounding areas, 
including the rail and bus stations, Clarendon Road office hub, the 
football stadium and hospital. Priority will be for pedestrians  
and cyclists; 
 f)  Opportunities should be taken to reduce the vehicle dominance of 
the ring road. Proposals that provide active frontages onto the ring 
road and contribute towards transforming the environment into one 
that is inclusive by supporting pedestrians and cyclists alongside 
other transport modes will be a priority. This will help to support the 
use of the new Sustainable Transport Hub at the southern end of the 
High Street;
 g)  Linkages to open spaces, particularly Cassiobury Park and 
the proposed Colne Valley Linear Park, should be improved, 
contributing to the creation of a well-connected, accessible and 
integrated network of open spaces;
 h)  Heritage assets are located in key parts of the Strategic 
Development Area such as the High Street and the areas around St 
Mary’s Church and the Town Hall. They are a key component of the 
character of this area and proposals for new development should 
respond to these assets, enhancing their character and setting;
Continued on next page >38 Core Development Area
   
Strategic Policy CDA2.2: Town Centre Strategic Development Area
 i)  Future development in the Strategic Development Area will take 
into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s 
Heritage Impact Assessment Screening Report for this area and 
where prepared for individual sites;
 j)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the 
preparation of further detailed Heritage Impact Assessments for all 
sites to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
 k)  Proposals must demonstrate the provision of innovative waste 
management and recycling storage and collection systems, to 
reduce the need for service vehicles along the High Street;  l)  A site for a new 3 form entry primary school should be located within 
the Strategic Development Area that is BB103 compliant, including 
external areas. Applicants are encouraged to identify where a new 
primary school can be provided.
  The Town Centre Strategic Development Area is defined on the  
Policies Map.Continued from previous page >
39
Mixed-Use Development
Public Transport Priority
Active and Positive Frontages
Bushey Arches
Improved Access
Walking and Cycling
West Coast Main Line
Transport for London
Proposed Linear Park
Watford High Street Station
Bushey Station 
Major Bus InterchangeKeyCore Development Area
Colne V alley Strategic 
Development Area
Context 
2.59  The Colne Valley Strategic Development Area 
encompasses 83 hectares in the southern 
part of the Core Development Area. The 
defining feature is the River Colne. It includes 
destinations such as Vicarage Road Football 
Stadium, Watford General Hospital, Trade City 
employment area and a distribution of retail 
parks that perform an out-of-town shopping 
role in the borough, and Bushey and Watford 
High Street railway stations (Figure 2.4). Figure 
2.4 is a schematic diagram to provide context 
for the area and is not to be interpreted  
as policy.
2.60  The overarching vision for the Strategic 
Development Area is to transform it from a 
car-dominated environment with large retail 
and commercial sheds, into a new mixed-use 
urban quarter with a quality public  
realm and an enhanced and accessible  
river environment for all to enjoy. The 
Strategic Development Area comprises three 
areas of different character and objectives; 
Lower High Street, River Colne and  
Watford Riverwell. Figure 2.4: Colne Valley 
Strategic Development Area, 
Illustrative Context Plan
Watford High 
Street StationTo the M1
Town Centre
Thomas Sawyer Way
River Colne
Bushey 
StationVicarage Road 
Stadium
Watford General 
HospitalWatford
Riverwell 
DevelopmentLower High StreetWaterfields Way
Dalton WayWiggenhall RoadOVERGROUNDOVERGROUND40 Core Development Area
2.61  Located in an area of high sustainability, 
there are opportunities for people to have 
excellent access to public transport, services 
and facilities including the Town Centre. New 
development is envisaged to transform this 
part of the town and create a built and natural 
environment that is increasingly focused 
on people and high quality place-making. 
Proposals should be designed to reinstate an 
urban grain that creates a legible network of 
streets and public spaces, and a quality public 
realm. This should improve connectivity 
for all users and more widely makes a 
contribution towards creating a high quality 
neighbourhood where people want to live. 
2.62  Proposals should maximise the opportunities 
and be designed to make effective use of 
land. They should ensure design measures 
are implemented to mitigate any adverse 
impact of the scheme on existing residential 
areas. Within the Strategic Development Area, 
proposals should not increase the amount 
of retail floorspace on site unless small-scale 
provision is needed to support the local 
community. Existing retail floorspace can be 
re-provided, where appropriate, however a 
reduction of retail provision will be supported 
to contribute towards the objective of 
transforming this area into a residential and 
mixed-use quarter.
2.63  Watford Museum (Grade II listed building), the 
Pump House Theatre and Frogmore House 
are important heritage assets located along the 
Lower High Street. Where there is a potential 
adverse impact on a heritage asset a Heritage 
Impact Assessment may be required. Design measures to minimise impacts on these assets 
should be set out as part of any proposals.
2.64  The area is dominated by a network of busy 
roads that include the Lower High Street, 
Dalton Way and Waterfields Way (which 
links to the M1). The high volumes of traffic 
have resulted in the designation of an Air 
Quality Management Area at Bushey Arches 
and another at Pinner Road just outside 
the Strategic Development Area boundary. 
The road network has also resulted in 
fragmented pedestrian and cycle provision 
and significant severance between people 
and local destinations. Informed by the Local 
Transport Plan and the Local Cycling and 
Walking Infrastructure Plan, proposals will 
contribute towards reducing the influence 
of the motorised vehicle in this area and 
prioritising active travel and public transport. 
Projects such as junction improvements and 
giving priority to non-private-vehicular traffic 
along the Lower High Street will be supported.  
2.65  Major development proposals should have 
regard to Supplementary Planning Documents, 
masterplans and strategies related to the 
Strategic Development Area. Applicants will 
be expected to demonstrate how they have 
maximised local opportunities for development 
of appropriate densities, to improve the public 
realm and increase access to services and 
facilities. Applicants will also be expected to 
demonstrate that proposals would contribute 
to the co-ordinated delivery of development 
and that it would not compromise future 
development opportunities within the Strategic 
Development Area.River Colne area 
2.66  Development in this area will primarily be 
residential. Located at the lowest point of the 
valley between the Town Centre and Bushey 
Arches, proposals will need to be designed 
to reflect their location near the River Colne 
while intensifying existing land uses given the 
close proximity to Bushey Station. 
2.67  New development fronting the river should 
be designed to minimise disturbance to 
semi-natural areas. Proposals should do this 
by including measures that will enhance the 
setting of the river, the avian, riparian and 
aquatic habitats it supports and improve 
pedestrian and cycle routes. To do this, 
proposals should consider the location of 
other green spaces and community facilities 
in the wider area that the community will use. 
2.68  The area has been subject to a Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment and this should be 
used to inform how proposals are designed 
in order to mitigate flood risk. Sites affected 
may require a site specific flood risk 
assessment and this should consider other 
flood risk mitigation measures that may be 
forthcoming in the Core Development Area. 
Applicants are encouraged to engage with 
the Environment Agency as an early part of 
scheme preparation. Further discussion is 
set out in the ‘Flood risk and ground water 
management’ section of Chapter 9 ‘Natural 
Environment’. On sites where the River Colne 
has been culverted, measures need to be 
taken to re-naturalise the waterway.41 Core Development Area
2.69  The impacts of new development will need 
to be managed given the sensitivities of 
the environment, particularly those located 
in Flood Zones 2 and 3 or with potential to 
affect biodiversity. Building design measures 
that reduce noise and light spill should be 
integrated into all development proposals. 
Building heights in this area will need to 
be appropriate and reflect the context and 
constraints of this part of the Strategic 
Development Area.
2.70  The River Colne is an important asset in the 
area as part of the network of green and blue 
infrastructure, and a connection from the 
Ebury Way and Oxhey Park to Waterfields 
Recreation Ground and further north along 
the valley. The area lies to the north of the 
Colne River Regional Park and shares many 
of the same characteristics. The Colne 
Valley provides an opportunity to improve 
the natural environment and increase the 
recreational value for local people. 
2.71  A key objective of the Strategic Development 
Area, informed by the Watford Green 
Infrastructure Strategy, is to create a linear 
park along the river basin. Proposals along 
the River Colne should be designed to help 
create this park and make provision for a 
publically accessible shared use path along 
the site. This will contribute towards open 
space requirements set out in Policy NE9.7 
‘Providing New Open Space’. As part of the 
linear park, proposals should be designed 
to facilitate continuous access to adjacent 
greenspaces, play areas, allotments and playing fields. This may require measures to 
address road crossings in the vicinity.
Watford Riverwell, Vicarage Road Football 
Stadium and Watford General Hospital area 
2.72  The western part of the Strategic 
Development Area incorporates Watford 
Riverwell, an area of residential development 
and supporting community facilities; the 
Vicarage Road Football Stadium and Watford 
General Hospital, an important sub-regional 
health facility. The surrounding area has 
an overarching residential character and 
development schemes will need to be 
designed to reflect and integrate with this.
 
2.73  The stadium and hospital are next to each 
other and important local landmarks in the 
Vicarage area. Improvements to the hospital 
will be supported, and planning consent has 
been granted for a new multi-level car park. 
Any future development proposals in this area 
should also positively contribute towards the 
existing residential character and enhance 
community facilities.
2.74  Redevelopment of the hospital is likely to 
consist of multiple phases; delivery of the 
multi-storey car park, redevelopment of the 
hospital and land between the new hospital 
and Vicarage Road. Development of the 
Riverwell and Watford General Hospital 
area should be considered in the context of 
the wider Strategic Development Area and 
existing built-up area adjacent and ensure 
opportunities to connect people with local destinations are optimised such as creating 
easily legible routes through the site that are 
enhanced through each phase. The layout 
of buildings and their access points should 
ensure there is good accessibility for people 
using sustainable transport such as walking, 
cycling, public bus services and those with 
mobility issues.
42 Core Development Area
2.75  The hospital is adjacent to the existing 
residential area of Vicarage. Redevelopment 
schemes will need to take into account 
how new development may affect existing 
residents and implement design measures to 
mitigate any possible negative impacts. The 
area is capable of supporting a base building 
height of up to six storeys, however, buildings 
of significant scale are likely to have an impact 
on the character of the residential area and 
listed buildings in the vicinity. If proposed, an 
approach to taller buildings that demonstrates 
a transition from higher elements in more 
central parts of the site transitioning to lower 
lying buildings closer to the boundary of the 
Strategic Development Area, such as Vicarage 
Road, will need to be set out. 
 
2.76  Part of the site includes the disused former 
Croxley Rail Line, a route safeguarded by 
Policy ST11.2 ‘Protecting and Enhancing Future 
Public Transport routes and Watford Junction 
Station Area as a Transport Hub’. This route 
will form part of a Mass Rapid Transport 
System linking Watford High Street and Ascot 
Road to the west (on the boundary with 
Three Rivers District). Development proposals 
adjacent to the safeguarded route should 
be designed to enable pedestrian and cycle 
connections into the route and to any future 
infrastructure. More generally, proposals are 
expected to enhance the local walking and 
cycle network and enable good access to 
public transport along Vicarage Road and 
Thomas Sawyer Way. Delivery of managing development 
2.77  The constituent parts of the Colne Valley 
Strategic Development Area including the 
Lower High Street, Riverwell and the hospital/
stadium areas, will together contribute 
towards the wider regeneration of the Colne 
Valley. To support the coordinated delivery of 
development and achieving the objectives for 
the area the following mechanisms are either 
in place or will be prepared in the future:
  •  Riverwell will continue to deliver new homes 
and community facilities guided by an 
existing masterplan for the area developed 
by the Council in partnership with the  
private sector.
  •  The Lower High Street area extending from 
Watford High Street Overground Station 
to Bushey Overland Station consists of a 
mix of allocated sites and land that remains 
unallocated. A masterplan Supplementary 
Planning Document will be prepared by the 
Council to guide development in the Lower 
High Street area and provide greater detail 
on the objectives and specific proposals in 
the Local Plan. Once adopted, development 
proposals will need to have regard to the 
masterplan. Applicants will be expected 
to demonstrate that their proposals will 
contribute towards the coordinated delivery 
of development, do not inhibit the delivery 
of other sites and do not compromise future 
development opportunities that could 
make a positive contribution towards the 
objectives for the area.  •  The proposed new hospital is a distinct 
area within the Strategic Development Area 
that has outline planning permission. Once 
delivered, the existing hospital site will be 
able to support the delivery of new homes in 
the later part of the plan period. The Council 
will prepare appropriate guidance for the 
redevelopment of the surplus land.
43 Core Development Area
Community infrastructure
2.78  New development in the Colne Valley 
Strategic Development Area, is anticipated to 
include 4,361 new homes. Of these, 1,383 form 
part of the Watford Riverwell scheme which 
already has planning permission. These will 
generate additional need for school places 
and increase demands placed on existing 
health facilities.
2.79  The Watford Riverwell scheme will provide 
one new primary school with one other 
provided within the Colne Valley SDA and 
there is some projected capacity at existing 
schools in the wider area. Proposals will be 
required to make provision for primary school 
facilities. For sites larger than 1,000 dwellings, 
this will be required on site. For sites that 
are located in close proximity to each other 
and will have a cumulative impact that will 
generate demand for a new school, applicants 
are encouraged to work collaboratively with 
other landowners and the education authority 
to best meet this need. There is a need to 
identify where a new primary school can 
be provided that provides good amenity for 
young children. If an alternative location for a 
new primary school is identified outside of the 
Strategic Development Area and will meet the 
needs of new residents this will be supported. 2.80  Applicants should work collaboratively 
with other landowners and the Clinical 
Commissioning Group to identify how 
additional health facilities can be delivered. 
Where provision is made on site, this will be 
considered in the context of other developer 
contributions.
Building height
2.81  Informed by the Tall Buildings Study, the base 
future building height in the area is up to five 
or six storeys. New development should be designed to reflect this character and where 
proposals exceed this height, they will need to 
comply with the requirements set out in Policy 
QD6.5 ‘Building Height’. To make a positive 
contribution to the Watford Skyline, proposals 
should use appropriate densities, site layouts, 
building heights and reflect the topography 
which is lowest around the River Colne and 
highest near the Town Centre. Important 
views across the borough, such as from the 
rail viaduct and Oxhey Park, should not be 
compromised.
44 Core Development Area
Strategic Policy CDA2.3: Colne V alley Strategic Development Area
  The Colne Valley Strategic Development Area is designated to 
facilitate transformative and co-ordinated change around the River 
Colne, Lower High Street and the area of the Watford General Hospital 
producing a sustainable and mixed-use urban quarter of high quality 
design and place-making, excellent connectivity and a diverse range 
of uses.
  A masterplan Supplementary Planning Document will be prepared by 
the Council to guide development in the Lower High Street area and 
provide greater detail on the objectives and specific proposals in the 
Local Plan. Once adopted, development proposals will need to have 
regard to the masterplan. Applicants will be expected to demonstrate 
that their proposals contribute towards the co-ordinated delivery of 
development, infrastructure and improvements to the public realm. 
Proposals should be designed to not inhibit the delivery of other sites 
or compromise future development opportunities that could make a 
positive contribution towards the objectives for the area.
  Development will be supported where it contributes towards the 
objectives for the area and is consistent with other policies in the 
Local Plan. Applicants will be required to set out how their proposals 
contribute positively towards the following:
 a)  The redevelopment of retail and commercial land will be intensified 
with mixed-use development. Where retail use is re-provided, this 
should not exceed the existing net retail floorspace on site;
 b)  Redevelopment of the existing Watford General Hospital will 
provide modern facilities that are well integrated and co-ordinated with other developments, designed to minimise impacts on 
nearby residential areas and are well connected to support 
sustainable transport options including walking, cycling and  
bus services;
 c)  A multi-storey car park with a capacity of approximately 1,450 
car parking spaces located east of the existing Watford General 
Hospital car park;
 d)  In locations adjacent to existing residential areas, new 
development should be designed to minimise the potential 
impact on these areas by providing a transition in built form 
between existing homes and higher-density development;
 e)  Proposals located in areas of flood risk will need to consider the 
cumulative impact of development and ensure that mitigation 
measures do not conflict with other measures that may have been 
agreed on other sites in the Core Development Area; 
 f)  New development will contribute towards the creation of, and 
connections to a linear park along the River Colne, from Water 
Lane to Oxhey Park, enabling public access for pedestrians and 
cyclists and the enhancement of wildlife habitats;
 g)  Proposals adjacent to the River Colne are to be designed to 
enhance its setting, facilitate public access, and to include 
measures to minimise the impact of development on the river-
based habitats including the re-naturalisation of the River Colne 
between Water Lane and Waterfields Way;
Continued on next page >45 Core Development Area
Strategic Policy CDA2.3: Colne V alley Strategic Development Area
   h)  A site for a new primary school within Site MU21: Land at 
Riverwell, and a site for a new 3 form entry primary school within 
Site MU16: Land at Tesco, Lower High Street, to meet demand 
generated by new development;
  i)  A new pedestrian and cycle crossing or underpass at Waterfields 
Way should be provided as part of the linear park along the  
River Colne;
  j)  The Lower High Street should be prioritised for improved public 
transport and the creation of a shared surface route;
  k)  Priority systems at junctions and crossings to improve access 
and permeability in the wider area for public transport, 
pedestrians and cyclists;  l)  Future development in the Core Development Area will take 
into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s 
Heritage Impact Assessment Screening Report for this area, and 
where prepared, for individual sites;
  m)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the 
preparation of further detailed Heritage Impact Assessment 
for all sites to be submitted prior to the determination of any 
application.
    The Colne Valley Strategic Development Area is defined on the 
Policies Map.Continued from previous page >
46
Homes for a Growing 
CommunityChapter 347 Homes for a Growing Community
Homes for a Growing Community 
3.1  The Spatial Strategy seeks to deliver at least 13,328 net additional new homes 
between 2021 and 2038. This is equivalent to the delivery of at least 784 new 
homes each year and forms the baseline figure to calculate the five year housing 
supply. The figures that make up the housing supply in the Local Plan is set out in 
Figure 3.1. Figure 3.2 provides an overview of site allocations for residential use and 
their distribution across the borough. For more detailed information about these 
sites, refer to Table 13.1 and for site boundaries refer to the Policies Map.
3.2  The Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (2021) identified 56 sites 
suitable for residential and mixed-use development that includes new homes. The 
location of these sites are shown in Figure 3.2. This assessment sets out the number 
of homes that will come forward. This includes sites identified for development and 
how many homes will come forward on sites that are either not identified as a site 
allocation, or come forward with a housing density that is different from the indicative 
capacities calculated in the Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment.
3.3  The number of homes to be delivered on site allocations during the plan period 
is 8,604 units. This figure is the sum total of the indicative yields for all of the 
allocations as listed in Chapter 13 which are derived from the size of each site and 
standard density assumptions depending on its location. As of 1 April 2021, a total 
of 1,218 units on site allocations have been granted planning consent. These units 
are not included in the maximum of 2,507 units that could come forward on sites 
with extant planning permission as represented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.2: Housing sites in the Local Plan
Figure 3.1 Housing figures in the Local Plan
2,217
Windfall+ + = 13,328
Total number of 
homes2,507
Commitments 
(maximum number 
of homes delivered 
through extant 
planning permissions)8,604
Homes on 
allocated sites48 Homes for a Growing Community
3.4  As part of the housing to be provided to 2038, 
a total of 2,217 homes are included in the 
housing supply as windfall. This is based on 
a combination of three factors including the 
historical annual average of 70 dwellings per 
year completed on sites of less than five units; 
development sites coming forward within the 
density range identified in the Housing and 
Economic Land Availability Assessment, but 
higher than projected; and unidentified sites 
larger than five dwellings gaining planning 
permission. Combined, it is expected that 
windfall development will contribute, on 
average, 158 new homes per year over the 
plan period with the windfall contribution as 
part of the housing trajectory from 2024/25. 
3.5  The South West Hertfordshire Local Housing 
Needs Assessment (2020) identified the local 
authorities of Dacorum Borough Council, 
Hertsmere Borough Council, St Albans City and 
District Council, Three Rivers District Council 
and Watford Borough Council as forming the 
South West Hertfordshire Housing Market Area. 
It demonstrates a relationship between housing 
need and movement between the five authority 
areas. The Council’s all face challenges to meet 
their housing need, however they have agreed 
to continue to work together to deliver the 
housing required across the wider area.
3.6  The delivery of new homes over the plan 
period is set out in the housing trajectory 
(Appendix B). This forecasts the anticipated 
delivery of new homes each year to 2038 
and provides a mechanism to evaluate the 
performance of the Plan. It also highlights 
when the provision of supporting facilities and infrastructure are required. The housing 
trajectory will be kept up to date and 
monitored as part of the Council’s Authority 
Monitoring Report.
3.7  To provide more certainty about when 
schemes will be coming forward and 
assist with projecting when other types of 
supporting development may be required, 
such as infrastructure, as part of their 
proposals, applicants are expected to provide 
a year by year housing trajectory setting out 
when new homes will be completed.
3.8  The commitments figure of 2,507, as quoted in 
Figure 3.1, assumes that all sites with planning 
permission on 1 April 2021, which are not site 
allocations in the Local Plan, will be developed. 
This means that any permissions which are 
not implemented will lead to a reduction in 
this source of supply. Since the adoption of the 
Core Strategy in 2013, the Council has seen an 
average annual lapse rate of 15%. If this rate was 
to be replicated across all permissions as of 1 
April 2021, this supply of 2,507 dwellings would 
be reduced by 376 dwellings to 2,131 dwellings.
Strategic Policy HO3.1: 
Housing Provision
  To meet housing need, at least 13,328 net 
additional homes, equivalent to at least 784 
new homes per year, will be delivered, in 
Watford between 2021 and 2038. Proposals 
for residential development will be 
supported where they contribute positively 
towards meeting local housing needs and 
achieving sustainable development.
  Residential developments should 
demonstrate how they will make an 
optimal use of land and provide a mix of 
homes including size, tenure and specialist 
adaptations to support people with different 
needs to ensure good quality homes are 
provided for all, both now and in the future.
  Site allocations for housing and mixed-use, 
where residential use would be supported, 
are defined on the Policies Map.49 Homes for a Growing Community
Housing mix, density and 
optimising use of land 
Design-led schemes and housing density
3.9  The Spatial Strategy sets out an approach to 
maximise the land available for redevelopment, 
reduce its impact on the environment through 
carbon reductions and deliver sustainable 
development. Housing density provides 
an indication of how effectively a site is 
used and its contribution towards meeting 
housing need. However, it does not provide 
wider context about efficient use of land, 
which is more closely related to site-specific 
opportunities, constraints and sensitivities. 
Design-led schemes should make efficient 
and effective use of land by responding to 
character, existing or intended as appropriate, 
the opportunities, constraints and sustainability 
of a particular site and its surroundings. 
3.10  Within the Core Development Area higher 
density development of at least 95 dwellings 
per hectare is expected. Higher density 
development will be particularly supported 
in areas where there is good access to Mass 
Rapid Transport, such as at Watford Junction. 
Outside of the Core Development Area, 
proposals should start with a minimum of 45 
dwellings per hectare and be revised up or 
down, based on the character and attributes 
of the area. This lower figure reflects the lower 
sustainability of these areas which have fewer 
services and facilities compared to the Core 
Development Area. Housing mix
3.11  A variety of housing types enable people to live 
and move within the town at different times in 
their lives as their needs change. The types of new 
homes coming forward during the plan period 
should reflect the needs of local people, present 
and future, and account for market trends.
3.12  A balance between housing demand and 
housing need should relate to what is 
deliverable. This can vary on a site by site basis. 
During the plan period Watford is likely to 
provide a higher proportion of smaller one and 
two bed properties than other local authorities 
in the South West Hertfordshire housing market 
area. This is reflective of Watford’s character, 
which is more intensively built up, has a higher 
population density and better access to public 
transport. This makes it a more sustainable 
location compared to its neighbours. Over the 
plan period the mix of housing types may need 
to be rebalanced across the housing market 
area to ensure an appropriate amount of family 
housing is provided.3.13  The Local Housing Needs Assessment 
suggests that a high proportion of demand for 
new homes will be generated by households 
with one and two dependent children. 
Providing a mix of homes of different sizes 
is therefore important to support a balanced 
community and ensure that housing demand 
and housing need are both met through 
new development. Therefore, proposals for 
residential development will be expected 
to provide a housing mix that includes a 
proportion of family-sized homes with three or 
more bedrooms.
3.14  Proposals with a residential element are to 
provide a Housing Schedule. This should set 
out the total number of units; type and tenure 
of units; the number of habitable rooms and 
floorspace for the different elements of the 
market; and affordable and specialist housing, 
provided as appropriate. In conjunction with 
this, a housing trajectory setting out the 
anticipated annual completions should be 
provided as part of a planning application. 
50 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.2: Housing Mix, Density and Optimising Use of Land
  Housing mix
  Proposals for new residential development of five dwellings or more will be supported where 
they make provision for at least 20% of the total number of residential units to be family-sized 
(at least three+ bedrooms).
 Housing density and optimising land
  Residential developments should seek to optimise the density of sites through a design-led approach, 
taking account of the context and sustainability of a site, focusing higher density development 
within the Core Development Area. Within it, new residential developments should seek to deliver a 
minimum density of at least 95 dwellings per hectare. Outside of the Core Development Area, new 
residential developments are expected to achieve at least 45 dwellings per hectare, but the optimal 
density for individual sites should be established through careful consideration of local character, 
context and access to amenities and public transport.
 Protecting existing housing stock
  If a net loss of residential accommodation is proposed, applicants will be required to 
demonstrate how the benefit of the scheme outweighs this loss.Affordable housing 
The need for affordable housing
3.15  Affordable housing can refer to rented or 
sale properties and is defined by the National 
Planning Policy Framework (Annex 2). To best 
reflect affordable housing as a proportion of 
the total number of homes completed on 
a site, the requirement will be measured by 
habitable rooms, Applicants are encouraged 
to partake in pre-application discussions to 
determine the affordable housing mix early in 
the planning process.
3.16  The number of affordable housing units 
provided does not have to be equivalent to 
35% of the total number of housing units 
proposed. The housing mix, in terms of size of 
units of the market and affordable elements 
of the scheme, can be varied so long as the 
number of habitable rooms provided as 
affordable accommodation is equivalent to 
35% of the total number of habitable rooms in 
the proposed development.
3.17  Habitable rooms in affordable and market 
elements of a scheme should be of 
comparable size when averaged across 
the whole development. Applicants should 
present affordable housing figures as a 
percentage of total residential provision 
by habitable rooms and units to enable 
comparison as part of the housing schedule.
51
3.18  The distribution of habitable rooms can help deliver the type of 
affordable homes needed in the borough more effectively and contribute 
towards providing 20% family-sized homes across the scheme as set out 
in Policy HO3.2 ‘Housing Mix, and Optimising use of Land’. Applicants 
are encouraged to engage with the Local Authority at an early stage to 
determine the housing mix of the affordable housing element of  
the scheme.
Type and size of affordable housing
3.19  The National Planning Policy Framework requires new development to 
provide different types of affordable housing, including shared-ownership 
products on qualifying sites in conjunction with other affordable housing 
products, such as social and affordable rent. The level of affordable 
housing provision required, 35%, has been determined through a viability 
assessment of the Local Plan to ensure sites are deliverable. 
3.20  Social rented housing provides homes for those who need it most and 
cannot access the property market. To prioritise this need, at least 60% 
of affordable housing provided on qualifying needs should be social rent, 
with the remaining made up of other tenures, such as affordable rent and 
discounted home ownership products. Social rented units are in greatest 
demand, but are the costliest to deliver. In some circumstances it may 
be preferable for a proposal to include a greater number of social rented 
properties, which would reduce the total number of affordable units. 
Where this is agreed with the Local Planning Authority, the applicant will 
be required to demonstrate how the provision is of equivalent value to 
meeting the affordable housing requirements set out in Policy HO3.3 
‘Affordable Housing’.3.21  The National Planning Policy Framework requires a proportion of the 
total number of residential units to be provided for affordable home 
ownership. Therefore, the delivery of other types of affordable housing, 
including social rent, are to be applied once this threshold has  
been achieved.
3.22  The type and quality of an affordable home to meet the needs of local 
people is often reflected in the size of the units provided. New homes 
can have bedrooms designed for one-bed space (single bed) or two-bed 
spaces (double bed or twin beds). Unit sizes are commonly expressed 
in terms of the number of beds and persons. The Council’s preference 
generally being for larger bedrooms which are more reflective of local 
need. The types of units in terms of bedroom and bed spaces should 
reflect the needs set out in the Council’s Housing Strategy.
Deliverability
3.23  Where delivery of 35% affordable housing on site is not possible and 
a reduced requirement is agreed with the Local Planning Authority at 
the time of planning consent, permissions will be subject to a late-stage 
review to determine if the scheme could deliver affordable housing more 
akin to the full policy requirement of 35%.Homes for a Growing Community
52 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.3: Affordable Housing
  Residential developments, of 10 homes or more will be supported 
where they provide at least 35% affordable housing (by habitable 
room).
  Proposals will be required to provide a mix of affordable housing 
tenures, including a minimum of 60% of new affordable homes 
as homes for social rent. The homes for social rent should seek 
to prioritise family-sized (three+ bedrooms) accommodation and 
reflect the most up-to-date Housing Strategy.
  Affordable housing should be provided on site. The Council will not 
support provision in lieu through commuted sums, other than in 
exceptional circumstances where it can be clearly demonstrated 
that it is not feasible to provide affordable housing on site. 
  Affordable housing is to be fully integrated in the development and 
to be designed and built to the same standard as market housing.
  Where a viability assessment, undertaken in accordance with 
national planning policy and guidance, demonstrates particular 
circumstances that mean the affordable housing requirements set 
out in this policy cannot be met, a late-stage review mechanism, 
which is triggered when 75% of the units in a scheme are sold or  
let (or a period agreed by the Local Planning Authority) will  
be required. 
  Where it is demonstrated that a higher number of affordable units 
can be achieved on site, up to 35%, the applicant will be required 
to provide the additional units to the Local Authority or Registered 
Housing Provider upon completion of the development.Build to Rent 
Build to Rent proposals
3.24  The National Planning Policy Framework defines Build to Rent as 
‘purpose-built housing that is typically 100% rented out.’ Additionally, the 
South West Hertfordshire Local Housing Needs Assessment states that 
‘it can form part of a wider multi-tenure development comprising either 
flats or houses, but should be on the same site and/or contiguous with 
the main development. Schemes are usually of a large scale in terms of 
the number of residential units and offer longer tenancy agreements of 
three years or more, and will typically be professionally managed stock in 
single ownership and management control’.
Discounted market rent and affordable housing
3.25  Build to Rent schemes will be required to provide affordable housing 
based on the criteria set out in Policy HO3.3 ‘Affordable Housing’. Where 
a developer is proposing a Build to Rent scheme that requires affordable 
housing to be provided, the affordable housing offer may be entirely 
Discounted Market Rent, if agreed with the Local Planning Authority. To 
meet housing need, the proportion of affordable housing to be provided 
as Discounted Market Rent should be the same as required in Policy 
HO3.3 ‘Affordable Housing’ (by habitable rooms). The minimum discount 
on the market rent units should be at least 20%, as required by Planning 
Practice Guidance. A discount greater than 20% will only be applied if 
demonstrated to be deliverable through an update to the Local Housing 
Needs Assessment.
3.26  In particular circumstances, a viability assessment may be acceptable 
to demonstrate that the Discounted Market Rent requirement is not 
achievable. Viability Assessments submitted as part of a planning 
application will be made publically available and robustly scrutinised by 
the Local Planning Authority.53 Homes for a Growing Community
3.27  Discounted Market Rent units should be 
fully integrated into the development, with 
no differences between these units and the 
market units, tenure blind.
3.28  As part of a planning application, applicants 
should provide the following information 
to demonstrate how the scheme will be 
operated and provide well-managed, high 
quality rented homes:
 a)  There is unified ownership and unified 
management of the development;
 b)  Longer tenancies (three years or more) are 
available to all tenants. These should have 
break clauses for renters, which allow the 
tenant to end the tenancy with a month’s 
notice any time after the first six months;
 c)  The scheme offers rent certainty for the 
period of tenancy, the basis of which 
should be made clear to the tenant before 
a tenancy agreement is signed, including 
any annual increases, which should always 
be formula linked;
 d)  There is on site management, this does 
not necessarily mean full-time, dedicated 
staff, however, all schemes need to have 
systems for prompt resolution of issues 
and some daily on site presence;
 e)  Providers have a complaints procedure in 
place and are a member of a recognised 
ombudsman scheme; and
 f)  Providers do not charge up-front fees of 
any kind to tenants or prospective tenants, 
other than deposits in advance.3.29  Discounted Market Rent units that are 
provided as affordable housing will be 
allocated to eligible households on Watford 
Borough Council housing register. Discounted 
Market Rent properties should be allocated in 
a manner agreed between the operator and 
the Local Authority. 
Clawback agreements
3.30  Private affordable rented properties will be 
subject to a 15-year covenant or a clawback 
agreement, agreed through planning 
conditions. For units provided as affordable 
housing, these will be provided in perpetuity.
3.31  Affordable housing, whether it be publicly 
or privately operated, provides a long-term 
community benefit. This benefit is likely to 
increase over the plan period if past trends 
continue, with property values increasing 
significantly faster than household incomes. 
Therefore it would be reasonable to 
expect an operator who wishes to sell any 
discounted market rent properties to:
 •  Clearly set out how the properties will 
be re-provided, by identifying a specific 
development to provide certainty to the 
local authority that there will be no net loss 
of affordable housing provision and the 
community will not be adversely affected;
 •  Re-provide with unit(s) of the same size as 
the unit(s) being withdrawn for sale;
 •  Locate the replacement units where they 
will meet the needs of people on the 
discounted market rent housing register.
3.32  This requirement should be set out through 
the use of planning conditions.54 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.4: Build to Rent
  Proposals for Build to Rent homes will be supported in locations 
appropriate for residential development. Affordable housing should 
be provided in accordance with Policy HO3.3 ‘Affordable Housing’, 
although Discounted Market Rent, at a genuinely affordable rent, 
will be accepted in place of other affordable housing tenures. The 
discount on the market rent should be at least 20% having regard 
to the most up to date Local Housing Market Needs Assessment or 
other relevant evidence.  
  To qualify as a Build to Rent scheme, proposals should meet the 
following criteria:
 
 a)  The development, block or phase within the development has at 
least 50 units;
 b)  The homes are retained as Build to Rent under a covenant for at 
least 15 years;
 c)  A clawback mechanism is in place to recoup additional affordable 
housing contributions in the event of the covenant being  
broken; and
 d)  All the units are self-contained and let separately.
  On schemes that propose a proportion of homes as Build to Rent 
and a proportion for sale to the market, this policy will only be 
applicable to the Build to Rent component. The scheme should 
be assessed as a whole, with affordable housing calculated as a 
proportion of the total habitable rooms across the scheme.Specialist care and supported living  
3.33  With an ageing population comes changing housing needs. These 
include differing design principles and the types of support required to 
enable people to live independently for longer, with care services and 
facilities available. Specialist housing for elderly people can include:
 • Age-restricted general market housing;
 • Retirement living or sheltered housing;
 • Extra care housing or housing with care; and
 • Residential care homes and nursing homes.
  People may have disabilities such as ambulatory difficulties, blindness, 
learning difficulties, autism and mental health needs, which may generate 
a range of housing requirements that change over time. These should 
be considered when new homes are built and any special requirements 
should be incorporated into the design of a new building.
55 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.5: Specialist Care and  
Supported Living
   Proposals for new specialist care and supported living 
accommodation, as defined in the Glossary, will be supported.
  Proposals that result in the loss of existing residential 
accommodation that provides specialist care and supported living 
will be resisted unless:
 a) There is no longer an identified need for the existing facility;
 b)  The needs will be met elsewhere in the borough, preferably close 
to the existing building or in a preferential location for specialist 
housing; or
 c)  Redevelopment would provide improved quality of specialist 
housing and facilities.
  Proposals should be designed to include pick-up and drop-
off facilities close to the principal entrance, that are able to 
accommodate specialist transport vehicles. To aid mobility, 
development should provide space for the storage of  
mobility scooters.
  Should a proposal for new specialist care and supported living 
accommodation fall within Use Class C3, the proposals will be 
required to provide affordable housing consistent with Policy HO3.3 
for that proportion of the scheme. This requirement will not be 
applied to proposals for new specialist care and supported living 
accommodation classified as being within Use Class C2.Student, co-living and non-self-contained 
accommodation 
3.34  Watford has a thriving Town Centre with a diverse range of services and 
facilities in the borough. The population is relatively young compared 
to neighbouring districts, with population projections indicating this 
demographic will continue.
3.35  West Herts College is the largest education institution providing tertiary 
education opportunities up to diploma and apprenticeship levels. The 
University of Westminster branch in Harrow, Middlesex University in 
Hendon, as well as a number of technical colleges in the area, offer wider 
education opportunities, attracting people from other areas or abroad 
who will seek accommodation. Increasingly Watford is seen as a possible 
location for a more affordable lifestyle.
3.36  Student and co-living accommodation is a type of housing primarily 
focused on younger people, where they can share communal facilities 
while having their own accommodation. These types of developments 
have a high ratio of people per square metre and are best suited to areas 
where there is good access to services and facilities. In Watford, the 
Town Centre and nearby railway stations provide good access for people 
walking, cycling and those using public transport.
3.37  For other forms of non-self-contained accommodation, these should be 
located where residents have good access to services and facilities and 
will not have an adverse impact on residential amenity.56 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.6: Student, Co-living and  
Non-Self-Contained Accommodation
  New student and co-living and non-self-contained accommodation 
will be supported where it is located within the Core Development 
Area, or within 800 metres of a railway station located in the Core 
Development Area.
  Proposals for student accommodation will be supported where 
they provide evidence of support and need from an educational 
institution or a registered provider of student accommodation.
  
  A covenant protecting the premises for student use only will be 
secured through planning conditions.
  Co-living and non-self-contained accommodation will be supported 
where it incorporates a high quality of design and generous 
communal shared space and amenities for all occupants.
  
  To differentiate co-living and non-self-contained accommodation 
from other types of residential accommodation, proposals will be 
required to have a minimum provision of 50 units. Proposals will 
need to be supported with a management plan submitted as part of 
a planning application.
  Proposals will be required to make a financial contribution to 
comply with affordable housing requirements set out in Policy 
HO3.3 ‘Affordable Housing’.Self-build and custom housebuilding 
3.38  Self-build and custom housebuilding is an approach to delivering new 
homes that are designed and built by people to meet their needs and 
aspirations. The limited amount of land available for new development, 
as identified by the Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment, 
makes it inappropriate to allocate land specifically for self-build homes and 
custom homebuilding. However, self-build and custom housebuilding will 
be supported on allocations and windfall sites, and proposals that include 
50 or more non-flatted homes (excluding affordable housing) will be 
required to provide 10% of plots for such development.
3.39  If the scale of development is large enough to support one or more self-
build plots, applicants are encouraged to consider how these self-build 
plots can be integrated into the overall scheme. Marketing of the site 
should be demonstrated to have been undertaken proactively to gauge 
potential interest in a self-build plot on the open market, including those 
registered on the Council’s Self-build Register. 57 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.7: Self-build and 
Custom Housebuilding
  Residential proposals for 50 non-flatted 
homes or more (excluding affordable 
homes) will be supported where they 
provide one self-build plot for every 10 
houses, in agreement with the Local 
Planning Authority. This will be secured 
through legal agreement.
  The average size of a self-build plot 
should be comparable to the average size 
of the market sized plots provided on site.
  If a plot has been offered to people on the 
Council’s Self-build Register and the open 
market and marketed for a minimum 
of 12 months from the commencement 
of development on the site and has not 
been sold, then the plot will be returned 
to the developer.Policy HO3.8: Gypsies and 
Travellers
  Existing designated sites used by Gypsies 
and Travellers will be protected, unless it is 
demonstrated they are no longer required.
  Proposals for new sites will be supported 
when there is no further capacity at 
existing or allocated sites for Gypsies 
and Travellers and the Gypsy and 
Traveller Accommodation Assessment is 
considered out of date.
   Proposals for new sites for Gypsies and 
Travellers should:
 a)  Have good access to the highway 
network;
 b)  Have good access to health and 
education facilities by walking and 
cycling;
 c)  Not have a significant adverse impact 
on the physical or visual character of 
the area;
 d)  Contribute towards biodiversity net 
gain and not adversely impact upon 
habitats or trees;
 e)  Not be located in an area of significant 
flood risk; and 
 f)  Not have an adverse impact on the 
amenity of existing or future residents.Gypsies and Travellers 
3.40  Gypsies and Travellers are part of our 
community and have housing needs that 
are to be addressed as part of the Local Plan. 
Presently, there is one permanent Gypsy and 
Traveller site in Watford at Tolpits Lane, with 
ten authorised pitches. There are no private 
long-term sites or sites for temporary stays  
in the borough.
3.41  The Watford Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment (2018) was 
undertaken to identify the local needs of 
Gypsies and Travellers up to 2036. The study 
identified a need for two additional pitches for 
Gypsy and Traveller households.
3.42  The assessment found that there is a need for 
seven additional pitches for households that 
do not meet the planning definition of Gypsies 
or Travellers. This need will be addressed as 
part of the general housing need.
3.43  One site with two pitches located adjacent to 
the existing site at Tolpits Lane is allocated 
for Gypsies and Travellers to meet projected 
need during the plan period. There is no 
further requirement to allocate land to meet 
future need. However, should that change 
in the future, proposals for new Gypsy and 
Traveller accommodation will be assessed 
using Development Management policies.
58 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.9: Residential 
Conversions
  Proposals to sub-divide existing residential 
accommodation into self-contained 
flats or large scale Houses in Multiple 
Occupation will be supported where:
 a)  In the case of conversion to self-
contained flats, proposals resulting in 
the loss of purpose built, family-sized 
accommodation with three or more 
bedrooms, are to include a family-sized 
unit (three+ bedrooms) with direct 
access to garden space at ground floor 
on site as part of the development;
 b)  In the case of conversion to self-
contained flats, all residential units on 
site meet the nationally described  
space standard;
 c)  In the case of conversion to a House in 
Multiple Occupation, the property has 
an original, unextended, floor area of at 
least 150sqm and is located in an area 
with good access to public transport 
and other amenities;
 d)  Appropriate amenity space and facilities 
for refuse and recycling storage are 
provided; and 
 e)  The proposal is car-free or parking 
provision is provided on site, or in 
nearby off-street parking facilities.Residential conversions 
Residential conversions
3.44  Properties converted into smaller units 
contribute towards new homes required in 
an area through the sub-dividing of existing 
properties. This can make effective use of 
existing dwellings, particularly where there 
is high density housing in an area of high 
sustainability. However, they can reduce the 
number of family-sized homes available in 
the area and impact upon local amenity if 
not properly managed. A mix of dwelling 
sizes (number of bedrooms) is important to 
maintain balanced communities and enable 
people to move and live in areas where they 
share social connections and are affordable.
Houses in Multiple Occupation
3.45  Houses in Multiple Occupation perform 
an important role in the availability of 
housing, particularly for people only able 
to afford lower rents, and are supported in 
the borough. However, Houses in Multiple 
Occupation, in conjunction with other 
residential conversions, can create issues 
where there is a high concentration in a 
particular area. This can be visible through 
inappropriate numbers of parked vehicles 
and declining maintenance, affecting the 
property and amenity in the immediate area. 3.46  Proposals for changes of use to a House in 
Multiple Occupation will only be acceptable 
where residential amenity is not significantly 
affected, family housing is re-provided and 
the dwelling has good access to services 
and facilities (Figure 1.2). To enable good 
management and support, and ensure 
that they are available in the right locations 
without having an adverse impact on the 
surrounding area, only 10% of the total 
number of dwellings along a residential 
frontage (or for a long street, defined as a 
residential frontage between two main roads 
or junctions) will be permitted. 
59 Homes for a Growing Community
Building standards for 
healthy , accessible and 
adaptable homes 
3.47  To achieve sustainable development and 
improve health and wellbeing, new homes 
need to be of a quality to enable people 
to live comfortably in circumstances 
that meet their needs. This applies to all 
members of our community who may be 
at different stages of their lives and have 
different family circumstances. Physical 
and mental health are often affected by 
household circumstances such as cramped 
accommodation and poor soundproofing 
and in part, can be related to the quality of 
how a home has been built.
Internal space standards
3.48  New housing is an opportunity to improve 
housing for local people. This is particularly 
pertinent with an increasing number of 
homes being delivered through Permitted 
Development Rights, where Internal 
Space Standards are not regulated, and an 
increasing awareness of the importance 
of healthy homes to support physical, 
mental health and wellbeing. To ensure the 
delivery of high quality housing, proposals 
will be required to meet the Internal Space 
Standards set out in the national  
Building Regulations.Adaptability and accessibility
3.49  People should have the opportunity to stay in 
their own homes as they grow older; enjoy a 
good quality of life, and continue to live in the 
community where they have lived their lives; 
feel more connected to their communities; 
and help reduce costs to the social care and 
health systems. To do this, homes need to 
be adaptable. Most existing homes have 
not been designed in this way and are 
increasingly unlikely to meet the needs of a 
changing demographic. Alterations useful to 
support people as they get older, or those 
with disabilities, include wider doors and 
ramps for wheelchair access, and walls fitted 
with grab rails. More generally, it is important 
that the internal layout of a home is designed 
to enable it to support people with mobility 
issues and disabilities.
 
3.50  The demographic in Watford is one of an 
ageing population, with the number of 
elderly people expected to increase (ONS, 
2011 Census). The Local Housing Needs 
Assessment highlights the projected increase 
in the number of people with a range of 
disabilities from existing levels, including 
those with mobility issues, autistic spectrum 
disorders, learning disabilities and  
challenging behaviour. 3.51  The Local Housing Needs Assessment states 
there is an existing shortfall of adaptable 
homes in the borough. It suggests there 
is a significant need for new housing that 
is designed to address the needs of the 
changing demographic. More specifically, 
the study suggests that a higher proportion 
of people using wheelchairs are likely to be 
living in social housing.
60 Homes for a Growing Community
Dementia friendly homes
3.52  It is estimated that nationally the number 
of people living with Alzheimer’s will more 
than double by 2040 and directly affect one 
in three people aged over 65 (Alzheimer’s 
Society). In Watford this translates to about 
2% of people who could be living with 
Alzheimer’s by 2038. This is recognised 
locally by Watford Borough Council, having 
declared their intention to be a ‘Dementia 
Friendly Town’ in 2019.
3.53  Good quality housing and sensitively planned 
environments, whether a family home, extra-
care housing, residential care or nursing care, 
can have a substantial impact on the quality 
of life of someone living with dementia. 
Small changes can often be enough to help 
someone living with dementia to be more 
independent, by providing an environment 
that is clearly defined, easy to navigate, and 
feels safe. Design considerations to support 
people with dementia are set out in  
Figure 3.3.Figure 3.3: Dementia friendly design principles
Energy efficient homes
Good insulation and ventilation 
to avoid overheating to support 
comfortable living.Safe outdoor environment
Prioritising pedestrians over other users in 
outdoor spaces and using wide pavements 
and materials and building orientation to 
avoid dark shadows or bright glare.
Internal layouts
Generous internal space standards and potential for three 
habitable rooms and flexible layouts with storage at good 
heights and provision for mobility aids. Locate windows 
where they are easy to use, of appropriate size and detail to 
maximise natural light and air circulation. Open plan layouts 
should be used avoiding internal corridors and provide 
balconies and patios with space for tables, chairs and plants.
Building layouts
Encourage people to circulate and use 
shared private spaces to interact in the 
building, provide good natural surveillance 
of shared private outdoor spaces and 
avoid design that creates a sense of an 
‘institutional’ feeling.
Care ready
Be designed to accommodate 
new technologies.Relationship with the street and 
outdoor environment
Design a quality and welcoming public realm, 
where a clear street hierarchy is used creating 
good connectivity and building entrances are 
obvious and signage is clear. Use of familiar 
street furniture that is easily recognisable. 
Internal layout of shared and private spaces.
61 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.10: Building 
Design Standards for Healthy , 
Accessible and Adaptable 
Homes 
  All new homes will meet or exceed the 
nationally described internal space 
standard.
  All new housing will be designed and 
built to comply with M4(2) of the Building 
Regulations unless they are built to 
comply with M4(3) of the Building 
Regulations.
  For developments of 10 or more homes, 
at least 4% of the dwellings will be built to 
be wheelchair adaptable and comply with 
M4(3) of the Building Regulations.
  For developments of 50 homes or more, 
2% of dwellings are to be designed to 
support someone living with dementia by 
having regard to the ‘Dementia Friendly 
design principles’ set out in Figure 3.3.
  Homes designed to be M4(3) compliant 
can also be designed to be ‘dementia 
friendly’. Where such homes are 
provided, they will contribute towards 
both the M4(3) and ‘dementia friendly’ 
home requirement.Private and communal  
open space 
Private open space 
3.54  In addition to internal space standards that 
contribute towards quality homes, access to 
private outdoor space is just as important for 
health and wellbeing. Most of the residential 
development to come forward in Watford 
during the plan period will be apartments. To 
provide healthy home environments, access 
to private outdoor space is essential. 
3.55  Proposals should consider how private 
outdoor space can add quality to a scheme 
and how it will improve the relationship 
between the building and its surroundings. 
This includes the provision of a high quality 
built environment, and should increase 
natural surveillance early in the design 
process. All dwellings should have level 
access to one or more of the following forms 
of private open space: garden, terrace, roof 
garden, courtyard garden or balcony. 
3.56  Private open space should be practical in 
terms of its shape and utility, offering good 
amenity so it can comfortably accommodate 
a table and at least four chairs. The space 
should also be suitably screened, to protect 
the area from high noise levels and  
provide privacy. Shared private amenity space 
3.57  While private amenity space in the form of 
balconies provides space for residents of the 
property, these will be small and generally 
not suitable for gatherings of people or 
recreational use. Shared private amenity space 
on site can enhance the quality of a scheme 
and support residents by providing areas to 
socialise and use for recreation purposes.
 
3.58  Apartment schemes should provide high 
quality shared private amenity space on site 
that is accessible to all residents unless it 
would not be possible or appropriate to do so. 
The use of roof areas, including podiums and 
courtyards for additional private or shared 
amenity or garden space is supported and 
should be considered in the wider context of 
the scheme, in terms of the opportunities and 
constraints of a site.
3.59  Where shared private amenity space is 
provided, it should be designed to be 
accessible to all residents and provide places 
to sit, play and exercise. Where provision 
is catering for families in the development, 
informal play space, and as appropriate, 
equipped play space should be integrated 
into the shared space. It should be adaptable 
to accommodate the changing needs of 
residents and be easy to maintain, whilst 
not compromising its contribution towards 
creating a quality public realm. Importantly, 
shared private amenity space should be 
designed into the scheme so as not to be 
overshadowed or suffer low levels of daylight.62 Homes for a Growing Community
Policy HO3.11: Private and Shared Private 
Amenity Space
   Private amenity space  
  All new homes should be provided with private outdoor amenity 
space that meets the following minimum standards:
Size of dwelling Apartment* House/Duplex/Maisonette
1-bed 5sqm 12sqm
2-bed 7sqm 24sqm
3-bed 8sqm 25sqm
4+bed 9sqm 25sqm
The minimum depth and width for all balconies and other private 
external spaces should be 1.5m. This does not contribute towards 
the minimum internal space standards.
Shared private amenity space  
 The provision of shared private outdoor amenity space, including 
roof and terrace space, will be supported. Residential development 
comprising 10 or more flats should provide shared private outdoor 
amenity space that is high quality and accessible to all residents 
unless it would not be possible or appropriate to do so. 63
A Strong EconomyChapter 464 A Strong Economy
A Strong Economy 
4.1  W atford is a sub-regional economic centre, home to the UK headquarters of some 
well-known companies as well as many smaller local businesses. A short commute 
to central London means that Watford is strategically placed for business, although it remains a distinct and competitive economic centre in its own right.
4.2
  W
atford has a diverse economy, with a mix of office and industrial-based 
employment that reflects the multi-skilled community living in the borough. Information and communications technology based industries (ICT) are key employers in Watford, with professional services and knowledge based industries being its largest sector. Equally there is a strong industrial base in the borough, with five distinct industrial areas operating across a variety of different industries (Figure 4.1). This includes businesses related to storage, distribution and manufacturing. Figure 4.1 reflects designated employment areas as defined on the Policies Map. For information about site allocations for employment uses, or that have an element of employment use, refer to Tables 13.2 and 13.3 in Chapter 13.
4.3
  W
atford is also part of the South West Hertfordshire Functional Economic Market 
Area (FEMA), along with Dacorum, Hertsmere, St Albans and Three Rivers. Watford shares a strong relationship with its neighbouring areas, as demonstrated by the interlinked commuting flows.
4.4
  The planning s
ystem can help to support the growth of Watford’s economy by 
ensuring that the right type of land is available in the right places. The South West Herts Economic Study Update (2019) has identified a need across the sub-region for 188,000sqm of additional office floorspace and 481,500sqm of additional industrial floorspace. For Watford, the study suggested there was a need for 37,600sqm of office floorspace and 98,400sqm of industrial floorspace. Reflecting the strengths and opportunities across South West Hertfordshire and Watford to contribute towards this requirement, Watford has planned for 85,488sqm of office floorspace and 25,206sqm of industrial floorspace. This means that there is an under-provision of industrial floorspace due to land availability, which is compensated for through an overprovision of office floorspace.
4.5
  The Council will continue t
o work with neighbouring authorities in the South West 
Hertfordshire Functional Economic Market Area to deliver the shortfall of industrial that cannot be provided in Watford over the plan period.
Figure 4.1: Areas designated for office and industrial uses65 A Strong Economy
4.6  Providing more office floorspace than required for Watford can support 
our neighbouring authorities in meeting their need, provide high quality 
office floorspace to replace ageing stock and reinforce Watford’s role 
across the sub-region as an office hub. It also allows for new offices to be 
provided at the most sustainable locations, as Clarendon Road allows for 
the benefits of its proximity to Watford Junction to be maximised.
4.7  The policies in this chapter seek to encourage further economic growth 
by supporting increased provision and intensification of employment 
floorspace, including industrial (Figure 4.2).
4.8  COVID-19 has greatly impacted the economy to date, with the full, long-
term effects upon employment remaining relatively unknown. The policies 
have been designed to continue to support business investment and 
development in Watford, whilst also being sufficiently flexible to allow for 
any potential transformative impacts. This may include increased flexible 
and home working. There is also the potential for an economic recession 
which could lead to a period of high unemployment and vacancy before 
any long-term recovery.Employment
Supporting new 
ways of working 
such as home 
workingCreating 
apprenticeships on 
new development 
sites
Planning for 
new offices 
and industrial 
spaceCreating 
jobs
Ensuring local 
businesses are 
used in developers’ 
supply chain
Protecting 
employment 
landFigure 4.2: Role of employment policies
Strategic Policy EM4.1: Providing New 
Employment
  Proposals for new employment floorspace will be supported where 
they contribute towards meeting the identified employment need in 
the borough and Functional Economic Market Area. 
 
  To meet the employment needs in Watford and contribute towards 
the strategic employment requirements of South West Hertfordshire, 
the Local Plan makes provision for 25,206sqm net additional 
industrial floorspace (Use Classes B2, B8, E(g)(ii) and E(g)(iii) and 
85,488sqm of net additional office floorspace (Use Class E(g)(i). To 
meet these targets, the Local Plan will seek to prevent the net loss 
of office and industrial floorspace across the borough. New office 
growth will be prioritised at the Clarendon Road Primary Office 
Location, while new industrial growth will be prioritised in the five 
Designated Industrial Areas. 
  The Council will seek to support sustainable economic growth in the 
borough and the wider Functional Economic Market Area, where 
possible, by:
 a)  Protecting existing employment land from inappropriate 
development;
 b) Encouraging the growth of new businesses and industries; 
 c)  Supporting new models and ways of working, including more 
flexible working practices;
 d)  Ensuring employment land is intensified to make the most 
effective use of land; and
 e) Attracting new inward investment.
  Site allocations for employment and mixed-use development, where 
employment uses would be supported, are defined on the Policies Map.66 A Strong Economy
Designated industrial areas 
4.9  Watford contains five industrial areas hosting 
a wide variety of businesses, from large 
warehouses for storage and distribution, to 
smaller workshops. These industrial areas are 
vibrant during the day time and vacancy rates 
are low. Yet as the demand for housing grows, 
so too will the number of jobs required in 
Watford. A key issue facing the borough is that 
the identified need for new industrial land is 
met with a limit in land supply. The South West 
Herts Economic Study Update has shown 
there to be a large demand for industrial 
floorspace within the plan period, although 
the borough’s Housing and Economic Land 
Availability Assessment (HELAA) (2021) has 
identified a shortfall of land for industrial uses 
up to 2038. 
4.10  This shortage has been exacerbated by large 
scale losses of floorspace over recent years. In 
Watford, industrial floorspace has seen a net loss 
of 24,657sqm between 2007 and 2018. Evidence 
shows that these losses have often been to 
residential uses, which enjoy higher land values 
and have been subject to conversions through 
Permitted Development Rights. There have also 
been losses to other non-employment uses 
that generate few jobs, such as bulky retail units 
and community spaces that are better suited 
to other locations. These losses, combined with 
high future demand for industrial land, mean 
that protecting and intensifying designated 
industrial areas will play an important role in 
meeting future industrial growth requirements. 
Sites within designated industrial areas that have 
scope to be intensified have been identified as part of the Housing and Economic Land 
Availability Assessment. 
4.11  While any new industrial floorspace could  
be dispersed across the borough, the  
co-location of industrial uses in a designated 
area can have benefits. Although evidence 
shows productivity is higher when industry 
is clustered, there are some more practical 
advantages of consolidating designated 
industrial areas. The noise, vibration and odour 
often caused by industrial processes can make 
it more sensible to locate these industrial 
uses together, as opposed to dispersing them 
directly amongst residential and office uses. 
4.12  Uses that would be considered inappropriate in 
designated industrial areas are destination uses 
that do not complement the existing industrial 
uses in the area. These destination uses generate 
specific trips to the industrial areas that are not 
related to the employment offer on site. For 
example, some retail uses such as showrooms 
may attract customers to the industrial area, but 
cannot be used by the employees on site on a 
daily basis. These types of uses can undermine 
the effectiveness and value of the employment area to Watford’s economy and are better  
suited to other locations. 
4.13  Some non-industrial uses can support the 
function of the designated sites, making a 
valuable contribution to the area. These uses 
can be referred to as supporting uses, or ‘walk 
to’ uses, reflecting their strong relationship 
with neighbouring businesses. Providing small 
facilities under 100sqm in size such as fitness 
gyms, nurseries, some retail units and cafés 
can complement existing uses by providing 
facilities that can frequently be used by staff 
working in the employment areas while also 
creating jobs. Offices may also support the 
industrial function of some businesses in the 
site, although larger premises will be subject 
to Policy EM4.3 ‘Office Development’. Existing 
office in the Designated Industrial Areas can 
retain the same use, but will be encouraged to 
intensify where possible. 
4.14  Development should also have regard to 
the Hertfordshire Waste Local Plan and the 
identified Employment Land Areas of Search 
(ELAS) which overlaps with some of the sites  
in the Local Plan.
Table 4.1: Future industrial supply
Summary of industrial floorspace provision 2021-2038
South West Hertfordshire requirement 
Watford requirement
Provision through site allocations
Provision on sites with planning permission
Total industrial floorspace provision in the Local PlanFloorspace provision (sqm)
481,500
97,400
12,799
12,407
25,20667 A Strong Economy
Policy EM4.2: Designated 
Industrial Areas
  Designated industrial areas are identified 
on the Policies Map.
  Proposals for new industrial employment 
uses will be supported where they 
contribute to the identified need for 
industrial land set out in the South West 
Herts Economic Study Update. Proposals 
that would incur a net loss of industrial 
floorspace will be resisted unless the 
new use would avoid compromising the 
industrial activities in the area, and:
 a)  An up to date evidence base 
demonstrates that the site is no longer 
required for industrial use; or
 b)  The property has been vacant for 
at least 12 months and there is clear 
marketing evidence to show it cannot 
be reused or redeveloped for industrial 
use in the medium term.
  Proposals for supporting uses under 
100sqm will be supported where their 
job generating potential can clearly be 
demonstrated. This should be assessed on a 
case by case basis. Proposals for supporting 
uses must show that the development 
proposed would not compromise any 
industrial or other employment activities 
in the designated site in terms of their 
continued efficient function, access, service 
arrangements and operating times.Office development 
4.15  The professional service industry is the 
largest sector of employment in Watford and 
accounts for 14% of jobs, with these types of 
businesses often being office based. 
4.16  The majority of Watford’s offices are clustered 
around Clarendon Road, which functions as 
Watford’s Primary Office Location. The draw 
that Clarendon Road has across the sub-
region is reflected in the South West Herts 
Economic Study Update, which emphasises 
the strategic role that the area plays in the 
Functional Economic Market Area. The 
provision of office floorspace in the Local Plan 
is set out in Table 4.2.
4.17  The Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment has shown that the vast majority 
of new office growth in the plan period can 
be met at Clarendon Road. There are many economic and environmental benefits of 
concentrating Watford’s office growth at 
this established office location. Developing 
an intensified office cluster will help sustain 
Clarendon Road as an eminent and distinctive 
office location, with an increased focus 
on sustainability and high quality design. 
Ensuring that Watford’s offices are grouped 
at Clarendon Road would also help retain its 
vibrancy, whilst enjoying the benefits  
of agglomeration.
4.18  The area sits within the Watford Gateway 
section of the Core Development Area, 
which is set to be an area that will experience 
some transformative change during the plan 
period. Potential exists to redevelop sites 
within the Clarendon Road office area and 
intensify land use to ensure that office growth 
requirements are met. This includes high 
density development and taller buildings. 
Table 4.2: Future office floorspace supply
Summary of office floorspace provision 2021-2038
South West Hertfordshire requirement 
Watford requirement
Provision through site allocations
Provision on sites with planning permission
Total office floorspace provision in the Local PlanFloorspace provision (sqm)
188,000
37,600
19,428
66,060
85,48868 A Strong Economy
4.19  Similar to designated industrial areas, some smaller, supporting or walk-
to uses of under 100sqm may also be considered appropriate, where 
they support the office function of the area. This may include cafés or 
convenience stores for employees to purchase lunch, hot drinks or other 
everyday items. Residential uses will also be supported in the area, to create 
a vibrant, mixed-use quarter. However, any mixed-use development should 
be office led to ensure that the quarter retains its key employment function.
4.20  To preserve the strong sub-regional role that Clarendon Road plays in 
supporting growth in the office sector, the area will be the preferred 
location for future office growth. It is important to protect existing office 
use at this location, in line with the findings of the South West Herts 
Economic Study Update. For proposals for new office floorspace, the 
Office Development Hierarchy should be followed (Figure 4.3). The 
approach aims to direct new office development to the Clarendon Road 
Primary Office Location and the Town Centre, followed by the wider Core 
Development Area. This ensures that new office use outside of Clarendon 
Road contributes to small clusters first, to minimise any potential negative 
impacts on residential or industrial areas elsewhere.
Figure 4.3: Office Development Hierarchy
Clarendon Road Primary  
Office Location
Performs a strategic function in 
South West Hertsfordshire as a 
regional office hub. It is expected that 
the office floorspace requirements 
up to 2038 can be met within this 
location through intensification.Watford Town Centre
Office development 
appropriate as part of a mix 
of main town centre uses.
Wider Core Development Area
Small clusters of office.Policy EM4.3: Office Development
  The Clarendon Road Primary Office Location is located on the 
Policies Map.
  Proposals for new office development, defined within the office 
Use Class E(g)(i), that result in no net loss of office floorspace in 
the Clarendon Road Primary Office Location will be supported. 
Proposals that would incur a net loss of office floorspace will be 
resisted unless they safeguard the commercial role and character 
of the Clarendon Road Primary Office Location, and:
 a)  An up to date evidence base demonstrates that the site is no 
longer required for office use; or
 b)  The property has been vacant for at least 12 months and there 
is clear marketing evidence to show it cannot be reused or 
redeveloped for office use in the medium term.
  Mixed-use development, including residential and other uses that 
are consistent with the type of development and the objectives 
for the area, will be supported where there is no net loss of office 
floorspace and a predominantly active commercial frontage is 
maintained onto Clarendon Road that reinforces the commercial 
character of the area. 
  Proposals for development of new office uses outside the 
Clarendon Road Primary Office Location must support the Office 
Development Hierarchy. Proposals are also to demonstrate there 
will be no significant adverse impact on the office function of 
Clarendon Road, and that good accessibility by walking, cycling and 
public transport is provided or available.
  Proposals for supporting uses under 100sqm will be supported 
where their job-generating potential can clearly be demonstrated. 
This should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.Elsewhere in the borough
Small offices dispersed throughout the borough.69 A Strong Economy
Economic development 
outside of designated 
employment areas 
4.21  The Watford Employment Land Review (2019) 
has shown that losses of B (employment) class 
floorspace have been most prevalent in non-
designated employment locations. This has 
largely been through changes to residential 
uses through Permitted Development Rights 
and other means. These losses remain in 
conflict with the need to increase floorspace 
to support Watford’s economic growth 
to meet the identified need set out in the 
South West Herts Economic Study Update. 
Whilst the majority of employment growth is 
expected to come through the redevelopment 
and intensification of designated sites, the 
designated industrial areas and the Clarendon 
Road Primary Office Location, smaller non-
designated sites also have the potential to 
assist in supporting Watford’s economy. 
 
4.22  In the first instance, new offices should be 
directed to the Clarendon Road Primary 
Office Location and the Town Centre, and 
industrial uses to the Designated Industrial 
Locations. However, the loss of existing 
offices and industrial sites should be avoided 
to ensure that viable employment sites are 
not lost to other uses. The policy seeks to 
protect the employment offer outside of 
designated employment areas to address 
recent losses of B (employment) class 
floorspace. Different ways of working 
4.24  One of the impacts of COVID-19 to date 
has been the move towards more flexible 
working practices. This includes a rise in 
home working for those who are able to do 
so. This change in working culture may spell 
an increase in demand for different types  
of premises.
4.25  Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
dominate the working base in South West 
Hertfordshire and account for 99.6% of all 
private businesses and 50% of employment. 
This means that there may be a greater 
demand in Watford for smaller, non-traditional 
workspaces. This issue was also raised during 
the preparation of the Local Plan, where 
public consultation identified the need for the 
provision of more flexible workspace, as well 
as more start up and incubator units for small 
businesses. The demand for more communal 
office facilities to be provided as part of new 
development was also highlighted as part of 
the public consultation.
4.26  Creative industries are a fast-growing sector 
in South West Hertfordshire and providing 
the right types of spaces could support 
their growth. The Cultural Strategy (2019) 
highlights the need to improve the range of 
facilities for creative industries, which could 
strengthen Watford’s cultural offer. This 
could include the provision of exhibition or 
studio space on the ground floor of new 
developments or in stand-alone spaces. 4.23  Changes in the market may mean that some 
sites are no longer viable for employment use 
and either lie vacant, or are better suited for 
another use. In these circumstances, changes 
of use should be enabled to ensure that the 
most effective use of land is being pursued. 
Policy EM4.4: Economic 
Development Outside 
Designated Employment 
Locations
  The net loss of existing employment 
floorspace outside designated industrial 
areas, or the Clarendon Road Primary Office 
Location, will only be permitted where:
 a)  An up-to-date evidence base 
demonstrates that the site is no longer 
required for employment use; 
 b)  The property has been vacant for at least 
12 months and there is clear marketing 
evidence to show it cannot be reused or 
redeveloped for employment use in the 
medium term;
 c)  The job generating potential of the 
alternative proposed use can clearly be 
demonstrated; or
 d)  The proposal achieves clear sustainability 
objectives, such as the provision of 
residential development in close 
proximity to key public transport nodes.70 A Strong Economy
Policy EM4.6: Training, 
Skills and Professional 
Development
  The Council will work with its partners 
and use development obligations to 
require major developments to provide 
appropriate employment and training 
initiatives for local people.
  To achieve this, major development 
proposals will be required to submit a 
training, skills and employment strategy, 
in agreement with the Council, which 
demonstrates:
 
 a)  Training programmes and 
apprenticeships provided on new 
development sites and/or as part of 
new development; 
 b)  Fair tender opportunities offered 
to local small and medium-sized 
enterprises and social enterprises; and
 c)  Opportunities offered to local 
businesses in their supply chains.Training, skills and 
professional development 
4.27  It is important that when new development 
comes forward, it benefits local people. 
Developer contributions are sought to ensure 
that the required infrastructure is provided 
to support the current and future needs 
of the community. These contributions, 
such as Section 106 contributions, can be 
used to fund social infrastructure, such as 
opportunities for training and professional 
development. Although the labour force in 
Watford is considered to be highly skilled, 
there exist opportunities to help address 
social inequalities by offering opportunities 
to those seeking apprenticeships or further 
training. This could be during the construction 
phase of new development or in the 
completed development itself. 4.28  There are high levels of deprivation in 
parts of the borough, including the fifth 
most deprived area in Hertfordshire. This is 
often linked to income deprivation, which 
can be exacerbated by unemployment 
and lower levels of education. Supporting 
apprenticeships or training schemes would 
seek to capture the social value of new 
development.
 
4.29  New development can also support local 
businesses in Watford by ensuring that fair 
tender opportunities are given to local small 
and medium-sized enterprises and social 
enterprises, and that local businesses are 
used in the developer’s supply chain. 
 
4.30  The process for providing these employment 
and training initiatives will be set out in 
a Supplementary Planning Document. 
Applicants will be required to provide a 
training, skills and employment strategy to 
demonstrate their contribution. Policy EM4.5: Different Ways 
of Working
  Development proposals for new forms of 
workspace, including flexible workspace, 
start-ups, micro businesses and space 
for social and cultural enterprises will 
be supported across the borough where 
there is demonstrated to be no significant 
harm to the amenity of neighbouring 
land uses.
71
A Vibrant TownChapter 572 A Vibrant Town
A Vibrant Town 
5.1    Watford has a strongly performing Town Centre, with St Albans Road 
District Centre supporting by also offering a wide range of services and 
facilities. In addition, there is a network of Local Centres that provide 
for much of their communities’ day-to-day needs. The approach for the 
Plan is to build on these strengths and focus growth in these centres, 
providing retail, leisure and entertainment for all ages and groups of 
people. Protecting smaller centres will help ensure built up areas in the 
borough have good access to services and facilities and contribute 
towards reducing the need for people to travel.
5.2  The opportunity to participate in activities, whether for recreation, 
community events or learning, is important for people living in and 
visiting Watford. The availability of a variety of facilities and shops attracts 
people to the Town and Local Centres (Figure 5.1) and helps them remain 
dynamic and vibrant. Figure 5.1 indicatively shows where the Town Centre, 
District Centre and Local Centres are located in the borough. For more 
detailed information such as the spatial coverage of these designations, 
refer to the Policies Map where these are defined.
5.3  Watford, as a sub-regional centre, serves residents of the town and 
beyond, drawing people from throughout South West Hertfordshire. The 
vibrancy and vitality of the Town Centre will be maintained and enhanced 
through the plan period, providing the opportunity to access a wide 
range of ‘town centre uses’ (as identified in the National Planning Policy 
Framework) including retail, leisure, entertainment, office, arts and culture. 
These functions are vital to long- term sustainability and underpinning 
Watford as an attractive place to live, work and invest.
5.4  Continued vitality in these areas can reduce the need to travel, by 
providing goods and services in easily accessible locations and allowing 
combined trips. This encourages sustainability and creates opportunities 
for focal points within residential areas, particularly those with the potential 
to support higher housing densities.
Figure 5.1: Watford Town, District and Local Centres73 A Vibrant Town
The changing nature of retail in Watford  
5.5  Watford has a successful Town Centre but 
the Local Plan also recognises that the retail 
environment is changing with traditional 
retail declining; and service sectors, such as 
food and drink, health and fitness, and hotels 
increasing. This highlights the importance of 
retaining flexibility in retail policy to encourage 
footfall with popular uses, such as leisure and 
food and drink.
5.6  The nature of the Town Centre and; to a lesser 
extent, Local Centres, is continuing to evolve. 
Increasingly they are becoming hubs for 
leisure, social and community activities, not 
just for shopping. Retaining flexibility in retail 
policy encourages footfall, ensuring centres 
remain vibrant while continuing to meet the 
needs of people that use them. The Council is 
seeking to enhance the offer for families in the 
town and create a balanced centre that meets 
the needs of all residents and users at different 
times of the day and night. New proposals for 
cultural and social uses will be encouraged 
as appropriate town centre uses that can add 
vibrancy and activity. It is anticipated that a 
building may be in a number of different uses 
concurrently or at different times of the day.5.7  The Town, District and Local Centres also play 
a critical role in place-making. To support this, 
developers will be expected to maximise the 
proportion of ground floors in town centre 
uses, fronting on to streets or public spaces 
that are active, by taking steps to reduce the 
amount of blank frontage and space given 
over to building servicing and management, 
such as bin stores and plant. Proposals must 
ensure that units are accessible and designed 
to the highest quality, considering how 
proportions, materials and detailing relate to, 
and complement, their surroundings.
5.8  Where opportunities arise to develop new 
centres or to enhance existing local shops 
to perform as Local Centres, some limited 
additional retail development may be 
acceptable, subject to the Sequential and 
Impact Tests.
5.9  There are a number of out-of-centre retail 
and leisure parks in Watford. These generally 
provide for shops selling large value items, 
less suitable for town centre locations. 
They are generators of car travel and are 
poorly integrated into their surroundings. 
Redevelopment of these sites, such as 
Waterfields and Lower High Street, should 
make a better use of land by providing 
new residential development alongside 
appropriate retail that is easily accessible 
and well integrated with the surrounding 
area. Redevelopment of these sites could 
also provide an opportunity to reassess the 
transport network in the vicinity, securing 
improvements to public transport, cycling and 
walking. Consolidation of retail floorspace in 
such locations may be appropriate to support 
additional economic spend or investment 
in the Town Centre, Watford’s primary retail 
destination.
5.10  This chapter should be read in conjunction 
with the Town Centre Strategic Development 
Policy CDA2.2 ‘Town Centre Strategic 
Development Area’.74 A Vibrant Town
Strategic Policy VT5.1: Supporting Vibrant Retail Centres
  Planning permission will be granted for the development of retail, leisure, entertainment, arts, culture, office and other main town centre uses (as defined 
in the NPPF) within the defined Town, District and Local Centre boundaries, providing the use is appropriate for the scale and function of each centre. 
Development within these boundaries should contribute towards the enhancement of the public realm.
 Town Centre 
  Alongside new homes, Watford Town Centre will remain the focus for; comparison shopping, leisure, entertainment, civic and cultural activities. 
Development proposals within the Town Centre that are ‘family friendly’ will be encouraged. 
  To ensure the long-term vitality and viability of Watford Town Centre, the Council will apply sequential tests for the main town centre uses, and 
require impact assessments for retail and leisure developments over 2,500sqm, in accordance with national planning policy. 
  Proposals that optimise the use of land and floorspace within the Town Centre, through mixed-use development, including new or re-used space 
above shops and commercial premises, will be supported, providing they have regard to the role and function of the centre, impacts on vitality and 
viability and the compatibility of proposed and existing surrounding uses.
 Outside the Town Centre
  Where appropriate, a limited amount of retail development will be supported on strategic sites to provide for the new community, subject to: 
compliance with the sequential test; proposals being of an appropriate scale; provision of good accessibility by walking, cycling or public transport; 
and there being no significant adverse impact on the vitality and viability of the Town Centre or Local Centres in the vicinity.
 District and Local Centres
  The vitality and viability of the District and Local Centres will be enhanced to provide local goods and services for local communities. Proposals that 
optimise the use of land and floorspace within the District and Local Centres, through mixed-use development, including new or re-used space above 
shops and commercial premises, will be supported, providing they have regard to the role and function of the centre, impact on vitality and viability, 
including that of existing business, and the compatibility of proposed and existing surrounding uses.
 The Town Centre, District Centre and Local Centres are defined on the Policies Map.75 A Vibrant Town
PUB
 Groceries
TOYS
Figure 5.2: Components of a vibrant town76 A Vibrant Town
Retail Hierarchy 
5.11  The Retail Hierarchy focuses on town centre 
uses that generate high footfall in accessible 
locations for those working, living and 
visiting Watford (Table 5.1). It is important that 
new retail development takes place in the 
right locations and at an appropriate scale. 
Watford’s Retail Hierarchy will be used to direct 
town centre uses to the most appropriate 
location, with regard to their scale, function 
and character. The Town Centre will be the 
preferred location for these uses.
5.12  It is acknowledged that ‘walk-to’ Local Centres 
can help provide premises for small-scale 
manufacturing or shared working premises, 
where businesses may wish to sell their 
produce. These uses can help to serve the 
needs of the local community and improve 
the function by increasing footfall in the area. 
Proposals for these uses will be supported, but 
will be considered against the policy criteria.Retail Hierarchy DescriptionTable 5.1: Watford Retail Hierarchy
Watford Town Centre performs a role as a sub-regional 
centre, with its catchment extending beyond the borough 
boundary. The centre offers a full range of town centre 
uses, including: retail, leisure, business, community and 
cultural facilities.
St Albans Road District Centre contains a good range of 
town centre uses, including a large public library. The 
District Centre has a smaller catchment than the Town 
Centre, but a wider draw and a larger number and range of 
units than the Local Centres.
Local Centres include a range of small shops, meeting the 
day-to-day needs of a small catchment area. It is expected 
that Local Centres will also contain facilities, such as GPs, 
dentists, dry cleaners and community facilities, to support 
the retail offer. Typically, Local Centres are categorised 
as being over seven units, with a range of at least three 
different uses.Watford Town Centre
St Albans Road
Buckingham Road 
Bushey Arches
Garston Park Parade 
Goodwood Parade 
Langley Road 
Langley Way 
Leavesden Road 
Longspring 
Merton Road 
North Approach 
St Johns Road 
The Brow 
The Gossamers 
Tudor Avenue 
Vicarage Road 
Villiers Road 
Whippendell Road East
Whippendell Road/ 
Ascot RoadTown Centre
District Centre
Local Centres 
77 A Vibrant Town
Watford Town Centre 
5.13  Given the scale of development envisaged 
within Watford over the plan period, the rapidly 
changing economic market and the way 
people are increasingly using town centres to 
socialise, it will be important for proposals to 
be designed to be sufficiently flexible to allow 
for changing conditions and needs. Proposals 
that allow for varying size requirements, for 
example, by providing for expansion through 
the future creation of mezzanines, or the 
subdivision/amalgamation of units, will be 
supported. Consideration should also be given 
to future-proofed design that allows for units to 
readily change uses. This flexibility should be 
demonstrated as part of a planning  
application submission.
5.14  It is acknowledged that there may be instances 
where some loss of floorspace contributes 
towards achieving wider objectives, such as 
the redevelopment of the site, or improving 
access to upper levels. In such cases, ground 
floor units should remain of a size and scale 
that is viable to current or future occupants 
and the access to upper levels be designed so 
as not to undermine the activity and function 
of the frontage.5.15  The South West Herts Retail and Leisure 
Study (2018) recognises the prominent 
position of Watford Town Centre, whilst also 
acknowledging the need to broaden the offer 
to include a wider range of leisure and cultural 
activities. No specific allocations are required 
to meet any leisure capacity identified within 
Watford, however, such facilities should be 
promoted, providing that such uses would not 
adversely impact the operation or function 
of existing retail provision and the vitality and 
viability of the Town Centre.
5.16  Other uses, such as employment and 
residential, would be appropriate on upper 
floors, however, access must be designed 
to promote street level activity and not 
undermine the viability of ground floor units or 
interrupt the active frontages.
Learning and non-residential institutions
5.17  These uses (Use Class F1) are acceptable in 
the Town Centre, however, it is important that 
they do not negatively impact on the function. 
It is acknowledged that large numbers of 
people travel to large-scale attractor uses 
at a specific time; planning applications will 
need to demonstrate that such uses would 
have no negative impact on the transport 
network. In addition, uses that remain closed 
for large portions of the day or week are not 
appropriate. Windows and doors should face 
on to the street, creating interest and activity 
for significant portions of the day, with lively 
internal uses visible from the outside, or spilling 
on to the street in appropriate locations.Outdoor uses
5.18  Uses that help to keep the public realm active 
will play an important role in placemaking 
and are, in principle, encouraged. However, 
the impacts on the amenity of residents and 
workers would need to be carefully considered. 
Any proposals for street markets would need to 
be accompanied by a management plan that 
identifies its hours of operation and storage 
arrangements when not in use, types of traders, 
advertising, servicing and pedestrian and 
transport impacts. Event spaces will also require 
a management plan regarding types of events, 
frequency of use, noise levels, advertising, 
servicing and pedestrian and transport impacts.
Convenience food takeaways
5.19  There has been a growing concern in recent 
years about the proliferation and over-
concentration of hot food takeaways and their 
impact on health, in particular, regarding the 
proximity of takeaways to schools and the 
impact that this has on childhood obesity. 
In 2020 government reclassified hot food 
takeaways into a separate use class. The type 
of food on sale nearest to schools can influence 
the diet of schoolchildren and the availability 
of ‘unhealthy’ foodstuffs can make healthier 
choices less likely. While it is acknowledged that 
takeaway uses can be beneficial to the function 
of the Town Centre and reduce vacancies, an 
over-concentration of these uses would be 
detrimental to the character and function, or 
vitality and viability, of the Town Centre, and, as 
such, proposals that would result in potential 
clustering will be resisted.
78 A Vibrant Town
Policy VT5.2: Watford Town Centre
  Within Watford Town Centre, as shown on the Policies Map, planning 
applications for town centre uses will be supported where they:
 a)  Maximise the proportion of the ground floor fronting a street as  
a positive and/or active frontage; and
 b)  Support flexibility and adaptability to future-proof for changing 
uses (subject to appropriate permissions).
  Applications for learning and non-residential institutions will be 
supported where they:
 c) Retain active frontages throughout the day;
 d) Demonstrate no negative impact on the road network;
 e) Serve the local community.
  Applications providing outdoor uses, such as eating and drinking 
uses with outdoor seating, event space or street markets are 
encouraged and will be supported where they:
 f) Do not detract from residential amenity;
  g)  Demonstrate no negative impact on connectivity and the ease of 
getting around for pedestrians and cyclists.
  Applications for new hot food takeaway will be supported  
where they:
 h)  Retain a separation of at least four units between each hot food 
takeaway unit;
 i) Protect the amenity of surrounding properties.Local Centres 
5.20  Retail and service provision outside the Town Centre is an important 
element towards achieving sustainable development and healthy 
communities. The network of Local Centres across the borough allows 
easy access to multiple services and contributes positively towards the 
identity of neighbourhoods. Local shops, alongside other services, are 
a key component of Local Centres and their protection will help shape 
how services are provided in the future.
5.21   Proposals will need to provide flexibility for Local Centres to address the 
challenges of new forms of retailing, while realising their potential for 
higher–density, mixed-use residential developments and environmental 
improvements. Redevelopment will be supported where it can make 
centres more viable and functional, but existing floorspace will be 
protected, to provide more facilities and amenities in local communities 
and reduce the need for travel. Proposals should demonstrate that the 
continued operation of existing facilities is not compromised  
by redevelopment.
5.22  The focus is on the consolidation of a viable range of functions and 
uses that make Local Centres a recognisable destination in the local 
area, particularly convenience retailing, leisure, local employment and 
workspaces. The design, accessibility and layout of Local Centres will 
have an important impact upon their success, and, in turn, the health 
and wellbeing of local people. Proposals should promote a range of unit 
sizes and retain a variety of uses, to meet the needs of the  
local community.
5.23  Smaller Neighbourhood Centres should focus on a limited but variety 
of uses and provide convenient and attractive access by walking and 
cycling to local goods and services needed on a day-to-day basis.79 A Vibrant Town
Policy VT5.3: District and Local Centres
  New development must contribute positively to the function, vitality 
and viability of the District and Local Centres. This will include 
sufficient provision of local shops and services to meet the day-to-
day needs of local communities.
  Proposals for commercial, business and service uses, or appropriate 
community uses, will be supported. Development proposals should:
 a)  Maximise the proportion of the ground floor fronting a street as  
a positive and/or active frontage; 
 b)  Demonstrably relate to the character, scale and role of the 
existing centre;
 c)  Ensure centres are accessible, active, attractive and safe during 
the day and night;
 d)  Provide convenient and attractive access by walking and  
cycling; and
 e)  Support temporary and community uses where they help to 
activate and revitalise units.
  Applications for new hot food takeaway will be supported  
where they:
 f)  Retain a separation of at least four units between each hot food 
takeaway unit; and
 g) Protect the amenity of surrounding properties.
  The District Centre and Local Centres are defined on the  
Policies Map.
80
An Attractive TownChapter 681 An Attractive Town
An Attractive Town 
6.1  The Spatial Strategy identifies areas of the town where transformational 
change is appropriate, areas where the scale of change is lower and some 
areas where very little change is expected. Within Watford’s urban fabric 
there are existing areas of distinctive and high quality character, which 
should be retained and reinforced, and other areas where the character 
has been eroded through past developments that present opportunities 
for creating new, distinctive, high quality places.
6.2  New development provides an opportunity to make a positive 
contribution through high quality design. To help deliver the objectives 
of the Local Plan, applicants will need to demonstrate how they have 
integrated high quality design in a fashion that reflects the character of the 
area. The National Planning Policy Framework requires new development 
to take opportunities to improve the character and quality of an area and 
the way it functions. The National Design Guide sets out detailed practice 
guidance which new development should follow. Development proposals 
should also take account of Supplementary Planning Documents and 
guidance which includes the Residential Design Guide (2016) and 
Character of the Area Study (2011) and any future revised versions of these 
which are adopted.Good 
Design
Well landscaped 
and people 
friendly spaces
Attractive and 
clutter free 
streetsSpaces 
for social 
interaction
Attractive and 
functional 
placesThriving 
placesAttractive and 
distinctive 
buildings
Human scale 
buildings
Comfortable 
and spacious 
homes
Figure 6.1: Principles of good design82 An Attractive Town
Figure 6.2: Established, Protected and Core 
Development Areas6.3  To ensure that the growth proposed can be delivered in a way which will 
retain and reinforce the character and identity of Watford three types of 
area within the town have been identified.
 a.  The Core Development Area, where most of the growth for the town will 
take place and the scale of change is expected to be transformational;
 b.  protected areas where the scale of growth will be very limited and very 
respectful of the local context; and 
 c.  established areas (parts of the town not in the Core Development Area 
or Protected Areas) where the scale of change is more limited than the 
Core Development Area, but where some intensification is expected.
6.4   Protected Areas include all parks and open spaces (detailed map at  
Figure 9.1) and all Conservation Areas (detailed map at Figure 7.2). These 
maps are to provide context about Policy QD6.1, however, they are not 
intended to set out policy requirements. Areas identified are defined on 
the Policies Map and this should be referred to as part of the  
decision-making process. 
83
 An Attractive Town
Strategic Policy QD6.1: Design for an Attractive Town
  New Development in Watford is required to deliver high quality 
design. Buildings will be designed to minimise environmental impact 
including mitigating climate change impacts, deliver attractive 
and functional spaces and reinforce and develop a distinctive local 
character with durable, lasting materials. Proposals will be required to 
demonstrate that they have responded positively to sensitive areas. 
New public realm will be attractive, accessible and reflective of the 
needs of the community.
 
  There are three areas in Watford, each of which requires a separate 
approach when considering the design of new development.
 Core Development Area
  The approach to design will encourage a new positive character, 
enhance areas of poor quality and build on existing aspects of positive 
design. High-density development will be supported, with the highest 
densities to be located in the most sustainable locations. Proposals 
for taller buildings will be of an appropriate height that reflects its 
location, role in the built-up area, contributes to wayfinding as a key 
marker in the townscape and which makes a positive contribution 
towards an attractive skyline.
  Proposals for major developments will be required to achieve 
high quality design, with taller buildings required to demonstrate 
outstanding design and innovation that are well connected through a 
quality public realm that is interesting and people can easily interpret 
and use. Together, these will contribute towards achieving a compact 
and walkable town.  Proposals will demonstrate how they maximise the relationship 
between new buildings, environmental features and people, maximise 
site-specific opportunities and contribute towards their integration 
with the surrounding area.
  In locations where the Core Development Area is adjacent to existing 
areas of established residential character, proposals will need to be 
designed to reflect this sensitivity and demonstrate how they enable 
an appropriate transition between these areas.
 Established Areas
  This includes all areas that lie outside the Core Development Area and 
the Protected Areas. The degree of change will be more limited than 
in the Core Development Area but is expected to result in a gentle 
uplift in the density of the area. Development proposals in these areas 
should be led by the existing characteristics of the local area and will 
reinforce and where appropriate enhance the character of the  
local area.
 Protected Areas 
  The degree of change within these areas or which affects their setting 
will be more limited. Development proposals will be of the highest 
design standard and particular attention should be paid to the 
detailing and materials proposed for the scheme. Design cues should 
be taken from heritage assets and designations to inform and guide 
the character and identity of new development.
  The Core Development Area, Established Areas and Protected Areas 
are defined on the Policies Map.84 An Attractive Town
Design principles 
6.5  The quality and distinctiveness of a place is the result of decisions made 
about how the buildings relate to one another and to the spaces between 
them. This affects the way the place looks, feels and is used. It is important 
that new developments in the town make a positive contribution to the 
identity and character of the local area and support and enhance the 
local movement network whilst providing opportunities for businesses to 
thrive, spaces for people to enjoy and leisure activities.
6.6  The ground floor of new buildings should provide animated and active 
frontages. This can be achieved through the provision of direct access 
to ground floor uses and the positioning of ground floor uses so that the 
active uses animate the adjoining public space. This will help streets and 
spaces to be lively areas and contribute to social wellbeing and  
strong communities.
6.7  New development inclusive of individual buildings and the public 
spaces between them should be designed for all users, link well into the 
existing network and provide safe and attractive areas for cyclists and 
pedestrians. Street layouts should follow a logical structure and hierarchy 
to aid navigation, including: incorporating local landmarks and distinctive 
features that help wayfinding; and, be designed to provide a logical 
sequence of key points.
6.8  Local and town wide views are important to residents and those arriving 
in the town, and are an important aid to finding key locations. Key views 
are identified in the Skyline: Watford’s Approach to Taller Buildings 
Supplementary Planning Document or any subsequent replacement 
document that sets out important local views.
85 An Attractive Town
Policy QD6.2: Design Principles 
  Proposals for new development will be required to show how they will 
make a positive contribution to high quality design and place-making. 
To achieve this, proposals for new development will need to show how 
they have responded to the following design principles.
 Sustainable design
  New developments will need to be designed to minimise their impact 
on the environment and embrace sustainability principles. This should 
include measures to reduce the use of resources including energy, 
water and waste, and incorporate soft measures to improve the 
environment such as green roofs, green walls and  
multi-functional green spaces.
 Character and identity
  New buildings and streets are to be attractive and distinctive. This 
includes consideration to the way an area looks, feels, sounds, smells 
and how it functions, both presently and in the future. Street scenes 
are to be of high quality, welcoming and take design cues from 
existing buildings, where they make a positive contribution to the 
character of the area, ensuring it is identifiable and relatable  
to residents.
 Built form
  The scale and massing of proposed buildings will need to relate to 
the local context and the role of the area. Building footprints are to be 
of an appropriate scale, enhance the relationship between buildings 
individually, collectively and the spaces between them to create 
environments that are relatable to people, easy to understand, have good light, minimise wind effects and improve connections with the 
surrounding area. New buildings should make use of local topography, 
to reinforce Watford’s distinctiveness. 
 Active and positive frontages 
  On main streets and in public spaces, new buildings should include 
active frontages and/or positive frontages and ensure an active 
visual and physical relationship between the street, or space, and the 
building. Uses on the ground floor should incorporate active uses to 
animate the interface between buildings and the public realm.
 Movement and connectivity
  Streets are to be designed so they are efficient, convenient, legible 
and permeable, to support all users and prioritise non-vehicular travel. 
Routes need to be designed for their anticipated level of use and be 
clearly defined, to make it easy for different users to interpret using 
appropriate wayfinding measures, including sightlines.
 Views
  New development will need to make a positive contribution towards 
important views in the borough, having regard to the Skyline: 
Watford’s Approach to Taller Buildings Supplementary Planning 
Document or equivalent future guidance. This includes views from 
high vantage points, ground level and long distance views. New 
development should enhance the setting of local landmarks where 
appropriate. New developments that have an impact on the local 
skyline will need to be designed to an outstanding standard that will 
improve the distinctiveness of Watford in a positive way.
86
 An Attractive Town
Public realm 
6.9  A high quality and functional public realm is crucial to creating places 
in which communities and businesses can thrive. Streets and spaces 
should be designed to promote social interaction and inclusion, where 
people of all ages and abilities can mix, feel safe and be comfortable. In 
areas of higher density development, it is crucial that the streets and 
spaces accommodate a wide range of uses to meet the needs of the 
communities around them, such as areas for play, fitness, quiet spaces and 
more generally to contribute towards improving health and wellbeing.
6.10  The spaces created between buildings should be convenient for a wide 
range of users, adaptable and flexible so they can accommodate the 
changing needs and lifestyles of users and changing uses over time. 
Building lines and active frontages should be used to define the public 
realm with building height used to create a sense of enclosure that results 
in a comfortable and usable space or street. 
 
6.11  Complementary elements, such as materials, finishes, furniture, planting, 
signage, lighting and public art should be used to ensure that the spaces 
and streets created in new developments are at a human scale. Design 
details should consider the health and wellbeing of the people using 
them, for example, the provision of shade and shelter, places to rest as well 
spaces for more active uses. The creation of ‘gated communities’ which do 
not contribute to well connected, accessible and a permeable public realm 
should be avoided.
6.12  The delivery of high quality public realm within new schemes and within 
the Strategic Development Areas will be secured through the use of 
conditions or S106 Agreements.Policy QD6.3: Public Realm 
All areas of public realm need to be designed so they are safe, 
accessible, inclusive and attractive. Public spaces in new development 
will be supported where it is demonstrated they meet the  
following criteria:
a) Create spaces that positively reinforce local identity;
b)  Routes and spaces are designed to accommodate social interaction, 
activity and green infrastructure for everyone to use;
c)  Use appropriate street furniture to enable informal play, areas 
for rest, encourage social interaction, wayfinding measures 
and linkages between local destinations taking care to avoid 
unnecessary street clutter, and consider how spaces will be used 
during the day, evening and night;
d)  Provide safe environments, using active frontages, natural 
surveillance, sightlines, good lighting and well located  
building entrances;
e)  Create an attractive environment using tree/shrub planting and 
soft landscaping, prioritising native species; consideration will need 
to be given to maintenance and how soft landscaping is used to 
reduce the sense of car dominance, where car parking is  
provided; and 
f)  Use public art where it will animate the public realm and foster  
a sense of identity.
87 An Attractive Town
Building design 
6.13  High quality building design is important to 
creating successful places, in terms of the 
impact that the external appearance has 
on the spaces and streets around it and the 
internal living environment which occupiers 
experience. Good building design will 
contribute to high quality living environments 
and will have a beneficial impact on the health 
and wellbeing of users and occupiers.
 
Relationship between buildings and streets
6.14  New buildings should be designed so that 
the external appearance enhances the 
positive aspects and features of existing local 
character and identity. There are some parts 
of the urban area where the positive character 
has been eroded through inappropriate past 
development and proposals to redevelop in 
such locations should take the opportunity 
to enhance and upgrade the character and 
identity of the area, drawing on the positive 
aspects of the wider area.
6.15  The detailed design of the building façades 
should have a positive relationship with the 
street and, in particular, should be at a scale 
that people walking in the street can relate 
to and feel comfortable with. Façades facing 
the street and other public spaces should 
have entrances and windows at regular 
intervals allowing access to the building and 
the sense that the space is over looked from 
the surrounding buildings. The details and 
materials should reflect those found in the local area but may be interpreted in a more 
contemporary and innovative way. Materials 
should be of high quality and designed to 
age well, retaining their quality and finish; 
care should be taken when introducing new 
materials alongside traditional ones, so that 
they work well together and also reinforce 
local character, whilst creating a distinctive 
new identity.
 
Flexibility in design
6.16  The design of new buildings should consider 
how the building and the spaces in the area 
will be used now and in the future, and ensure 
that they can be adapted to accommodate 
the needs of future users. In particular, 
consideration should be given to how new 
residential buildings can facilitate changing 
working patterns, where more people may be 
working at home more of the time. This may be 
achieved by providing additional space within 
residential units or, in appropriate locations, 
providing a shared workspace on the ground 
floor of a new building. Planning applications 
for new residential development should 
demonstrate how this has been considered.
Designing for comfortable environments
6.17  The effects of climate change mean that 
buildings should be adequately heated and 
cooled to deal with more extreme hot and cold 
spells. Where possible, new residential units 
should be able to be cooled using natural cross 
ventilation, which will result in a more energy 
efficient building. This can be achieved using 
dual aspect units in residential schemes which will also improve the daylight levels. Internal 
design measures, such as higher ceilings, can 
be used to aid cooling and ventilation.
 
6.18  Proposals for new buildings should consider 
this at an early stage of the design process 
and use building layouts that maximise the 
number of dual aspect units delivered. The 
size of glazed areas should be adjusted to 
avoid overheating, particularly on south and 
west-facing elevations, which receive more 
sunlight during the hottest part of the day. 
Other measures to shield the impacts of 
afternoon sun should be an integral part of 
the building design.
88
 An Attractive Town
Safe and attractive environments
6.19  To assist with delivering active frontages and 
improving social interaction within larger 
residential developments, buildings should 
be designed to have multiple cores that 
access directly onto the street at the front of 
the building. Reducing the number of units 
served by a core area will provide better 
opportunities for residents to meet and get 
to know their neighbours and to develop 
stronger local communities. Shared internal 
areas should be light and airy and provide 
sufficient circulation space for residents to 
pass each other easily and for informal  
social interaction.
6.20  It is important that residents have 
somewhere safe and convenient for package 
and parcel delivery. Where possible, this 
should be located within the building on the 
ground floor of each core. Other large item 
and cycle storage should be conveniently 
located, easily accessible and safe, so that 
residents feel comfortable using it. The best 
location is within the building and on the 
ground floor of the core area. If this cannot 
be achieved, then storage should be located 
close to the building, visible from the building 
and secure. External refuse and recycling and 
cycle storage should be located to minimise 
visual and physical obstruction, whilst being 
easily accessible for residents and operatives.6.21  To provide attractive environments and 
buildings it is important to consider the 
location of services, utilities, down pipes 
and gutters carefully and early in the design 
process so that they are an integral part 
of the design. Where possible, service and 
utility boxes and pipes should be located 
inside buildings with access to boxes from 
communal areas on the ground floor. 
On taller buildings the removal of excess 
rainwater from the roof of buildings to the 
drainage network should be integrated 
into the building and external gutters and 
downpipes avoided. On a more domestic 
scale, buildings external downpipes and 
gutters should be carefully positioned to 
avoid a cluttered appearance.
6.22  Internal space standards and amenity 
space standards are set out in Policy 
HO3.10 Building Standards for New Homes 
and Policy HO3.11 Private and Shared 
Private Amenity Space. Policies relating 
to sustainable construction are located in 
Chapter 8 ‘A Climate Emergency’.
89 An Attractive Town
Policy QD6.4: Building Design 
  Well designed buildings that are visually attractive, functional, 
accessible, sustainable, mitigate climate change, and that reflect  
the character and wider objectives for the area, will be supported.
 Enhancing character and identity
  New buildings are to positively contribute towards the local area using 
the following design principles:
 a)    In areas where the local character and identity has been eroded,  
the design of new buildings should enhance the positive and 
improve the negative qualities of the area;
 b)  The proportions of new buildings need to be appropriate to the 
existing or emerging character of the area;
 c)  Façades and their detailing are to have a positive relationship with 
the street, be of a human scale, reflect its role and function and 
enhance the character of the area;
 d)  Materials should be of high quality, robust, durable, age well,  
reflect their function and sit comfortably with buildings in the  
area, adding to local distinctiveness.
  Safe, healthy and attractive internal and external environments
  New residential buildings should be designed to provide internal and 
external spaces that support the health and wellbeing of all those who use 
and experience them. New building design should adhere to the following:
 
 e)  All ground floor units facing the street or public realm should be 
designed so that the primary access for each individual unit is directly on 
to that street or public realm; deviation from this (by exception) will need 
to demonstrate that individual ground floor access is not feasible due to 
the constraints of the site;
 f)  Include a high proportion of dual aspect units to create quality internal 
spaces, able to receive good light and air ventilation and, where possible, 
avoid using a single aspect form; g)  Internal layouts should provide for working at home, implementing the 
technical internal space standards; this could be the inclusion of space 
within individual dwellings for a home office, or a shared workspace 
within the building;
 h)  Internal cores are to serve no more than eight units per floor; deviation 
from this (by exception) will need to be justified and mitigated through 
design measures that demonstrate internal living standards will not be 
adversely affected.;
 i)  Buildings should be designed to promote the use of stairs through 
locating the stairwell in a prominent and easily accessible location within 
the entrance core of the building, providing a well-lit and spacious internal 
space which allows social interaction as well as being comfortable for 
residents to walk up and down and to pass one another.
 j)  Secure cycle parking should be provided in easily accessible and 
convenient locations.
  Getting the details right: storage, waste, servicing and utilities  
  All new developments will be designed so they are effective and 
attractive by meeting the following criteria:
 k)  Access to service and utility boxes should be inside the building and 
avoid unnecessary clutter; where this is not possible they should be 
an integral part of the design;
 l)  Refuse and recycling should be located within the building envelope; 
where this cannot be achieved, bin stores which are carefully 
positioned, easy to use and attractive should be provided;
 m)  Secure provision for parcel receipt and storage should be provided 
on site; and 
  n)  The location of drainpipes, gutters and pipes for services and 
utilities should be integrated into the wider design, to avoid a 
cluttered appearance. 90 An Attractive Town
Building height and taller 
development 
6.23  To meet the borough’s need for new 
homes and jobs the Local Plan anticipates 
development coming forward at higher 
densities than currently exist across the 
borough. This means Watford is more likely 
to see new buildings that are taller than the 
existing prevailing height within an area.
6.24  The Tall Buildings Study (2021) examines the 
prevailing height of existing buildings across 
a series of defined character areas and the 
likely base building heights that will need 
to be achieved in order to meet the need 
for homes and jobs across the borough. 
The findings have been drawn from an 
assessment of relevant factors, including: 
an area’s sensitivity to taller buildings and 
suitability for them; consideration of strategic 
growth designations; and potential visual 
impacts of tall buildings when seen within the 
townscape including important views. The 
report provides an evidence-driven approach, 
which establishes appropriate thresholds for 
base building heights in each character area 
for future development. 
6.25  Base building heights are not intended to 
act as an absolute ‘cap’ on the height of new 
buildings but instead set a presumption 
in favour of developments where the 
predominant height falls within the threshold 
set for that character area. Four distinctive 
character areas have been identified 
including: •  Watford Gateway: Potential development 
sites within Watford Gateway are generally 
less constrained by their urban context, 
particularly in the area around Watford 
Junction Station. They are well connected to 
the local and strategic transport network, and 
higher density and mixed-use development 
is generally appropriate here. The Watford 
Junction area is relatively low lying, while 
Clarendon Road is characterised by buildings 
taller than the surrounding area. The station 
area is a key node with limited sensitivity to 
development and excellent access to public 
transport; strengthening the role of Clarendon 
Road as a gateway to the Town Centre 
through good design and use of buildings 
with added height can make a contribution 
towards this. Sites in this area will be expected 
to make a significant contribution to 
streetscape and connectivity improvements, 
particularly the transformation of the ring road. 
Proposals that adjoin existing residential areas 
will need to demonstrate a transition between 
the two areas.
 •  Town Centre: The Town Centre contains a 
diverse range of uses, buildings and public 
spaces. The area is suitable for higher density 
development in the right locations, however, 
this needs to be appropriate to the site and 
its surroundings and to clearly justify why a 
site is suitable for a taller building. Proposals 
will need to be explicit as to why a taller 
building is appropriate for the location. This 
includes demonstrating which landmark, 
node or location the building is marking; how it relates to and enhances the existing built 
form, including scale and massing; how the 
frontage will positively contribute towards the 
public realm and place-making; in locations 
near the High Street, how it relates to the 
shopping area and provides a quality living 
environment; and how the proposal has 
responded to heritage assets that may be 
affected by the proposal. 
 •  Colne Valley: The Colne Valley area has a 
greater sensitivity to building height and 
proposals will need to consider the local 
topography and views across the area. 
Proposals should embed placemaking 
aspirations to open up the river, protect and 
enhance existing or future views and mitigate 
sensitivities associated with biodiversity. On 
larger sites, through a masterplan approach, 
well designed schemes may identify 
opportunities that maximise changes in 
topography to achieve additional height. 
91 An Attractive Town
 •  Areas outside the Core Development Area: 
These areas have an established character 
and the prevailing height is lower. Proposals 
will need to clearly demonstrate how they 
relate to the existing character and make 
a positive contribution towards the area. In 
very limited cases, specific locations might 
be suitable for taller elements above the 
proposed base building heights. However, in 
the absence of significant improvements to 
public transport accessibility, building heights 
and density are likely to be more modest. 
Locations outside the Core Development 
Area where taller elements may be 
appropriate include:
 
   •  Ascot Road, where a character for taller 
buildings has been established; and
  •  On large sites close to the Dome 
Roundabout, which is a key entry point  
to the town.
6.26  Where a proposed building would exceed 
the base building height for the area, this will 
need to be clearly justified and will be subject 
to detailed consideration under the criteria 
set out within the Building Height Policy. 
To demonstrate why a proposal for a taller 
building should be supported, the starting 
point should be to demonstrate that the 
location is appropriate, based on an evaluation 
and assessment of suitability and sensitivity, as 
set out in the Tall Buildings Study:  •  Suitability: Proposals should demonstrate 
their suitability in relation to excellent public 
transport and cycling accessibility, proximity 
to town centres or local facilities, access to 
green spaces and designations for strategic 
development.
 •  Sensitivity: Proposals must consider 
potential impact on designated and 
undesignated heritage assets, views, 
ecological assets and green spaces.
6.27  Proposals that involve higher densities 
should be based on careful consideration 
of local character, context and access to 
amenities and public transport. Relevant 
plan policies include: housing and amenity 
space (Chapter 3 ‘Homes for a Growing 
Community’); design (Chapter 6 ‘An Attractive 
Town’); and heritage (Chapter 7 ‘The Historic 
Environment’); sustainability and climate 
change (Chapter 8 ‘A Climate Emergency’); 
open space (Chapter 9 ‘Conserving and 
Enhancing the Environment’) and sustainable 
transport (Chapter 11 ‘Sustainable Travel 
Town’). The approach to building heights 
should also be considered alongside the 
Spatial Strategy and Local Plan objectives 
(Chapter 1 ‘Spatial Strategy for Watford’) and 
aspirations for the Strategic Development 
Areas (Chapter 2 ‘Core Development Area’).Outstanding design, high quality living 
environments and community benefits
6.28  Where consideration of the suitability and 
sensitivity of a site suggests that a taller 
building, or built element, may be justified, 
proposals will need to demonstrate how 
they will deliver outstanding design quality, 
high quality living environments and public 
benefits for the town and community.
6.29  To ensure taller buildings are of outstanding 
design, applicants should make appropriate 
use of tools and processes for assessing 
and improving the design of their proposals, 
including making use of design review. 
More specifically, when taller buildings are 
designed, they should demonstrate that 
consideration has been given to the three 
main elements: base, mansard and pop-up. 
Guidance should refer to the specific massing 
rules that apply to each of these elements, as 
set out in the Tall Buildings Study.
92 An Attractive Town
6.30  Buildings that would be taller than the 
base building height for their area will also 
be required to demonstrate their positive 
contribution in terms of public benefits to the 
town and the community. Proposals should 
be able to demonstrate that these benefits 
clearly exceed the benefits that could be 
achieved for a building that would be lower 
than the base height for the appropriate area. 
These benefits should include, but may not 
be limited to: 
 a)  Enhanced provision of affordable housing 
and a good mix of dwelling sizes which 
reflect the identified housing needs;
 b)  Enhanced provision of infrastructure, 
including public transport, cycling 
and walking infrastructure and social 
infrastructure to support community health 
and wellbeing, including public open space 
and access to services and facilities;
 c)  Building to high environmental 
standards, with comfortable internal 
living environments that provide good 
air ventilation, daylight and minimise 
overheating;
 d)  Maximising opportunities to generate 
energy, using low-carbon and renewable 
sources and taking advantage of the scale 
of development; e)  Make a positive contribution towards place-
making, including measures to reflect and 
reinforce positive elements of local character 
and deliver a recognisable and distinctive 
local landmark; and
 f)  How the building will contribute 
towards Watford as a place, in terms of 
distinctiveness, design quality and how this 
relates to the urban form. 
 
Definition of prevailing building height and 
taller building thresholds
6.31  The Tall Buildings Study has identified future 
prevailing building heights in all parts of the 
borough. This has been used to inform an 
approach where higher-density development 
up to a certain height will not be defined 
as a taller building. This is referred to as the 
‘base building height’ and is set out as the 
number of storeys. This base building height 
for each respective area reflects the balance 
between existing character, constraints and 
opportunities (Figure 6.2). Buildings at this 
height or lower will not be assessed against 
Policy QD6.5 ‘Building Height’, but will need to 
comply with other policies in the Local Plan. 
Where a building is proposed that exceeds 
the appropriate base building height, it will be 
defined as a ‘taller building’ and will trigger 
the implementation of Policy QD6.5 ‘Building 
Height’ alongside other Local Plan policies. Table 6.1: Base building heights
Up to 8 storeys on a 
street frontage, stepping 
up to 10 storeys to  
the rear. 
Up to 5 storeys on the 
High Street, stepping up 
to 8 storeys to the rear.
Up to 6 storeys.
Up to 4 storeys.Watford Gateway
Town Centre Strategic 
Development Area
Colne Valley Strategic 
Development Area
Outside of the Core 
Development AreaArea of the borough Base building height
93
 An Attractive Town
Policy QD6.5: Building Height 
  Proposals for buildings that exceed the base building height set out in 
Table 6.1 will be classified as a taller building.
  Proposals for taller buildings should clearly demonstrate:
 a)  Outstanding design quality, including height, massing, proportion, 
materials, detailing, site layout and its relationship with the 
surrounding area, which set it apart in terms of quality and 
distinctiveness, and which positively contribute towards the context 
and character of the area;
 b)  Significant public benefits that the development will provide, as set 
out in paragraph 6.30, clearly setting out why these would not be 
achievable as part of a development restricted to the base building 
height;
 c)  Significant sustainability benefits including the building design, 
construction, operation and connections to the surrounding area;
 d)  A clear townscape rationale for the specific siting of taller buildings, 
marking key locations or nodes, and responding to public transport 
accessibility and activity e)  A positive relationship with relevant heritage assets and their 
setting and the historic character that contributes to the town’s 
distinctiveness;
 f)  A desire to achieve a specific skyline shape or cluster having regard 
to Skyline: Watford’s Approach to Tall Buildings Supplementary 
Planning Document or any subsequent replacement document;
 g)  That proposals have been designed to avoid harmful impacts on 
daylight, sunlight, wind conditions, overheating and microclimate, 
including the provision of appropriate mitigation where required;
 h)  That appropriate amenity and play spaces are incorporated to a 
high standard for all residents;
 i)  That the setting of the development will not be dominated by car 
parking as a result of the higher density. In this context, a car-lite 
approach should be taken, where this would be an appropriate 
response to higher local public transport accessibility; and
 j)  A balanced and comprehensive approach to servicing to avoid 
impact on local streets and spaces.
 Proposals for tall buildings are unlikely to be accepted in Outline form. 94
The Historic EnvironmentChapter 795 The Historic Environment
HeritageLandmarks and 
buildings 
which attract 
visitors
Informs 
understanding 
of the history 
of the town
Reflects 
Watford’s 
pastImproves 
health and 
wellbeing
Attractive 
placesDistinctive 
character
7.3  All heritage assets (designated and undesignated) will be appropriately 
protected reflecting the importance of the designation and where 
appropriate enhanced. 
7.4  New development can make a positive contribution to, or better reveal, 
the significance of heritage assets and the Council will encourage this 
where appropriate. Well designed proposals that protect and enhance the 
significance, character and setting of heritage assets that may be affected 
by the development will be supported.Figure 7.1: Heritage benefits The Historic Environment 
7.1  The Council places great importance on preserving the historic 
environment. Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation 
Areas) Act the Council has a responsibility to have special regard to 
preserving listed buildings and must pay special attention to preserving 
or enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas. The 
National Planning Policy Framework states that in decision making 
local authorities should give great weight to conservation of designated 
heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their significance. The Council 
expects that development not only conserves, but also takes opportunities 
to enhance or better reveal, the significance of heritage assets and  
their setting.
7.2  Watford has a diverse and rich range of heritage assets including listed 
buildings, historic parks and gardens, conservation areas and assets 
of archaeological significance, which make an important contribution 
towards the character and distinctiveness of the town. Figure 7.2 provides 
an overview of where heritage assets are located in the borough. This 
map is for context purposes and for more detailed information about 
specific areas and sites covered by policies refer to the Policies Map. Some 
key elements of the town’s heritage include:
 
 •  Surviving buildings from the medieval core of the town (St Mary’s 
Church, Almshouses, Fuller Free School;
 •  18th Century town houses (Frogmore House , 97 High Street, Little 
Cassiobury and Watford Museum);
 • Industrial heritage;
 • Parks, gardens and cemeteries;
 • Residential streets and buildings of the Victorian period; and
 •  Innovative twentieth century buildings and housing developments.96 The Historic Environment
7.5  The Council has a proactive approach to managing heritage assets. 
In addition to the Local Plan Policies, the Council protects the historic 
environment through the following guidance, which should be considered 
as part of planning proposals where they apply:
 • Conservation Areas Management Plan;
 • Conservation Area Character Appraisal documents;
 • Local list of undesignated assets of local interest;
 • Register of buildings and structures at risk;
 •  Supplementary planning documents to provide more detailed guidance 
on specific issues;
 •  Article 4 Directions to protect designated and undesignated assets from 
small scale changes that are allowed under Permitted Development 
Rights and which would erode the significance of those assets.
 •  Extensive Urban Survey Project Assessment Report (Hunns for  
HCC) 2000;
 • List of Freestanding Assets.
7.6  Proposals for new development that involve heritage assets or their 
setting should be accompanied by supporting material that shows that 
the development has understood the significance of the asset. This 
should be a combination of desktop and on site investigation making 
use of the Historic Environment Records (HERs) database and relevant 
Supplementary Planning Documents.
 
7.7  Detailed plans to an appropriate level will need to be submitted with 
applications, alongside Design and Access or Heritage Statements, to 
demonstrate how the heritage asset and its setting will be affected and to 
ensure that its significance is protected or enhanced.
7.8  Where a new heritage asset is revealed during the early phases of new 
development, the developer will be expected to work with the Council 
to seek a solution, as far as is practicable, which protects the significance 
of the new asset. Depending on the importance of the revealed assets, 
proportionate changes to the scheme being proposed may be necessary.
Figure 7.2: Conservation areas, listed buildings and locally 
listed buildings in Watford97 The Historic Environment
Strategic Policy HE7.1: Enhancement and 
Protection of the Historic Environment
  Development proposals should embrace opportunities to use 
the historic environment to support good design and enhance 
the setting and understanding of the historic environment and 
improve Watford’s historic character.
  All development proposals involving heritage assets (designated 
and undesignated) should avoid causing harm to the significance 
of those assets, including their setting. Where this cannot be 
avoided, measures to minimise or mitigate the harm caused will be 
considered and balanced against the heritage and public benefits 
arising from the development according to the importance of the 
asset and the extent of the impact to its significance.
 
  Where loss, wholly or partly, is unavoidable, developers are required 
to record and enhance the understanding of the significance of any 
heritage asset and to make this record publicly available.
  Proposals will need to consider the potential adverse impacts 
on a heritage asset or its setting associated with cumulative 
development. Where there are potential cumulative effects, 
applicants should include design measures to mitigate this impact.
  All development proposals involving heritage assets (designated 
and undesignated) or affecting the setting of assets should be 
supported by a Heritage Impact Assessment, proportional to the 
scheme proposed and significance of the heritage asset, prepared 
by a suitable qualified person.
98
Designated heritage assets 
7.9  Designated assets within the borough include statutorily listed buildings, 
registered parks and gardens, and conservation areas. It is important to 
ensure the significance of these assets is protected and where possible, 
better understood through any changes which have to be made to the 
assets. Proposals involving listed buildings and registered parks will need 
to clearly justify the positive contribution they will make and show that the 
proposal has been designed to avoid, and where possible, minimise the 
impact on the significance of the asset through appropriate enhancement 
and conservation measures.
7.10  Designated assets, and in particular listed buildings and structures, make 
an important and valued contribution to the distinctive character and 
appearance of the town and provide attractions for people visiting the 
town and cherished local landmarks.
 
Listed buildings
7.11  New development proposals involving listed buildings should avoid total 
or substantial demolition, including those which propose the rebuilding 
behind the façade. Proposals should avoid causing harm to the setting 
of listed buildings and structures and where appropriate should seek to 
enhance and better reveal the significance of that setting.
7.12  Many minor alterations and some repairs to listed buildings, including 
those to the interior, which may affect the special interest of the building 
will require listed building consent. Proposals for changes to listed 
buildings may present opportunities to improve disabled access to those 
buildings. Solutions to improve accessibility will require a balancing 
of the need for access with the conservation and preservation of the 
asset. Design approaches for this should be supported by an audit of 
conservation constraints and access needs, and should have considered 
all available options.The Historic Environment
99 The Historic Environment
7.13  Proposals which seek to reduce energy consumption in listed buildings 
will be welcomed provided they do not cause harm to the significance 
of the building. Energy use can be reduced without harming the fabric 
or appearance of the building such as roof insulation, draught proofing, 
secondary glazing, more energy efficient boilers, heating and lighting and 
the use of green energy sources.
Conservation areas
7.14  Changes within conservation areas will be managed in a way that 
retains the distinctive character and appearance of that area, and new 
development should make a positive contribution to this. Design and 
access statements or heritage statements should include an assessment 
of the character and context and show how the development proposed 
has been informed by this and how it contributes positively to it.
7.15  When considering applications for demolition in conservation areas, 
account will be taken of group value, context and setting of buildings, as 
well as their quality as individual structures and any contribution made to 
the setting of listed buildings. Applications for total/substantial demolition 
will be expected to:
 a)  Demonstrate to the Council’s satisfaction that effective measures will 
be taken during demolition and building works to ensure structural 
stability of retained parts and adjoining structures;
 b)  Be justified in terms of the optimisation of resources and energy use in 
comparison with the existing building;
 c)  Include plans which clearly show which parts of buildings are to  
be demolished;
 d)  Provide detailed plans for redevelopment which are to be approved 
prior to permission for demolition being granted.Policy HE7.2: Designated Heritage Assets
  When considering the impact of a proposed development on 
the significance of a designated heritage asset, great weight will 
be given to the conservation of the asset. Any harm to, or loss 
of, significance will require clear and convincing justification in 
accordance with national policy.
 Designated buildings, structures and parks 
  Development involving a statutory listed building, scheduled 
ancient monument, its setting, or a registered park or garden will be 
determined in accordance with their significance and value. To ensure 
the conservation of the listed buildings in Watford proposals should:
 a) Avoid total or substantial demolition of a listed building;
 b)  Avoid changes of use, alterations, and extensions that would cause 
harm to special architectural and historic interest of the building; and
 c)  Not cause harm to the significance of the listed building or its setting.
 Conservation areas
  Development in conservation areas will be supported where they 
preserve and, where possible, enhance the character, appearance 
and significance of the designation and clearly demonstrate they: 
 d)  Use building design that is of an appropriate scale and materiality;
 e)  Enhance existing features and structures which contribute to the 
significance of the Conservation Area;
 f)  Do not significantly harm important views into, out of, or within 
the conservation area; and
 g)  Preserve trees and other significant built and landscape features 
which contribute to the character and appearance of a conservation 
area or which provides a setting for local architectural heritage.100 The Historic Environment
Non-designated  
heritage assets 
7.16  Watford has many attractive and locally 
significant buildings and features which 
contribute to the distinctiveness of the town 
but that are not formally designated  
as heritage assets. The National Planning 
Policy Framework identifies these as  
non-designated assets.
7.17  Non-designated assets include a range of 
buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas 
or landscapes that have heritage value and 
should be considered in determining planning 
applications. These can either be identified 
as part of the planning process, through 
neighbourhood plans, conservation area 
appraisals, be on the Watford Local List or 
other documents identified in paragraph 7.5.
7.18  Many of these are identified in the List of 
Buildings of Local Interest, which includes 
freestanding structures, and many places, 
areas and landscapes in the town are included 
in conservation areas and are therefore 
considered as designated assets.
7.19   Non-designated assets that are not yet 
identified and that come to light during the 
preparation of proposals for a site will be taken 
into account following guidance set out by 
Historic England so that proportionate weight 
can be given in the decision-making process. 
Other assets that are identified through 
processes such as neighbourhood plans or local history research will be reviewed and 
recognised as non-designated assets.
7.20  Watford’s Local List identifies historic buildings 
and features that are valued by the local 
community. When planning permission 
is required for any proposal that directly 
or indirectly affects the significance of a 
non-designated asset, then the Council 
will treat the significance of that asset as a 
material consideration when determining the 
application. As part of a planning proposal, 
applicants should provide an explanation 
regarding the social and historic context of 
the heritage asset and how the proposal has 
responded to this. This should follow guidance 
set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework and guidance provided by  
Historic England.
7.21  Proposals for development must have regard 
to Watford’s Local List of Buildings of Historic 
or Architectural Importance Supplementary 
Planning Document or equivalent and should 
take account of other non-designated assets 
that are logged on the Historic Environment 
Record database.
7.22  Proposals should be of a design and scale 
that preserves or enhances the features that 
contribute to its significance and should use 
building materials, features, and finishes for 
features such as gates, walls, railings and hard 
surfacing, which are appropriate to the setting 
of the asset and the local context. Where 
possible proposals should take the opportunity 
to remove unsympathetic alterations and 
restore or reinstate missing features.Archaeology 
7.23  Archaeological remains can provide great 
insight into the social and economic lives 
of people living many years ago and it is 
important to ensure that such remains, 
whether known or unknown, are protected. 
7.24  Where a development site includes, is 
considered to, or is found to have the potential 
to include, heritage assets with archaeological 
interest, it must be accompanied by an 
appropriate desk-based assessment and, 
where desk-based research is insufficient to 
properly assess the interest, a field evaluation.
7.25  Where the loss of the whole, or a material 
part of, the significance of a heritage asset of 
archaeological interest is justified, planning 
conditions will be included in any permission 
to ensure that an adequate record is made 
of the significance of the heritage asset 
before it is lost. This will be secured through 
an archaeological Written Scheme of 
Investigation, which must include provision 
for appropriate publication of the evidence. 
The potential for local public engagement 
and dissemination should also be considered 
and included in the Written Scheme of 
Investigation where this is deemed to be 
appropriate.
7.26  Arrangements should be made to store a 
copy of any reports and other materials 
that arise from archaeological investigations 
in relation to development proposals in a 
location agreed with local planning authority 
that is publicly available.101 The Historic Environment
Policy HE7.3: Non-designated heritage assets
  To preserve and enhance the character, appearance and setting of non-designated heritage assets, all planning applications that affect  
non-designated assets will be determined in accordance with the following: 
 
 a)  Where demolition is proposed, it should be demonstrated that all reasonable attempts have been made to retain all or part of the building; and
 b)  All alterations and extensions should enhance the building’s character, setting and features and must not adversely affect the significance of 
the building.
 c)  Monuments with heritage value will be protected and proposals should consider how they will respond to the retention and enhancement of 
the structure and its setting in situ or as appropriate.
  d)  Identified sites with places and landscapes with heritage value will be protected, and proposals will be required to demonstrate how they 
are positively contributing towards the heritage value to enhance local distinctiveness. Assets which come to light during the course of an 
application will need to be properly assessed and recommendations reflected in the details of the proposal.
  Where other non-designated assets that are logged on the Historic Environment Record database lie within a site, or are discovered during the 
course of site investigation work related to development proposals, measures taken to enhance and protect those assets in line with Policy HE7.1 
‘Enhancement and Protection of the Historic Environment’ should be explained and provided to support any applications for planning permission.
Policy HE7.4: Archaeology
  New developments should protect remains of archaeological importance. Where a development may affect archaeological remains applicants will 
be required to submit an archaeological assessment as part of a planning application. 
  To protect the significance of archaeological assets, measures will need to be taken that are proportional to their importance to ensure the physical 
preservation of the assets and their setting. These measures should be prepared in collaboration with the County Council’s Historic Environment 
team and secured through planning conditions.102
A Climate EmergencyChapter 8103
 A Climate Emergency
Sustainable construction and resource 
management 
8.1  The Climate Emergency Declaration made by the Council in July 2019 led 
to the ambitious objective of becoming carbon neutral by 2030. Planning 
has an important role to play in creating carbon neutral developments 
to meet this objective and work in conjunction with the wider 
Council initiatives to combat climate change as set out in the Watford 
Sustainability Strategy (2020).
8.2  New development will be expected to use design, and a mix of passive 
and active low carbon and renewable energy technologies to reduce 
emissions and support greener industries. Sustainable building 
construction and operations will be encouraged.
  
8.3  Major developments, particularly those located within the Core 
Development Area, that could benefit from the scale and density of 
development anticipated to take place during the plan period, should 
maximise opportunities to do so. This may include low-carbon and 
renewable energy schemes that could be integrated into a development 
and consideration of how the design and management of a scheme could 
make effective use of materials and reduce waste.
8.4  To be most effective, minimise costs and avoid time delays, applicants 
should consider sustainable principles from the start of the  
design process.
104 A Climate Emergency
Sustainable construction 
standards 
8.5  The scale of development in Watford presents 
significant opportunities to improve the 
quality and sustainability of new residential 
and non-residential buildings and how they can contribute towards a wider goal of 
achieving sustainable development. All new 
development should strive for sustainable 
consumption of resources, including energy, 
water and materials, with the latter reflecting 
guidance set out in the Hertfordshire Waste 
Local Plan.8.6  As indicated in Chapter 4 ‘A Strong Economy’, 
Watford will see significant employment and 
other non-residential development coming 
forward. This provides an opportunity to 
reduce their impact on the environment 
through the use of high quality construction 
methods. The Building Research Establishment 
Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) 
is intended improve the design quality of new 
non-residential schemes. Therefore, major 
non-residential developments should aim 
to meet the BREEAM ’excellent’ standard, 
or equivalent. While more limited in scope, 
smaller schemes also have opportunities to 
reduce their environmental impact, Minor 
non-residential proposals are encouraged 
to achieve BREEAM ‘very good’ standard or 
individual requirements that form part of the 
overall assessment to improve their  
environmental quality.
8.7  To be effective and reduce costs of retrofitting 
buildings, applicants should provide a pre-
assessment certificate to the Local Planning 
Authority which will set out how sustainability 
measures can be achieved as part of the 
development early in the process. Submission 
of a certificate by an accredited assessor will 
be required upon completion.Strategic Policy CC8.1: Mitigating Climate Change and Reducing 
Carbon Emissions
The Council will support proposals that 
help combat climate change and ensure the 
borough becomes more resilient, sustainable 
and adaptable to climate change. New 
development will need to demonstrate how it 
is contributing positively towards:
  A carbon neutral Watford
  Developments are expected to contribute 
towards the borough becoming carbon 
neutral and reducing the overall 
environmental impact.
  Sustainable construction
  Proposals need to consider how they will 
affect the environment from start to finish 
including the construction process and 
how occupants will use the building and 
surrounding area. New buildings
  New buildings will need to be high 
quality, use resources efficiently, 
reduce pollution, be safe to live in and 
encourage healthy lifestyles.
 Cumulative development
  New development should consider 
opportunities associated with cumulative 
development. This includes materials 
used in construction, the layout of the 
scheme and measures that will create a 
comfortable micro-climate such as light, 
shading and landscaping.
 Low carbon and renewable energy
  On site low carbon and renewable 
energy technologies will be encouraged, 
particularly where the scale of growth can 
support community energy networks.105 A Climate Emergency
Policy CC8.2: Sustainable Construction Standards for  
Non-residential Development
Proposals should be designed to reduce their impact on the environment and create high-
quality internal and external space for people to use. Proposals will be supported where it is 
demonstrated that resources will be used efficiently as part of the construction and operation 
of a building. This includes appropriate use of technologies, building design and layout, while 
taking into consideration the effects of climate change. To achieve this, non-residential major 
developments should aim to achieve BREEAM excellent standard.
The submission of a Compliance Certificate to the Local Planning Authority upon completion 
will be secured through planning conditions.
Resource management
Energy efficiency 
8.8  Energy use should be prioritised in line with 
the Energy Hierarchy (Figure 8.1). The first 
priority is to be lean. This is to ensure less 
overall energy use with good building design 
and high energy efficiency using passive 
design measures, such as building orientation, 
internal and external building layout, tree 
planting (prioritising endemic and deciduous 
species) and the size and location of windows.
 
8.9  The second priority is to be clean; to 
use energy that is supplied efficiently. 
Developments should consider connecting 
to decentralised energy networks (energy 
generated off the energy grid). This can 
include technologies such as solar energy and 
water, heat pumps, biomass-fuelled energy generation and larger-scale schemes, such as 
Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems.
8.10  The final priority is to be green and use 
renewable low or zero carbon energy 
sources. To reduce the impact on the 
environment and contribute towards the 
borough becoming carbon neutral, energy 
generation using sustainable sources is 
strongly encouraged.
8.11  In June 2019, Parliament passed legislation 
to legally bind the UK Government to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 100% from 
1990 levels, by 2050. The design of new 
buildings will make an important contribution 
towards this goal. To plan, design and save 
unnecessary retrofitting of buildings, new 
homes should be designed to be adaptable 
to zero carbon in the future.8.12  The Council will be more ambitious 
with energy performance standards as 
technologies improve, become more 
accessible and cheaper, and therefore the 
impact on development viability is reduced. 
Developments are to either achieve the 
applicable percentage of improvement 
required over the Target Emission Rate (TER) 
set out in Building Regulations or updated 
government standards that exceed this 
requirement, whichever is greater.Be lean: 
use less 
energy
Be green:  
use renewable 
energy Be clean:  supply 
energy efficiently1
32Figure 8.1: Energy Hierarchy106 A Climate Emergency
Carbon off-setting 
8.13  If developments demonstrate exceptional 
circumstances, resulting in an inability to meet 
the required standard of efficiency, they are to 
contribute to Watford’s Carbon Offset Fund. 
Contributions will be used within Watford for 
carbon reduction projects, such as retrofitting. 
The amount to be paid will be agreed in 
advance using the equation: Cost = (T – O) * 
X * Y. Where T = Total carbon emissions; O = 
Amount already offset on site; X = Cost per 
tonne of carbon emitted and Y = Number of 
years found applicable.
Overheating
8.14  Building energy efficient homes is important 
to reduce carbon emissions, however, it is 
also important to build new homes that are 
healthy to live in and support a person’s 
wellbeing. Overheating can be uncomfortable 
and dangerous, making it an important 
health issue. Smart design, such as dual 
aspect windows, passive ventilation and 
the incorporation of cooling measures like 
trees and shrubs, to increase light or provide 
shading, reflecting the seasons, are important 
to prevent overheating and avoid health 
risks. Further detail is set out in Chapter 6 ‘An 
Attractive Town’. Developers will be expected 
to integrate good design to support health 
and wellbeing and reduce overheating as 
part of their schemes. Use of traditional, 
energy dependent, cooling systems is not 
appropriate. 8.15  Where apartments are single aspect, which 
reduces airflow, and need to be supported 
by mechanical ventilation in addition to 
passive cooling measures, developers should 
demonstrate how this is addressed using low 
carbon technologies.
Water efficiency
8.16  The borough is within an area classified 
as under serious water stress by the 
Environment Agency. Water security can be 
put at risk, especially during droughts and 
with an increasing population, if not  
carefully managed. 
8.17  To secure a sustainable water supply, new 
standards and technologies should be 
incorporated as part of new development 
schemes to reduce water use. Residential 
developments are to meet the technical 
standard for water efficiency set at a 
maximum consumption level of 110 litres per 
person per day. All developments should 
utilise opportunities to install internal water 
efficient fixings and incorporate rainwater use 
and harvest greywater where possible.
Materials and waste management
8.18  Generating large amounts of waste can be 
detrimental to the health of the public, the 
environment and wildlife. To be more resource 
efficient, new developments should actively 
plan to reduce waste by minimising residual 
waste and by using recycled and recyclable 
materials as much as possible. 8.19  Proposals are to be in accordance with the 
Hertfordshire Waste Local Plan, including 
aligning construction practices and building 
operations with the Hertfordshire Waste 
Hierarchy (Figure 8.2). Practices to manage 
materials and waste through mechanisms 
such as Site Waste Management Plans and 
circular economy statements, as appropriate, 
are supported: 
8.20  Site waste management plans outline the 
types and amounts of waste expected from a 
construction site, including how each will be 
reused, recycled or disposed of. 
8.21  Circular economy statements consider how 
materials are used and keep their main use 
for as long as possible, before planning on 
reusing or recycling the material.
Recycling
Other recovery
DisposalPrevention
Preparing for re-use
Figure 8.2: Hertfordshire Waste Hierarchy107 A Climate Emergency
Policy CC8.3: Sustainable Construction and Resource Management
  Energy efficiency
  To minimise the impact of new homes on 
the environment, residential  
developments should:
 a)  Be designed so they can be adapted to be 
carbon neutral;
 b)  Avoid overheating and use passive 
ventilation when possible; and
 c)  Achieve a 19% improvement for carbon 
emissions over the target emission rate 
(TER) as set out in National Building 
Regulations Part L (2013) , or any  
updated government standards, 
whichever results in a higher target.
  Proposals that do not meet the energy 
efficiency target will only be supported if 
it is unfeasible and a financial contribution 
is made towards the Carbon Offset Fund to 
provide equivalent carbon savings off site.
  Water efficiency
  All residential developments should meet 
the technical standard for water efficiency of 
110 litres per person, per day.
  In new, non-residential developments, that 
are unable to achieve BREEAM ‘excellent’ 
standard, water conservation measures 
should be incorporated to reduce water 
consumption to a standard equivalent to 
BREEAM ‘very good’ for the appropriate 
building typology.
  Materials and waste management
  Development proposals should reduce 
construction waste through the re-use 
and recycling of materials. Practices 
undertaken should reflect the Hertfordshire 
Waste Hierarchy. As part of an application, 
applicants should set out how waste 
management of the site is in accordance 
with the Hertfordshire Waste Local Plan.108 A Climate Emergency
Managing air quality 
8.22  A polluted environment can result in a severe 
cost to public health, the natural environment 
and the economy. The links between poor air 
quality, human health, and the environment 
are well documented and is classed by Public 
Health England as a major public health risk. 
Mitigating the impact of development on air 
quality and minimising exposure to poor air 
quality across Watford is important. This can 
help to safeguard residents from the impacts 
of a polluted environment. 
8.23  There are currently two Air Quality 
Management Areas (AQMAs) in Watford, 
where national objectives for ambient 
air quality have been exceeded. The 
predominant pollutants in Watford are those 
commonly associated with road traffic.8.24  The exposure of vulnerable residents, 
such as children, the elderly, and those 
with respiratory issues to poor air quality, 
is a particular concern. Air pollution can 
affect anyone’s health; nevertheless, some 
individuals can be more susceptible than 
others. These include:
 • children;
 • the elderly;
 •  individuals with existing cardiovascular or 
respiratory diseases;
 • pregnant women;
 •  communities in areas of higher pollution, 
such as close to busy roads; and
 • low income communities.
8.25  Sensitive development may include, but is 
not limited to, schools, supported living and 
health facilities. Air pollution also has potential 
to have increased impact on the wider global 
environment and society with a  
changing climate.8.26  Air quality is often managed through soft 
measures, such as active modes of travel, 
urban greening and the use of sustainable 
construction methods. The ways new 
developments are designed can also assist 
in mitigating against the negative impacts 
of poor air quality. For instance, strategically 
planting trees and hedges between major 
roads and residential development can 
create a barrier to shield residents from poor 
air quality caused by traffic. Measures such 
as these will be supported as part of the 
plan. However, to ensure that national and 
international objectives for ambient air quality 
are met, additional steps must be taken to 
guide new development.
8.27  Development should seek to achieve overall 
improvements to air quality and minimise 
the potential adverse impacts. The policy 
intends to ensure that the possible impact 
of new development upon air quality is 
considered early in the design process and 
when planning applications are determined. 
Regard should be given to the location of 
development where users may be more 
sensitive to poor air quality.
8.28  Development will be expected to support 
the aspirations of the Air Quality Action Plan, 
as well as Public Health England’s 2019 ‘net 
health gain’ principles and the Public Health 
Outcomes Framework. Regard should also 
be given to the Ambient Air Quality Directive 
(2008) and the European Union Limit Values 
to determine compliance with national and 
international air quality standards.
109 A Climate Emergency
Policy CC8.4: Managing Air Quality
  Development will be supported where it minimises emissions 
that would contribute towards a worsening of existing air quality 
and seeks to improve existing air quality. Appropriate mitigation 
measures will be required to address any potential impact on air 
quality, along with encouraging the provision of electric vehicle 
charging points where parking is provided. 
  
  All major developments and other forms of development that 
are considered to be at risk of impacts resulting from significant 
emissions or pollutants will need to consider air quality. This 
includes, but is not limited to, development where the occupiers/
users may be sensitive to poor air quality and development in close 
proximity to an Air Quality Management Area. Proposals will be 
required to consider the cumulative impacts in conjunction with 
other developments in the vicinity and include mitigation measures 
where necessary.
 
 a)  Where a development would cause harm to air quality, planning 
permission will not be granted unless appropriate mitigation 
measures are proposed, which demonstrate that:Public exposure 
to the pollution source has been minimised;
 b)  Sensitive development has been located an appropriate distance 
away from the source of exposure; and
 c)  The development would not lead to the creation of a new street 
canyon or a building configuration that inhibits effective  
pollution dispersion.Managing the environmental impacts  
of development 
8.29  There are other types of pollution in addition to air quality that can 
have a negative impact on the environment and residential amenity, 
including light, noise, contamination, odour and vibration. Pollution can 
be brought about by new development and can have a severe impact on 
the amenity and function of existing properties and businesses, and the 
quality of life in an area.
8.30  The Council places responsibility on the applicant, or the party 
responsible for the development, to provide mitigation for any significant 
adverse impacts that may be generated by the proposed development. 
This is set out in national policy as the ‘Agent of Change Principle’ and 
ensures that new development does not cause existing uses in the 
vicinity to curtail their activities. Applicants will need to demonstrate how 
mitigation has been provided for any potential issues related to noise and 
light pollution, odour, contamination and other negative impacts. The 
Council will seek to ensure that quality of life, health, wellbeing and the 
environment are not adversely affected by harmful pollutants and other 
negative impacts that could be associated with new development.
8.31  The relevant national policy and guidance, including Building Regulations, 
should be referred to for information regarding ambient levels for each 
individual pollutant. There are also various key stakeholders who are 
able to give advice on minimising the risk of pollution and effective 
mitigation. These bodies should be engaged early in the process for 
good practice. For instance, where overhead powerlines traverse the site, 
early engagement with the operator should be undertaken and where 
development may have an impact on groundwater, the Environment 
Agency should be consulted. 110 A Climate Emergency
Policy CC8.5: Managing the Impacts of Development
  Development should be designed to protect 
the amenity of adjacent land uses and 
their occupants and local amenity, and to 
enhance the public realm. In accordance 
with the ‘agent of change’ principle, new 
development must ensure it does not 
cause existing uses in the vicinity to curtail 
their activities. New development will be 
required to assess its potential impacts 
on neighbouring land uses, including the 
cumulative effects, and set out mitigation 
measures where appropriate. To achieve 
this, development must have regard to the 
risk related to:
  Light pollution
  Developments must be designed to 
minimise any significant detrimental impact 
of external lighting on local amenity and 
safety, biodiversity, heritage assets, roads 
and watercourses.
  Noise pollution and vibration
  Where development is noise sensitive, 
noise-generating, or the surrounding area is 
sensitive to noise and vibration, applicants 
must undertake a noise assessment to 
identify potential issues and the required 
attenuation measures to achieve acceptable 
noise levels, as defined in national guidance. Noise assessments should also consider 
the risk of noise reflection, particularly on 
new developments near to railway lines and 
major roads.
  Contamination, including 
contamination of groundwater
  Applicants are required to carry out a 
comprehensive ground investigation report 
and take appropriate remediation measures 
for development on or near a site that is 
potentially contaminated. 
  Development that could adversely affect 
the groundwater quality, flow or volume will 
not be granted permission.
  Where a proposal is located within a 
Groundwater Source Protection Zone, 
applicants will be required to demonstrate 
there will be no significant impacts or 
risks to controlled waters. If a potential 
impact is identified, appropriate mitigation 
measures need to be incorporated as part 
of the scheme. Within Source Protection 
Zone 1 (SPZ1), infiltration via deep borehole 
soakaways will not be acceptable, other 
than when a drainage and hydrogeological 
risk assessment shows this to be the 
only viable option and that any risks to groundwater will be adequately 
mitigated. Certain discharges into the 
ground may require an Environmental 
Permit.
  Odour
  Development must address the adverse 
impact of odour through the incorporation 
of appropriate mitigation measures where 
the development is considered to generate 
or development is sensitive to odours.
 Unstable land
  Applicants will be required to remediate 
unstable land and further issues related 
to subsidence, before development can 
commence. Appropriate measures must 
ensure that the proposed development 
will not lead to land instability during 
works or following completion. A Land 
Stability Risk Assessment report may be 
required in line with national guidance 
if unstable land is considered to be a 
potential risk.
 Power lines
  The statutory safety clearances between 
overhead lines, the ground, and built 
structures must not be infringed.111
Conserving and Enhancing 
the EnvironmentChapter 9112 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
9.1  Although Watford is a densely populated urban borough, the natural 
environment is relatively rich. There are many high quality and high 
value open spaces, including 12 Green Flag parks, ancient woodland and 
sites of national and regional significance. Two rivers run through the 
borough, as well as the Grand Union Canal, which stretches from London 
to Birmingham. Watford supports wider green and blue links to other 
natural areas of significance in the region, including Colne Valley Regional 
Park and the Chilterns Area of Natural Beauty. Urban planning can be an 
important instrument for the natural environment, for it seeks to balance 
the need for new development while also striving to conserve and 
enhance the natural environment.
9.2  Designated green infrastructure and open spaces in Watford are shown 
on Figure 9.1. Ecological resources and opportunities have been identified 
and mapped as part of data held by the Hertfordshire Ecological Records 
Centre. This data includes species and site records and maps, as well as 
the Local Nature Partnership’s Network Mapping.
9.3  The content of Figure 9.1 reflects the green infrastructure and open 
space network as defined on the Policies Map. The opportunity areas 
and strategic/local links demonstrate how important elements of the 
green infrastructure network are connected and help to show where 
improvements could be made. This information is set out to provide 
context and aid policy implementation and applicants are encouraged to 
consider how their proposals can contribute towards enhancing the green 
infrastructure network.Figure 9.1: Green and Blue Infrastructure in Watford
113
 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Strategic Policy NE9.1: The Natural Environment
  The Local Plan will support the conservation and enhancement of the natural and local 
environment. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate a positive impact on 
Watford’s natural environment by:
 
 a)  Protecting and enhancing Watford’s natural and environmental assets and seeking to create 
new environmental features where possible; 
 b)  Conserving and enhancing the extent and quality of green infrastructure and ecological networks 
by seeking to create, expand and restore links within the network, and support the wider benefits 
from natural capital and ecosystem services at a landscape scale where appropriate;
 c)  Ensuring all development minimises impacts on biodiversity and achieves a measurable 
biodiversity net gain, following the ‘Mitigation Hierarchy’ of avoidance, mitigation or 
compensation;
 d)  Maximising the role of watercourses for leisure, recreation and active travel purposes, as 
well as seeking to enhance their water quality and biodiversity value, as required under the 
Water Framework Directive;
 e)  Reducing the risk of flooding, including surface water flood risk;
 f)  Bettering access to open space across the borough where there is an identified need and 
delivering new green spaces as part of new development;
 g)  Delivering non-traditional forms of urban greening as part of high density development, as 
well as traditional open space, including green roofs and walls;
 h)  Improving the quality of Watford’s existing open spaces through development contributions;
 i)  Ensuring that protected species and their habitats are a material consideration when 
determining planning applications;
 j) Protecting trees and encouraging native planting on new development; and
 k)  Considering the cumulative impacts of development on green and blue infrastructure. 
  Where the natural environment has not been appropriately assessed and considered with an 
application, planning permission will be refused.
114 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Why is green 
infrastructure 
important?Improves 
air quality
Mitigates 
climate 
changeCreates 
opportunities 
for play and 
recreationReduces 
flood risk
Improves 
mental 
health
Provides 
opportunities 
for urban food 
growingReduces 
social 
isolationEncourages 
physical 
activity
Supports 
species 
migrationImproves 
physical 
health
Improves public 
perception of 
an areaCreates quality 
habitats for 
wildlifeEncourages 
economic growth 
and inward 
investment
Reduces 
urban heat 
stressAttracts 
visitors to 
Watford
Environmental Economic Social KeyThe green infrastructure 
network
9.4  Green infrastructure is defined as multi-
functional networks of open spaces, green 
corridors and natural green space. Together, 
these networks perform a variety of functions 
for the environment and the people who live 
here. The importance of green infrastructure 
is highlighted in Figure 9.2. Watford’s green 
infrastructure network contains critical links 
across the borough, but also across wider 
Hertfordshire and beyond. 
9.5  To conserve and enhance the green 
infrastructure network, new proposals 
adjacent, or in close proximity to open 
space and green corridors should consider 
the impact of development on existing 
networks and prevent fragmentation. New 
development can help deliver enhancements 
to the green infrastructure network and 
improve connectivity between green spaces, 
if opportunities are proactively identified in the 
early stages, as proposals are being drafted. 
The potential impact of landscaping, access, 
excessive lighting, overshadowing and noise 
should also be considered and appropriate 
mitigation provided to protect the intrinsic 
quality of the network.Figure 9.2: Benefits of green infrastructure115 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
9.6  Opportunities to improve the green 
infrastructure network have been set out in 
the Green Infrastructure Plan and have been 
illustrated on Figure 9.1. The projects  
identified are:
 • Cassiobury Park enhancement;
 • Whippendell Woods enhancement;
 • Grand Union Canal enhancement;
 • Colne Valley Wetland enhancement;
 • Urban greening and legibility for Watford.
9.7  Trees also make an important contribution 
to biodiversity and should be protected 
where possible to support the government’s 
emerging England Tree Strategy (Department 
for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 2020).
Opportunities should also be taken to increase 
native planting to support biosecurity.Policy NE9.2: Green Infrastructure Network 
  Proposals must demonstrate how they will appropriately conserve, restore, expand or enhance the 
green infrastructure network, including how the site connects with the wider network. Development 
should protect the function and amenity of green routes, including public rights of way.
  Existing trees, woodlands and hedgerows should be retained wherever possible. If loss is 
demonstrated as being unavoidable, appropriate replacement or compensation will be required 
with native species being prioritised.
  Priorities for green infrastructure focus on the projects identified in the Green Infrastructure Plan.
  Green infrastructure as defined on the Policies Map will be protected.
116 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
The blue infrastructure 
network
9.8  The Grand Union Canal, the River Gade and 
the River Colne all flow through Watford 
and form the borough’s blue infrastructure 
network. The rivers are designated as main 
watercourses by the Environment Agency, 
whereas the Grand Union Canal is designated 
as an ordinary watercourse for the length 
it runs through Watford. Protecting and 
enhancing these watercourses is important 
for many reasons, such as to effectively 
manage flood risk, to conserve and enhance 
river habitats and to maximise opportunities 
for active travel and leisure. The Water 
Framework Directive (European Parliament 
& Council, 2000) also sets an objective to 
improve these watercourses to ‘good’ status 
by 2027.
9.9  During the plan period, there is expected 
to be new development occurring close 
to watercourses in Watford. High quality 
development presents an opportunity to 
enhance the role of watercourses and make 
them a central feature of new development. 
This would maximise the contribution that 
blue infrastructure can make in creating 
successful places.9.10  New development also presents an 
opportunity to enhance the quality of 
watercourses, to support them achieving 
the Water Framework Directive ‘good’ 
status within the established timeframe. 
The potential impact of landscaping, access, 
lighting, overshadowing and noise should 
be considered and appropriate mitigation 
provided to protect the intrinsic quality of 
the water environment. This is particularly 
pertinent for taller buildings, which can 
overshadow rivers and result in the loss  
of habitats. 
9.11  Development that occurs too close to the 
banks of watercourses can increase the risk of 
pollution and limit capacity to manage run off. 
The South West Hertfordshire Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment Stage 1 (2018) identifies 
the need for 8m undeveloped buffer zones 
between the top of the bank of any main 
watercourse and the built environment 
(including formal landscaping, sport fields, 
footpaths, lighting and fencing). The buffer 
zone must be free of hard standing, paths or 
lighting and must not be used for storage of 
materials. Planning conditions will require the 
developer to provide details of an appropriate 
management scheme to ensure that the 
buffer is well maintained.9.12  Many of Watford’s watercourses have been 
culverted, to support historic development 
and infrastructure projects. However, the 
culverting of watercourses can be harmful 
for the ecology, as it creates barriers to the 
movement of fish and causes the loss of 
bankside habitats (Environment Agency, 
2021). Culverts also contribute to an increased 
risk of blockage, which in turn, increases 
flood risk. As new development comes 
forward, it is important that de-culverting 
and re-naturalisation of the watercourse 
occurs as much as possible to improve the 
water environment. Culverting, among other 
issues, has meant that routes for cyclists and 
pedestrians along canals are also relatively 
fragmented. New development can help 
deliver enhancements to watercourses and 
their corridors by providing new connections 
and routes for active travel and leisure uses 
and by enhancing interconnectivity with the 
green infrastructure network.
9.13  This policy should be read in conjunction 
with Policy NE9.4 ‘Flood Risk and Mitigation’, 
which provides more detailed guidance on 
mitigating flood risk.117 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Policy NE9.3: Blue Infrastructure Network 
  Development proposals in close proximity to watercourses must support the strategic importance of Watford’s blue infrastructure network and 
seek to maximise its multifunctional environmental, social and economic benefits. Where development is adjacent to a watercourse, proposals 
are expected to contribute to the Thames River Basin Management Plan (TRBMP) in achieving ‘good’ ecological status as defined by the Water 
Framework Directive (WFD) objectives. Development proposals in close proximity to, or that include a watercourse must:
 a)  Maintain an undeveloped and unobstructed buffer strip of eight metres from the top of the bank of any Main River and any new development 
(including formal landscaping, sports fields, footpaths, lighting and fencing). Buffer zones should be natural in character, distinct from the built 
environment, with no light pollution greater than 2 lux, and with native species. Proposals should be accompanied by a management plan;
 b)  Conserve and enhance the biodiversity value of the watercourse and its corridor by including Water Framework Directive action measures within 
the proposal. Action measures could include but are not limited to, in-channel enhancements, the creation of priority wetland habitats, addressing 
misconnections and the eradication and management of Invasive Non-Native Species;
 c)  Enhance the role of watercourse corridors as an accessible active travel and leisure route for pedestrians, cyclists and boaters, and increase 
connectivity along the length of the watercourse. This includes connectivity and access, where appropriate, to the green infrastructure network;
 d)  Integrate the watercourse into the scheme as a vital part of the public realm; and
 e)  Open and re-naturalise modified watercourses, including culverted and piped waterways. New proposals for culverting will be refused and there 
is a presumption against the use of hard engineering, including gabions. A Water Framework Directive assessment should be submitted as part 
of proposals and should include an assessment of the works needed to prevent future flooding, in addition to how the proposal will impact Water 
Framework Directive status.
  The provision of crossings and bridges will be supported where they improve connectivity for pedestrians and cyclists, are in keeping with the 
setting of the area, and are designed to avoid obstructing flood flows and damage to a watercourse.
 Flood Zones 2 and 3 are defined on the Policies Map.118
Flood risk and groundwater 
management
9.14  The National Planning Policy Framework 
supports a risk-based, sequential approach to 
manage flood risk and ensure development 
is located in areas of lowest risk. Along with 
the Flood and Water Management Act (2010), 
there is a requirement for new development 
to minimise vulnerability and improve 
resilience to the impacts of climate change 
including flooding.
Flood risk 
9.15  Flood zone classifications reflect the local 
risk to people and property and indicate 
types of development that may be suitable in 
that zone due to risk level. In Watford, zones 
of fluvial and surface water flood risk and 
groundwater protection are identified in the 
Level 1 (2018) and Level 2 (2020) Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessments. These areas are 
largely, but not exclusively, associated to the 
water basins of the Rivers Colne and Gade. 
 •  Sites located within Flood Zone 1 are subject 
to lower levels of flood risk, however, they 
may still require a Flood Risk Assessment 
where new development could affect the 
floodplain and increase risk on site or on 
other sites nearby. A sequential test may be 
required for development where there is a 
previously identified flood risk issue.Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
 •  Development located in Flood Zones 2 
and 3 is at high risk of flooding. Site specific 
Flood Risk Assessments are required 
for all developments within these zones. 
Development should be prioritised outside 
of these areas, however, where this is not 
possible, sites will need to comply with 
Sequential and Exception Test requirements, 
as appropriate, before planning permission 
can be granted.
9.16  Flood risk should be discussed when 
development proposals are prepared. 
Applicants are expected to consider how their 
proposals affect, or could potentially impact 
other sites in the vicinity and their cumulative 
impact on flood risk, taking into account 
climate change. In some circumstances this 
may require further modelling to determine 
the overall impact and potential mitigation 
measures that may be needed. Developments 
should seek betterment of existing flood risks, 
both within the site and in the surrounding 
area. External organisations such as the 
Environment Agency and the Lead Local 
Flood Risk Authority (Hertfordshire County 
Council) should be consulted to provide 
guidance when required.Groundwater protection
9.17  The River Colne basin is designated as 
Groundwater Source Protection Zone 1, the 
most sensitive, with an area buffering the 
waterway covering much of east Watford 
identified as Groundwater Source Protection 
Zone 2 and sensitive to contamination. This 
means several land uses including industrial, 
petrol stations and waste management may 
not be suitable in certain areas of Watford 
due to the high risk of contamination to the 
aquifer and drinking water. Developers are 
expected to implement measures to avoid 
these potential negative impacts on the 
ground source. Where these are required 
these should be prepared in collaboration 
with the Environment Agency and the Lead 
Local Flood Authority.
119 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Flood risk mitigation
9.18  There are different causes that can trigger fluvial, surface and ground 
source flooding, and appropriate mitigation measures are required to 
reflect this. Proposals located in different parts of the borough that are 
subject to any type of flood risk will need to consider suitable measures 
to minimise the potential impacts. This should include measures to 
address safe access and egress, particularly for changes of use to a ‘more 
vulnerable’ classification (e.g. commercial to residential). These should 
satisfy the requirements set out in the Hertfordshire Local Flood Risk 
Management Strategy (2019) and should be prepared in collaboration 
with the Environment Agency.
9.19  Developments located in Flood Zones 2 or 3 are encouraged to have 
early and ongoing discussions with the Environment Agency (EA) 
and Lead Local Flood Authority to ensure proposals comply with their 
requirements. New residential developments should be designed to 
withstand a 1-in-100 year flood, plus a 35% climate change allowance 
while considering the impacts of plus 70% climate change during the 
process, to ensure longevity and safety of the development over time. 
Sequential and Exception Tests
9.20  Sites designated for development in this Plan have already been put 
through the Sequential and Exception Tests. However, the Exception 
Test may need to be reapplied if relevant aspects of a proposal were 
not considered initially. Windfall sites located within Flood Zones 2 or 3, 
or sites within Flood Zone 1 where there is an identified flood risk, which 
have not been subjected to Sequential and Exception Tests, will be 
required to do so.
9.21  In some instances, following the application of the Sequential Test, it may 
be necessary for a developer to make a contribution to the improvement 
of flood-management provision that would benefit the proposed 
new development and the existing community. Where a proposed 
development is deemed to have a harmful impact on flood risk, a 
contribution towards flood mitigation may be required through  
planning conditions.Figure 9.3: Flood Zones with climate change allowances 
in Watford
120 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
 Fluvial flooding
  When located within areas identified as 
being at risk of flooding, applicants are 
required to demonstrate how appropriate 
and effective mitigation measures have 
been integrated into the scheme, including 
management of residual flood risk.
  Proposals located within flood zones, need 
to meet the requirements of the Sequential 
and Exception Tests. Only water compatible 
and essential infrastructure will be permitted 
within Flood Zone 3b (functional floodplain). 
Essential infrastructure must also first pass the 
Exception Test to be located within Flood Zone 
3b. Developers should seek to increase the 
extent of Flood Zone 3b where possible and 
appropriate. To demonstrate compliance with 
the Exception Test, a flood resilient design and 
emergency planning considerations will need 
to be accounted for, over the lifetime of the 
development including:
 a)  The development to remain safe and 
operational under flood events;
 b)  Safe evacuation and/or safely remaining 
in the building under flood conditions;
 c)  Key services must continue to be 
provided under flood conditions; and 
 d)  Buildings are to be designed for quick 
recovery following a flood.  Any development within Flood Zones 2 and 
3, and those over one hectare in Flood Zone 1, 
should use a Flood Risk Assessment to show 
how they have considered flood risk beyond the 
site boundaries, including cumulative impacts 
arising from other developments. It must be 
demonstrated that the development provides 
wider sustainability benefits to the community 
that outweigh flood risk (informed by the 
evidence in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment) 
and that where possible, development will reduce 
flood risk overall. Proposals for development in 
the floodplain must demonstrate that suitable 
flood compensation storage will be provided to 
avoid any net loss in floodplain. Additionally, all 
new development within flood zones require an 
assessment of the impact of climate change on 
flood risk on site and elsewhere. 
  Developers should seek to provide an 
undeveloped buffer zone of eight metres between 
the top of the bank of any Main River and any new 
development (including formal landscaping, sports 
fields, footpaths, lighting and fencing).
  Proposals located in areas where waterways 
have been culverted or altered should seek to 
re-naturalise the river and surroundings, improve 
water storage and enhance riparian habitats, in 
line with requirements to meet Water Framework 
Directive objectives and the Thames River Basin 
Management Plan. There is a presumption against 
the use of hard engineering, including gabions. For any development within eight metres of 
a culvert, the developer must demonstrate 
that they have sought to de-culvert, as well 
as undertake a survey of the culvert to assess 
its exact location, condition and whether 
it is commensurate with the lifetime of the 
development or demonstrate how it will be 
repaired/upgraded. Flood defences and Main 
Rivers adjacent to development sites must 
be maintained, repaired or replaced by the 
developer for the lifetime of the development. 
For any development within eight metres of a 
main river, the developer must demonstrate that 
access to the river and banks will still be possible 
for maintenance and emergency works.
 
 Groundwater protection
  Where a proposal is located within a 
Groundwater Source Protection Zone, 
applicants will be required to demonstrate 
there will be no significant impacts or 
risks to controlled waters. If a potential 
impact is identified, appropriate mitigation 
measures need to be incorporated as part 
of the scheme. Within Source Protection 
Zone 1 (SPZ1), infiltration via deep bore 
soakaways will not be acceptable, other than 
when a drainage and hydrogeological risk 
assessment shows this to be the only viable 
option and that any risks to groundwater 
will be adequately mitigated. Certain 
discharges into the ground may require an 
Environmental Permit.Policy NE9.4: Flood Risk and Mitigation121 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Surface water management
9.22  A well-considered drainage strategy plays a 
vital role in the management of surface water 
flood risk. Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS) are water-management measures 
that use natural methods designed to 
manage surface water as close to the source 
as possible. To be effective, a Sustainable 
Drainage System can be designed to use 
a combination of approaches including 
rainwater collection, grey water recycling, 
infiltration, soakaways, bio-swales and 
discharge to a watercourse as appropriate. 
Design requirements for effective drainage 
systems can be found in the CIRIA 
(Construction Industry Research and 
Information Association), Sustainable Drainage 
Systems Manual (2015) and Hertfordshire 
Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (2019). 
9.23  Sustainable Drainage Systems should be 
multifunctional in their approach and be 
designed to maximise their benefits in other 
areas such as biodiversity and useable 
space for periods when they are not actively 
managing water for flood risk. Sustainable 
Drainage Systems can also aid in pollution 
mitigation when implemented correctly, 
but it is important that they are designed 
carefully to avoid contamination. For example, 
soakaways should not be implemented on 
contaminated land and infiltration should only 
be incorporated when using uncontaminated 
water. A surface water management plan is necessary to ensure Sustainable Drainage 
Systems are effectively designed, maintained 
and monitored.
9.24  The quality and effectiveness of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems can vary. The hierarchy 
below sets out an approach that should be 
considered where a scheme could use single 
or multiple measures. This hierarchy was 
prepared by Greater London Authority. From 
preferable, to least preferable:
 a) store rainwater for later use;
 b)  use infiltration measures, such as porous 
surfaces in non-clay areas;
 c)  attenuate rainwater in ponds or open water 
features for gradual release;
 d)  attenuate rainwater by storing in tanks or 
sealed water features for gradual release;
 e)  discharge rainwater direct to a watercourse;
 f)  discharge rainwater to a surface water 
sewer/drain; and
 g)  discharge rainwater to a combined sewer.
9.25  Where management and maintenance of 
Sustainable Drainage Systems are required, 
the applicant should set out how this 
will be approached. This will need to be 
discussed with the appropriate stakeholders 
and required through the use of planning 
conditions. 9.26  Site specific and Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessments for surface water management 
should consider both central and upper-end 
climate change allowances as stated in the 
National Planning Policy Framework. Details 
on the locations and necessary allowances 
are provided in the most recent Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment. Predicted climate 
change allowances are increasing with 
time, and developments must consider this 
increase based on the expected duration of 
the structure.
122 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Policy NE9.5: Surface Water Management 
  Proposals that incorporate well-designed Sustainable Drainage 
Systems that are appropriately integrated into the scheme, aim to 
achieve greenfield run-off rates manage surface water and improve 
resilience will be supported.
  Sustainable Drainage Systems should make effective use of land 
by being multifunctional, to maximise ecological benefits such as 
biodiversity, provide open space or incorporate tree planting and 
landscaping. Developments will need to ensure the implementation 
of Sustainable Drainage Systems does not worsen contamination 
effects, and soakaways should not be located within land affected by 
land contamination.
  Developments should seek betterment of existing surface 
water flood risk, both within the site and surrounding area, as an 
opportunity to have a positive impact on cumulative risk, using 
appropriate drainage measures. Allowances for changes and 
increases in flood risk due to climate change need to be considered. 
Sustainable Drainage Systems must be designed to respond to risk 
for the lifetime of a development, including the appropriate climate 
change impacts.
  Sustainable Drainage Systems should be designed and integrated 
into the proposal to effectively manage the existing surface water 
flow paths on the site, protect and enhance water quality and help 
to mitigate other flood risks. Measures should be agreed with the 
Lead Local Flood Authority and be consistent with the Hertfordshire 
Local Flood Risk Management Strategy. As part of an application, an 
applicant should provide a management plan that clarifies how any 
measures will be managed and maintained and agreed with the lead 
Local Flood Risk Authority. Protecting open space
9.27  Watford’s open spaces are a great source of pride for local communities. The 
award-winning parks are not the only types of green spaces that Watford’s 
residents can enjoy, as the borough contains a wide variety of facilities. 
From allotments to playing pitches, they each provide for a variety of 
different uses, functions and activities. Open space can make an important 
contribution to the green infrastructure network and offer valuable space 
for recreational and amenity use, along with contributing towards flood risk 
management schemes and Sustainable Drainage Systems.
 
9.28  Everyone living, working in and visiting Watford should have access to 
high quality open space and sports and recreation facilities. The types of 
facility provided and protected through new development should reflect 
locally identified needs. This can help to avoid deficiencies in different 
facilities, and to ensure that sites are being effectively used. Watford’s 
open spaces are not evenly distributed across the borough with some 
communities deficient and in need of improved access to recreational 
areas. Alternatively in some neighbourhoods there may be opportunities 
where alternative typologies and ancillary uses could be considered if 
there is a demonstrated need.
123 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Policy NE9.6: Protecting 
Open Space 
  Open space and ancillary facilities used for 
leisure and recreation will be protected, 
unless an up to date assessment of needs 
demonstrates the space is surplus to need. 
For an open space or an ancillary facility to 
be considered surplus to requirements, the 
following must be demonstrated:
 a)  An assessment of needs has been 
undertaken that has clearly shown the 
open space, buildings or land to be 
surplus to requirements, having regard 
to the Council’s most recent evidence 
base; and
 b)  The open space is not needed for 
alternative open space uses; or
 c)  An equivalent or better facility in terms 
of quality and quantity is to be provided 
in a more suitable location that meets 
the needs of the local community.
Development proposals for alternative open 
space uses will be supported where an up-
to-date assessment of needs clearly shows 
the benefits outweigh any adverse impacts 
on the community and the environment.
Open space and ancillary facilities used for 
leisure and recreation, as defined on the 
Policies Map, will be protected.Providing new open space
9.29  As new development comes forward, 
there may be opportunities to provide new 
publically accessible open space on site.  
The different types of publically accessible 
open space have been defined in the Watford 
Green Spaces Strategy and include  
the following:
 •  Parks, public gardens and recreational 
grounds;
 • Amenity green spaces;
 • Equipped play space;
 • Natural and semi-natural green spaces;
 • Outdoor sports facilities;
 • Churchyards and cemeteries; and
 • Allotments.
9.30  The different types of open space have 
been defined in the Green Spaces Strategy. 
The Strategy sets out where these different 
facilities are located in the borough and 
appropriate catchment distances for each 
typology. Where a development does not lie 
within the catchment distance of an open 
space, it will be imperative that, wherever 
possible, this is provided on site to reverse  
the deficiency. 9.31  In circumstances where on site open 
space provision is not practical, feasible, or 
would not benefit the scheme, a financial 
contribution may be acceptable with the 
agreement of the local planning authority. 
This contribution will be secured through 
planning conditions. In these cases, 
some level of communal open space and 
landscaping should be provided on site.
9.32  For outdoor sports facilities, it is not expected 
that provision will generally be possible on 
site. For areas deficient in outdoor sports 
facilities, contributions will be sought through 
the Playing Pitch Calculator, in line with the 
Playing Pitch Strategy (2020). Therefore, new 
residential developments will be required 
to provide open space, such as amenity 
and equipped play space on site, or where 
practical, other typologies such as allotments 
or semi-natural areas, where opportunities 
exist to enhance the green infrastructure 
network and support local residents. 
9.33  The design of new play areas and other 
formal open spaces should take account of 
good practice provided in Sport England’s 
‘Active Design’ guidance and any  
subsequent replacements.
124
 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Policy NE9.7: Providing New 
Open Space 
  New major development proposals will  
be supported where they contribute 
to the provision, enhancement and 
maintenance of open space, either by 
means of on site provision or though 
developer obligations.
  Where there is an identified deficiency, as 
set out in an up-to-date open space needs 
assessment, development proposals of 
ten dwellings or more will be required to 
provide publicly accessible open space on 
site. Provision should reflect the type of 
open space required in the area through 
accessibility, quality and value.
  Proposals that include new open space 
should be accompanied by a site 
management plan, in agreement with 
the Council, which sets out a proactive 
approach to the long term maintenance 
of the site. Biodiversity
9.34  Despite being a largely urban borough, 
Watford is rich in biodiversity. Watford 
contains a number of Local Nature Reserves 
and Local Wildlife Sites and is home to 
European Protected Species, such as great 
crested newts and pipistrelle bats. Other 
locally important but non-designated wildlife 
sites also make a significant contribution 
towards biodiversity in the area.
 
9.35  The sustained loss of green infrastructure 
and the breaking up of its networks can have 
a damaging effect on ecosystems in Watford. 
Inappropriate development could threaten 
the future of different species through habitat 
fragmentation and the loss of habitats. Given 
development pressures, it will be important to 
ensure that Watford’s biodiversity is protected 
and enhanced. Development proposals 
should contribute positively to ecosystems in 
Watford through the delivery of net gains in 
biodiversity. 
9.36  New development should support the 
creation of new wildlife habitats, which can be 
integrated into the layout and design of sites, 
as well as offsite where this cannot otherwise 
be achieved. Traditionally, this would include 
habitats incorporated as part of open space, 
such as water courses, vegetation and planting. However, some contemporary 
schemes have evolved to include green/
brown roofs, living walls and roof and rain 
gardens, which support biodiversity, amongst 
other benefits. Where appropriate, smaller 
alterations can include providing integrated 
bat or bird boxes within the fabric of new 
buildings, or hedgehog highways to make 
gardens more permeable. 
9.37  The Council will take a hierarchical approach 
to assessing proposals, as set out in national 
guidance. Compensatory measures will only 
be considered when no other measures are 
demonstrated to be feasible as set out in 
the Mitigation Hierarchy (Figure 9.4). In such 
an instance, Biodiversity Offset Agreements 
must be secured through Section 106 
Agreements. The process for this will be set 
out in a Supplementary Planning Document. 
 
Avoid
Mitigate
CompensateFigure 9.4: Biodiversity Mitigation Hierarchy125 Conserving and Enhancing the Environment
Policy NE9.8: Biodiversity 
  New development should seek to achieve an overall net gain 
in biodiversity. This must be measured through the use of the 
latest Defra Biodiversity Metric. The Biodiversity Metric should 
demonstrate an improvement in biodiversity units of 10% or more 
from the existing baseline value of the site.
  Development should apply the Mitigation Hierarchy to minimise 
or mitigate harmful effects on biodiversity. Mitigation and 
compensation measures must offset any losses to achieve a 
measurable net gain for biodiversity. Where it is not possible to 
avoid or mitigate all impacts on site, an offsite Biodiversity Offset 
Agreement should be submitted to demonstrate that any off-
site measures proposed seek to enhance locally and nationally 
important priorities.
  To ensure the long-term net gain, all development proposals 
should prepare a long-term monitoring and maintenance plan for 
biodiversity and habitat proposals, for a minimum period of 30 
years, including both on and off site measures.
  All development proposals will be required to prepare a 
proportionate ecological survey and assessment report. Where a 
protected species or habitat is found to be present, the proposal 
must mitigate or compensate appropriately in accordance with 
the legislation that protects them. Protected sites of international, 
national and local importance will be protected from inappropriate 
development based on the importance of the designation.
126
InfrastructureChapter 10127
 Infrastructure
Infrastructure
10.1  The provision of sufficient and appropriate 
infrastructure is required to support the 
growth and change set out in this Local Plan, 
in line with the sustainable development 
objectives in the National Planning  
Policy Framework.
10.2  Infrastructure is provided by public and 
private bodies and includes:
 •  Social infrastructure: schools, healthcare, 
community facilities, leisure and cultural 
centres, places of worship and emergency 
services. 
 •  Physical infrastructure: roads, footpaths, 
cycle-ways, water provision and treatment, 
sewerage, flood prevention and drainage, 
waste disposal, electricity, gas and electronic 
communications networks.
 •  Green Infrastructure: open spaces, recreation 
facilities, trees, green corridors, wildlife 
corridors and landscape features.
10.3  Details of these requirements are set out in 
Watford’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan considers the 
infrastructure improvements that are needed 
to support the planned increase in new 
homes, businesses and other facilities arising 
from the population and job growth in the 
borough. It identifies essential infrastructure 
and prioritises projects according to their 
importance in delivering the growth strategy.
 10.4  The Watford Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
considers the infrastructure improvements 
that are needed to support the planned 
increase in new homes, businesses and other 
facilities arising from the population and job 
growth in the borough. The Council will seek 
to protect existing community facilities in line 
with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built and  
Community Facilities’.
10.5  Developers will be expected to engage 
early with the Council and appropriate 
infrastructure service providers to discuss 
relevant requirements. Some will be specific 
to a particular site, whilst some will relate 
to the wider area. It is important that each 
development provides a fair contribution 
towards both site-specific and area-wide 
infrastructure. Alongside this, the cumulative 
impacts arising from the development across 
the area will need to be coordinated and 
adequately mitigated. Where necessary, the 
use of compulsory purchase powers to assist 
in the timely delivery of infrastructure will  
be considered.
10.6  Significant infrastructure items such as, but 
not limited to, schools, community centres, 
public realm, or, public transport provision, 
will often require different landowners or 
stakeholders to work together to secure 
timely and efficient delivery. Infrastructure 
should be delivered in a way and at a time 
that does not compromise development 
coming forward on connected sites. 
128
 
Strategic Policy IN10.1: Integrated 
Infrastructure Delivery  
    Proposals should demonstrate a comprehensive integrated and 
future-proofed approach to the delivery of development and 
infrastructure that mitigates the cumulative impact of  
development, and:
 a)  Contributes appropriately and proportionately towards required 
infrastructure, having regard to the latest Watford Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan, at a rate and scale sufficient to support the growth 
identified in this Local Plan;
 b)  Where applicable, connects to area-wide infrastructure and 
enables future connections;
 c)  Safeguards land to deliver area-wide or site-specific 
infrastructure, as identified in the site allocations and/or other 
policies in the Local Plan;
 d)  Is appropriately designed so that it complements and does not 
unduly restrict development on adjacent or connected sites. 
  Developers will be expected to participate in early pre-application 
engagement with the Council and infrastructure service providers 
to discuss their requirements.
  Developer contributions will be sought where needs arise, in line 
with the policy requirements of this plan; where provision is made 
on site, this will be considered in the context of other developer 
contributions.Infrastructure
Infrastructure
WasteTransport
Utilities
DigitalCulture
Flood 
preventionGreen 
corridorsEducationEmergency 
servicesLeisure
Community 
facilitiesHealth
Open 
space
TreesPlaces of 
WorshipProviding infrastructure to support new 
development  
Figure 10.1: Types of infrastructure129 Infrastructure
10.7  Infrastructure should be well integrated 
alongside new development with the 
phasing agreed, alongside providers, as 
part of a planning application. Wherever 
possible, especially on larger developments, 
infrastructure should be provided on site 
creating sustainable neighbourhoods.
10.8  The Infrastructure Delivery Plan highlights 
the need for new schools, healthcare and 
sustainable transport to support Watford’s 
population growth over the plan period. As 
infrastructure is provided by various agencies, 
the onus is on developers to ensure there is 
capacity to meet requirements arising from a 
proposed development.
Health facilities
10.9  Applicants will need to demonstrate 
collaborative working with other landowners 
and the Clinical Commissioning Group to 
identify how additional health facilities can 
be delivered. The scale and range of service 
provision will need to be appropriate to the 
level of demand generated by developments. 
Contributions towards new or enhanced 
healthcare facilities will be sought to ensure 
the healthcare requirements arising from new 
development are met. 
Education
10.10  As the borough’s population grows, demand 
for school places will continue to increase, 
placing pressure on existing facilities. It is therefore vital that where housing growth 
results in increased demand, investment 
is made across each education tier, as 
necessary, to ensure there are enough places 
to serve the borough’s pupils within  
their community.
 
10.11  For sites larger than 1,000 dwellings, 
education provision will be required on site. 
For sites that are located in close proximity 
to each other and will have a cumulative 
impact that will generate demand for a new 
school, applicants are encouraged to work 
collaboratively with other landowners and 
Hertfordshire County Council to best meet 
this need, identifying where a new primary 
school can be provided that provides good 
amenity for young children. Education 
opportunities should be maximised on any 
site given the high demand and limited 
suitable sites for school provision. 
Sustainable transport
10.12  Applicants will need to demonstrate 
collaborative working with other landowners, 
Watford Borough Council and Hertfordshire 
County Council, as well as other providers to 
deliver transport infrastructure improvements 
to support development, in line with Chapter 
11 ‘A Sustainable Travel Town’. This will include 
delivery of onsite infrastructure as well as 
contributing towards projects identified in 
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, Local Cycling 
and Walking Infrastructure Plan and Watford’s 
Sustainable Transport Strategy ‘Transforming 
Travel in Watford’. 
 Former Croxley Rail Line
10.13  Watford Borough Council continues to 
support the Watford to Croxley Rail Link 
(W2CL), or a comparable alternative, and 
considers that the route along the disused 
former Croxley Rail Line provides the 
opportunity for a walking and cycling link and 
a potential future route for Mass Rapid Transit. 
As such, the route and access to it should be 
safeguarded to maintain the possibility of its 
use by these modes; details of the land to be 
preserved are set out within the Croxley Line – 
Safeguarding for Mass Rapid Transit Technical 
Report and reflected on the Policies Map.
130
 Infrastructure
Quality communications
10.14  Communication technology is an integral 
part of modern society. It is important to 
work with developers and providers to 
ensure that schemes are well designed 
and have sufficient capacity to meet 
the anticipated demand and embrace 
technological change to continue to be 
socially connected and economically 
competitive.
10.15  For a scheme to be successful and be able 
to adapt to future technological changes, 
developers are expected to engage with 
utility providers early in design process. This 
enables all stakeholders to understand as 
early as possible if, and where, there may be 
a need for additional capacity in the network. 
It provides opportunities for development to 
be designed in such a way as to support the 
provision of utilities.
10.16  Future-proofed, high quality digital 
infrastructure, such as fibre optic cables 
for high-speed internet, is considered vital 
to support well-functioning residential and 
employment areas. The National Planning 
Policy Framework requires planning 
policies to set out how high quality digital 
infrastructure is expected to be delivered. 
Policy IN10.2: Providing 
Infrastructure to Support  
New Development  
  All non-householder development will be 
expected to demonstrate that there is, or 
will be, sufficient infrastructure capacity to 
support and meet all the requirements arising 
from the proposed development. Where 
necessary planning conditions will be used 
to ensure that development is not occupied 
ahead of the delivery of any necessary 
infrastructure upgrades. Infrastructure 
provision should be made in accordance 
with relevant requirements set out in this 
Local Plan; have regard to the latest Watford 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan; meet the needs 
arising from development; and mitigate 
adverse social, economic or environmental 
impacts arising from development.
  Developers must demonstrate they have 
explored existing infrastructure capacity 
with appropriate providers, and how this 
could be future-proofed, and demonstrate 
that they have made sufficient provision. 
Where appropriate, and where there is an 
identified shortfall across the borough, 
opportunities should be taken to maximise 
infrastructure provision on suitable sites.
 
  Proposals for residential and employment 
uses should demonstrate that provision 
is made for high speed internet 
infrastructure as part of the application.
131
Development contributions
10.17  The Local Plan will deliver new homes and 
jobs to meet Watford’s identified need. 
To support this, significant supporting 
infrastructure will be required to be 
delivered at the right time to meet the 
Council’s aspirations for sustainability, 
affordable housing delivery, health and 
wellbeing and place-making. To ensure 
that the burden of providing the additional 
infrastructure needed does not fall on 
existing communities, planning authorities 
are able to seek appropriate funding for this 
infrastructure from developers.
10.18  Housing and employment density, site 
constraints, affordable housing, ambitious 
sustainability standards, infrastructure 
delivery and other planning obligations 
all have associated costs. There will be 
a need to consider the ability of each 
site to contribute its fair share towards 
infrastructure, affordable housing and 
sustainability standards, whilst ensuring new 
development is viable and that the market 
is appropriately incentivised to deliver it. 
Site constraints may include exceptional or 
abnormal costs relating to contamination 
or poor ground conditions for example. The 
presence of such issues will be expected to 
impact on land values, rather than through 
a reduction in planning obligations or 
sustainability standards. In taking a balanced 
approach, development will need to deliver 
on the principles of sustainable development as set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework.
 
10.19  Watford’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
identifies and prioritises the key infrastructure 
required to support the growth outlined 
in this plan. It is an important supporting 
document that is regularly updated to react 
to the infrastructure delivery requirements 
and challenges associated with delivering the 
Local Plan.
10.20  A substantial amount of the infrastructure 
required to deliver sustainable development, 
including (but not limited to) enabling works, 
public realm and open space improvements, 
and street greening, will be sought on site 
and it is expected that developers will directly 
fund these.
10.21  The Council will primarily use Section 106 
Agreements and Community Infrastructure 
Levy payments to secure appropriate 
contributions from developments 
for affordable housing and items of 
infrastructure, or financial contributions 
towards their delivery, such as new schools 
and transport network improvements. 
Non-financial contributions may include 
employment and training opportunities.
10.22  The Council’s Infrastructure Funding 
Statement provides a summary of all 
financial and non-financial Section 106 and 
Community Infrastructure Levy planning 
obligation receipts and projects.Infrastructure
132
 
Infrastructure
Policy IN10.3: Development Contributions  
  There will be a need to balance the priorities for infrastructure 
delivery with those for affordable housing, other non-infrastructure 
related planning obligations and sustainability standards. 
  The Council will secure the infrastructure necessary to support 
the growth outlined in this plan, ensure sustainable development, 
meet the needs of development and, where necessary, mitigate the 
impacts of development by:
 
 a)  Securing appropriate on site enabling and development works;
 b)  Charging the Community Infrastructure Levy on developments 
as required by any charging schedules in operation for the area 
within which the development is located;
 c)  Securing planning obligations to provide affordable housing and 
mitigate the impacts of the development, in accordance with 
national policy and, having regard to any relevant Supplementary 
Planning Documents or other local guidance;
 d)  Securing off-site highway works, including provision for cycling 
and walking, where necessary;
 e)  Working with relevant service providers to identify and secure 
infrastructure funding or financing mechanisms.
133
A Sustainable Travel Town
Chapter 11134 A Sustainable Travel Town
A Sustainable Travel Town
11.1  The approach to managing transport in 
Watford is a key challenge, given its significant 
impact on major factors, such as economic 
productivity, air quality, public health and 
carbon emissions. With respect to the Climate 
Emergency, transport remains the largest 
emitting sector of greenhouse gases in the 
UK (ONS, UK Greenhouse Gases, 2018), whilst 
the town also has the highest levels of deaths 
attributed to air pollution in Hertfordshire. 
11.2  Working collaboratively with transport 
providers including Hertfordshire County 
Council as the Local Highway Authority, 
National Highways, and both bus and rail 
operators, the importance of a strategic 
direction to developing transport options 
for Watford is reflected in the Sustainable 
Transport Strategy Transforming Travel in 
Watford. This strategy should be considered 
alongside the Local Plan. Without significant 
change, the transport network will increasingly 
be a limiting factor on the borough’s 
aspirations for economic productivity, 
environmental sustainability, community 
vitality and public health, amongst others.
11.3  Watford’s compact urban form has significant 
potential to encourage people to walk and 
cycle more to local destinations, services 
and facilities, reflected by the fact that of trips 
made by Watford residents, 19% are less than 
one mile, with a further 36% being between 
one and three miles. This highlights the opportunity for more active travel if people 
have access to routes that get them to where 
they want to be in a way that is safe, efficient 
and enjoyable.
11.4  The combination of the Climate Emergency, 
the dominance of the car in the current modal 
share, and the potential for active travel based 
upon the volume of short-distance trips, 
means that new developments will need to 
be designed to encourage a modal shift in the 
town that reduces local people’s dependency 
on cars in favour of increased walking, cycling 
and public transport use. This will contribute 
towards reducing congestion, addressing 
climate change and air quality issues, as well as 
bringing health and economic benefits.
11.5  Hertfordshire County Council has adopted 
the Hertfordshire Local Transport Plan (2018). 
The South West Herts Growth and Transport 
Plan (2019) is the key supporting document 
to the Local Transport Plan, with an emphasis 
on improving health and generating modal 
shift away from car use. The Local Plan 
supports the Local Transport Plan and will 
facilitate delivery where possible. Additional 
county-wide transport strategies, to which 
development should align, include the Intalink 
Bus Strategy (2019), Rail Strategy (2020), the 
Speed Management Strategy (2020) and 
forthcoming Highways Network Management 
Strategy. To encourage more sustainable forms 
of travel, applicants should design schemes to 
reflect the Transport User Hierarchy priorities 
in the sequential order shown in Figure 11.1. 
Reduce the need to travel
Powered two wheelers
(motorbike, moped)Vulnerable road users
(pedestrians and cyclists)
Passenger transport
(train, bus)
Other motor vehicles
(cars, vans etc.)Figure 11.1: Transport User Hierarchy
11.6  Measures that encourage the uptake of 
sustainable modes, including new, high 
quality cycle networks, walking infrastructure 
and bus prioritisation will be supported. In 
addition, measures that reduce through 
traffic flows and speeds, including low traffic 
neighbourhoods and 20mph speed limits, will 
be encouraged. The enhancement of public 
transport provision will be prioritised through 
the safeguarding of land required for major 
interventions, such as new interchange spaces, 
Mass Rapid Transit and upgrades to existing 
hubs, as well as supporting the County Council 
in delivering the public transport actions set 
out in its transport strategies.135 A Sustainable Travel Town
11.7  Watford Borough Council aims for Watford 
to become a Sustainable Travel Town (Figure 
11.2), as advocated by the Local Transport Plan, 
where the perception to all highway users is 
that pedestrians, cyclists and public transport 
users will have a greater priority than they do 
at present. 
11.8  It will be expected that major new 
development will be located in areas of high 
sustainability where there is existing, or the 
potential for, high public transport accessibility, 
and that key services will be accessible 
by walking or cycling, with developments 
contributing to significant improvements to 
sustainable transport routes. Where this is 
the case it is expected that the provision of 
car parking will be highly limited, effectively 
removing in-built car dependence.
11.9  Land use decisions made through the Local 
Plan development process can shape and 
facilitate change in transport provision and 
travel choices. However, to successfully 
achieve a meaningful and sustained shift in 
travel behaviour, attractive alternatives to the 
private car are required. This is the start of a 
long-term process of change that will continue 
beyond the Local Plan end date of 2038, and 
will work within the framework of the South 
West Herts Joint Strategic Plan and the  
multi-modal study that goes up to 2050. Figure 11.2: Elements of a Sustainable Travel Town
What is a 
Sustainable 
Travel Town?
Minimising 
construction 
impacts
Provision 
for 
deliveriesHigher 
densities only 
where public 
transport is 
providedDecreased 
car 
ownershipVariety of 
travel options 
for every 
journeyReduced 
need to 
travelSupport 
for electric 
vehiclesIncreased 
cycle 
parking
Links through 
developments 
to key 
destinations
Reduced 
traffic 
speeds and 
volumes New 
cycling and 
walking 
routes
Provision 
for mass 
rapid 
transitEasy 
access to 
stops and 
stationsEnhanced 
multi-modal 
transport 
hubsIncreased 
bus 
priorityBike 
shareCar 
clubs
Appropriate 
parking 
provisionAttractive to 
walking and 
cyclingSupporting 
modal 
shiftGreen and 
innovative 
modes
Sustainable 
development
High quality 
transport 
network136 A Sustainable Travel Town
Strategic Policy ST11.1: Sustainable Travel Town
  New development will be supported in principle where it contributes 
towards sustainable and active travel behaviour, respecting the 
Transport User Hierarchy (Figure 11.1) set out in the County Council’s 
Local Transport Plan and Watford’s ambition to be a sustainable travel 
town. It should create an urban environment where people choose 
to walk and cycle, whilst reducing the impact of cars on the transport 
network, and promoting the use of public transport. Proposals will 
need to demonstrate how they contribute positively towards the 
Council’s Climate Emergency declaration and are expected to bring 
public health, air quality and economic productivity benefits.
  Development proposals should align with the principles set out 
below that aim to achieve better integration of land use planning and 
transport planning and develop a Sustainable Travel Town with a more 
active population. They should support the objectives of Hertfordshire 
County Council’s Local Transport Plan, and supporting strategies, 
plus contribute to the Growth and Transport Plan packages in the 
Local Transport Plan and subsequent updates, as well as aligning 
with Watford’s forthcoming Sustainable Transport Strategy and Local 
Cycling and Walking Implementation Plan. 
  To promote active travel the following initiatives should be embedded 
in development plans:
 a)  Developing Watford as a Walking and Cycle Infrastructure 
Improvement Town, supporting the growth of shared mobility 
offerings that include bike share schemes;
 b)  Creating neighbourhoods that encourage people to walk or cycle, 
through the provision or contribution to high quality walking and 
cycle routes that enhance connectivity and reduce severance; and
 c) Measures that reduce traffic speed and flow.  Developments will be supported where they improve public transport 
connectivity through:
 d)  Contributing to the development of comprehensive priority 
measures for buses with supporting high quality, accessible bus 
stops and service improvements where required, to enhance 
existing services and demand responsive transport throughout  
the town;
 e)  Supporting the development of Mass Rapid Transit in Watford;
 f)  Preserving and improving Watford Junction as a strategic transport 
hub for both rail and bus users, with excellent access routes, 
interchanges and other facilities enabling sustainable ‘first and last 
mile’ travel;
 g)  Supporting a mobility Hub within the Town Centre that serves as a 
focal point for multiple modes and links to the High Street Station; 
and
 h)  Enhancing pedestrian and cycle facilities at key junctions with the 
ring road.
  To reduce car dependency and the impact of private motor vehicles 
developments should:
 i)  Contribute to traffic-demand management measures introduced that 
promote mode shift away from private cars;
 j)  Provide provision for car clubs and electric vehicles, as set out in 
Policy ST11.5 ‘Car Parking, Car Clubs and Electric Vehicles’; and
 k)  Produce Travel Assessments and Travel Plans where required by, 
and in line with, Hertfordshire County Council’s relevant guidance.137 A Sustainable Travel Town
Protecting and enhancing 
future public transport 
routes and Watford Junction 
station area as a Sustainable 
Transport Hub
11.10  Watford benefits from being home to a 
number of key transport interchanges and 
routes, and is an established transport hub 
for the South West Hertfordshire area. This 
transport infrastructure should be retained 
and enhanced where necessary to meet the 
needs of those who live, work and visit. There 
is an expectation that an uplift in densities will 
also aid the provision and maintenance of 
public transport on a borough wide basis.
11.11  A variety of measures will need to be pursued 
and supported, including those identified in 
the South West Herts Growth and Transport 
Plan. The Council will support all of these 
where it can, including safeguarding routes 
for future active or public transport provision. 
The disused former Croxley Rail Line provides 
a potential future route for Mass Rapid Transit, 
as well as an opportunity for a walking and 
cycling link. As such, the route and access 
to it should be safeguarded to maintain the 
possibility of its use by these modes; details of 
the land to be preserved are set out within the 
Croxley Line – Safeguarding for Mass Rapid 
Transit Technical Report.
11.12  The Ebury Way cycle path provides a direct, 
traffic free cycle and walking route between 
Watford and Rickmansworth, providing a 
valuable commuting and leisure route. It 
should therefore be preserved, including access to it, with opportunities sought to 
enhance its quality, particularly in making it an 
all weather route.
 
11.13  The Abbey Line is an important public 
transport link between Watford and St Albans, 
enhancing regional connectivity. The status of 
this route, as being used for public transport, 
should be safeguarded.
11.14  Plans for an enhanced walking and cycling 
network are set out within the Local Cycle 
and Walking Infrastructure Plan. This network 
will be critical to Watford being a town where 
active travel is the natural first choice for short 
journeys. Thus, development should not prevent 
the ability of these networks to be delivered.
11.15  Hertfordshire County Council is developing 
plans for a new, Mass Rapid Transit system 
to significantly increase connectivity across 
the county. This will bring substantial 
benefits to Watford, and it is expected that 
proposed routes for this system will not be 
compromised by new development.
11.16  Watford Junction is the busiest railway station 
in Hertfordshire. The adjacent bus station, 
along with taxi rank provision, cycle and 
walking links and car parking mean that it 
serves as a multi-modal transport hub for 
both the town and the wider region. Growth 
around the station is unlikely to be possible 
without alterations to the built environment 
to unlock sites and improve accessibility to 
sustainable travel. The ability to deliver key 
transport infrastructure must therefore be 
preserved. This should include the provision of 
two new pedestrian/cycle bridges to overcome 
severance caused by the rail lines as part of the 
comprehensive redevelopment of the area. 11.17  One of these bridges should cross both 
the West Coast Main Line and Abbey Line, 
preferably as part of, or within the vicinity of, 
Watford Junction Station, and the second 
should be between Penn Road and Colonial 
Way. Links to these should accommodate 
both pedestrians and cyclists, be accessible 
to non station users 24 hours a day, maximise 
the permeability of the area, provide a 
connection to the Eastern Mobility Hub and 
not compromise any future re-routing of 
vehicle access to the concrete batching plant 
and rail aggregates depot.
11.18  A key requirement in developing Watford 
Junction as a transport hub is ensuring the 
existing bus station is well integrated with 
Watford Junction Station, as well as making 
travelling by bus as attractive as possible. 
Opportunities for improved infrastructure 
and facilities for passengers and bus operator 
staff should be preserved, and the bus and rail 
station should not be separated. 
11.19  A further element to the re-development of 
the area is a new Sustainable Transport Hub, 
containing a multi-storey car park as well as 
facilities for a range of other modes, to be 
located immediately east of the station, space 
for which should be preserved. 
11.20   Improvements to the road network will provide 
access from Colonial Way via Clive Way with 
upgrades to the necessary road junction and 
road extension to provide a connection with 
the proposed Watford Junction Sustainable 
Transport Hub. The potential re-routing of 
vehicle access to the concrete batching plant 
and rail aggregates depot should also  
be facilitated.138
   
Policy ST11.2: Protecting and Enhancing Future Public Transport Routes and Watford Junction 
Station Area as a Sustainable Transport Hub
  To prevent development that would compromise future mass transit, 
bus prioritisation, walking and cycling infrastructure, set out in either 
the South West Hertfordshire Growth and Transport Plan, the Local 
Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan or Watford’s Sustainable 
Transport Strategy, developers will need to have regard to the following 
Safeguarded Transport Routes to ensure designs would not compromise 
their ability to prioritise public transport and active travel routes:
 a)  The disused former Croxley Rail Line, including access points and 
routes on the existing road network, as set out in the Croxley Line – 
Safeguarding for Mass Rapid Transit Technical Report;
 b) The current Ebury Way cycle path and access to it; and
 c) The Abbey Line.
 Additionally, proposals should have regard to:
 d)  Existing and planned cycle routes identified in the Local Cycling and 
Walking Infrastructure Plan; and
 e)  Any future planned Mass Rapid Transit routes identified by 
Hertfordshire County Council.A Sustainable Travel Town
  The Safeguarded Transport Routes are identified on the Policies Map 
and represented in Figure 11.3.
  The role of Watford Junction as a multi-modal Sustainable Transport 
Hub should be preserved, meaning that development must not 
hinder the provision of the following on site and cross boundary 
infrastructure;
 f)  New pedestrian/cycle bridges over the West Coast Main Line and 
Abbey Line and connecting Penn Road with Colonial Way, plus 
access to these from the existing and new road networks;
 g)  Bus and rail access that also provides for the use of cycles, electric 
vehicles, drop-off movements, taxis, coaches and any future Mass 
Rapid Transit access;
 h)  Pedestrian and cycling access from Colonial Way (or Imperial Way 
as part of a comprehensive redevelopment of the area) that will 
provide a connection to the Eastern Mobility Hub and access to the 
station and not compromise potential re-routing of vehicle access 
to the concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot; and
 i)  Upgrading of the bus station and bus priority improvements to 
roads in the vicinity of the station. 
139 A Sustainable Travel Town
Figure 11.3: Areas for transport improvements in Watford, 
and routes to be safeguarded
Providing sustainable transport 
infrastructure for major development
11.21  A number of areas within the town are anticipated to experience 
significant levels of development within the Local Plan timescales or are 
located around major transport infrastructure. These areas are shown 
in Figure 11.3 and are representative of the Transport Improvement 
Areas as defined on the Policies Map. Without appropriate mitigations, 
new development will likely affect the functioning of the local transport 
network. A key mitigation will be the reduced provision of car parking 
(Policy ST11.5, ‘Car Parking, Car Clubs and Electric Vehicles’) that, in turn, 
will require the provision of alternative transport options. The sustainable 
transport requirements for these areas are set out within this policy. In 
particular, attention should be paid to providing internal permeability 
to walking and cycling, as well as complete, high quality routes to key 
destinations, overcoming severance where encountered.
Lower High Street area
11.22  Modelling forecasts that, without mitigation, potential development will 
have an impact on all major links into Watford, with particularly high 
impacts on Lower High Street, Beechen Grove Gyratory, and Waterfields 
Way. Therefore, where development sits within the Core Development 
Area it is expected that sites will be car-lite, with car-free being 
encouraged for those in closest proximity to Watford High Street Station.
11.23  Given its central location, and proximity to existing public transport 
networks, there is significant potential for the area to be supported by 
sustainable transport. Development should support the creation of a 
sustainable, multi-modal transport hub at the High Street/Water Lane 
junction. The location of the site between the Town Centre, Bushey 
Arches, Watford General Hospital, and Watford Riverwell means that 
development will be supported where permeability for people walking 
and cycling is enhanced from current levels through the provision of 
direct, high quality routes and an internal road network that ensures 
traffic volumes and speeds are low. Provision should also be made for 
active travel links to the termination of the disused former Croxley Rail 
Line on Wiggenhall Road.140 A Sustainable Travel Town
11.24  Lower High Street should be seen as a 
corridor primarily for sustainable transport, 
preserving the current high frequency bus 
service, as well as helping to link the potential 
future Mass Rapid Transit System, and being 
a key walking and cycling route for the site. 
11.25  To enhance bus services, introducing bus 
priority measures on the ring road should 
also be supported. Ensuring access for 
people walking and cycling should also be 
considered as part of development in the 
area. This should include upgrading the 
public realm and reducing severance at the 
Lower High Street / Exchange Road junction, 
plus providing high quality cycle routes on 
Lower High Street and Wiggenhall Road. As a 
noted accident hotspot, contribution should 
also be made to a revised junction layout 
at the intersection of Waterfields Way and 
Lower High Street. 
Bushey Arches
11.26  Whilst the scale of expected development is 
relatively limited, Bushey Arches is a known 
congestion hotspot, and an Air Quality 
Management Area has previously been 
declared for Pinner Road and Chalk Hill, so 
the traffic impacts of any development will 
need to be carefully considered. Without 
additional intervention, modelling suggests 
increasing stress on Lower High Street, 
south of Waterfields Way, and the Bushes 
Arches gyratory road network, as well as 
a number of further links, including Pinner 
Road, being over capacity. It is expected that 
development around Bushey Arches will support a package of sustainable transport 
interventions that is coherent with those to 
the north, around Lower High Street.
11.27  Developments should make sure that best 
use is made of existing public transport in 
the area, in particular by contributing to 
high quality walking and cycling links to 
Bushey Station and upgrading those around 
the Bushey Arches gyratory road network. 
Bus priority measures around the gyratory 
and connecting to a Lower High Street 
sustainable transport corridor should also be 
supported.
Watford Riverwell
11.28  Development beyond that already granted 
permission is not anticipated to be significant. 
However, new trips from development in 
the Riverwell area are likely to increase 
congestion and delays on the town centre 
road network and links such as the A4178, 
Vicarage Road and Harwood Road in the 
immediate vicinity. It is therefore expected 
that new development must contribute to 
sustainable transport infrastructure that 
makes the most of the area being within 
walking distance of the Town Centre and 
local transport hubs. 
11.29  Contributions could be expected to bus 
prioritisation measures on Vicarage Road, 
whilst permeability for cycling and walking 
should be substantially improved. In 
particular, active travel routes should link 
Watford General Hospital, Stripling Way, 
Thomas Sawyer Way and Ebury Way through the area, and additional infrastructure should 
be provided on routes around the site, such 
as Vicarage Road and Wiggenhall Road.
11.30  Land should also be safeguarded to provide 
access to the disused former Croxley Rail 
Line safeguarded transport corridor (and a 
potential station area).
Ascot Road
11.31  Whilst the highway network of the Ascot 
Road Area currently operates without 
congestion at most times, several locations 
are expected to see large increases in 
traffic levels during the Local Plan period, 
particularly around the Ascot Road / Hatters 
Lane / Blackmoor Lane / Greenhill Crescent 
Roundabout. 
141 A Sustainable Travel Town
11.32  To ensure bus services become a primary 
travel option for residents and employees 
in this area, development should support 
Ascot Road becoming a sustainable transport 
corridor, with significantly improved cycle 
infrastructure and bus priority measures. 
Existing pedestrian and cycle links between 
Croxley View and Greenhill Crescent improve 
local connectivity, and the Council will support 
new development that ensures this access 
is protected and enhanced, to maximise the 
permeability of the area. 
11.33  The road network within the area features few 
high quality cycle lanes. New developments 
will therefore be required to provide 
significantly upgraded cycle lanes on key 
routes to sites, and site layouts should 
integrate connections to these routes 
where possible, to deliver a cohesive cycling 
environment. The Council will support 
proposals to improve cycle links in the 
Holywell area including re-surfacing the Ebury 
Way (and new connections to it) to maximise 
use, alongside enhanced east-west cycle 
facilities along Harwoods Road / Chester Road 
/ Queens Avenue) to Whippendale Road and 
along Vicarage Road.
11.34  New development in the Ascot Road Area 
should preserve the opportunity for providing 
Mass Rapid Transit and walking and cycling on 
the disused former Croxley Rail line, including 
safeguarding land for a potential terminus.
St Albans Road
11.35  Several congestion hotspots exist within this 
area, with St Albans Road, the A41 and the 
Dome Roundabout particularly under stress. 
It should also be noted that an Air Quality Management Area was required on St Albans 
Road (revoked in 2019) and journey times 
for bus travel are long. These issues will be 
exacerbated if new development does not 
support sustainable transport. 
11.36  St Albans Road is a key strategic route serving 
the Dome Roundabout area for both car and 
public transport users, due to its connections 
with the Town Centre to the south and strategic 
roads to the M1. A shift to non-car-based modes 
of travel should be targeted for this corridor 
via improved highway infrastructure for bus 
priority. The corridor also has the potential to 
become a key cycle route, providing direct links 
to destinations and transport interchanges. 
Developments will therefore be supported 
that contribute to significantly enhanced, 
continuous walking and cycling infrastructure 
along the corridor, including overcoming 
severance and bus journey time delays caused 
by the Dome Roundabout.
Town Centre
11.37  Development sites within Watford Town Centre 
have high accessibility to public transport 
options, as well as services, amenities and 
employment opportunities within convenient 
walking and cycling distances. Many of the 
arterial roads leading towards the Town 
Centre are congested at peak times, and 
high traffic levels on the central ring road 
affect bus journey times and reliability, as 
well as it causing significant severance. It will 
therefore be expected that parking provision 
will be minimised, with car-free development 
encouraged, and contributions made to the 
enhancement of public transport and active 
travel infrastructure in the Town Centre.11.38  This should include bus priority interventions 
along, and in the vicinity of, the ring road, 
which in the future could potentially 
contribute towards a Mass Rapid Transit 
System. The potential to develop a 
Sustainable Transport Hub and interchange 
point at the High Street / Water Lane junction 
should also be supported. High quality and 
convenient cycle routes, especially those 
that facilitate north-south and east-west 
movement are required to encourage 
people to choose cycling as a primary 
mode of travel for short to medium distance 
trips, notably along Hempstead Road, 
Rickmansworth Road and St Albans Road.
11.39  All developments should support significantly 
enhanced cycle and walking infrastructure 
provision, through being highly permeable 
and contributing to complete routes that 
overcome the severance of the ring road, 
particularly at the Derby Road, Water Lane, 
Lower High Street, Vicarage Rd and Market 
Street junctions.
Watford Gateway
11.40   Being focused on a strategic, multi-modal 
transport hub, public transport accessibility in 
Watford Gateway is high and thus it is expected 
that developments will be car-lite, with car 
free encouraged. In addition to the internal 
requirements set out in Policy ST11.2, ‘Protecting 
and Enhancing Future Public Transport 
Routes and Watford Junction Station Area as a 
Transport Hub’, contribution should be made to 
high quality cycle and walking infrastructure to 
access the area from all directions. This should 
include a link north via Bradshaw Road to 
Balmoral Road as well as infrastructure along, 
and to cross, St Albans Road.142
 
Policy ST11.3: Providing Sustainable Transport Infrastructure for Major Development
  Major developments should maximise 
opportunities for sustainable transport, 
protecting and supporting current and 
future active and public transport routes.
 
  Cycling and walking infrastructure should 
be high quality and provide complete 
routes to key destinations, such as the Town 
Centre, transport hubs, employment centres, 
educational or community facilities. 
  In addition, for each of the following areas, 
as indicated in Figure 11.3, the principles 
set out below should be observed and 
the infrastructure requirements set out 
in Appendix C be positively supported 
by major developments, in addition to 
the safeguarding requirements set out in 
Policy ST11.2 ‘Protecting and Enhancing 
Future Public Transport Routes and Watford 
Junction Station Area as a Transport Hub’.
  Transport Improvement Areas and 
Safeguarded Transport Routes are defined 
on the Policies Map.
 Colne Valley Strategic Development Area
  Developments should expect that their 
transport needs here are met primarily by 
sustainable transport objectives, and as 
such should be car-lite. Lower High Street 
should serve primarily as a sustainable travel 
corridor, with high quality direct pedestrian 
access from sites. The provision of an internal 
travel network that is highly permeable to A Sustainable Travel Town
those who wish to walk or cycle, with direct, 
high quality links and low traffic streets between 
the Town Centre, Oxhey, Vicarage Road, Watford 
General Hospital and Riverwell should be 
ensured. Bus prioritisation measures should be 
provided on key access links.
 Bushey Arches
  Developments should support the ambitions 
for sustainable transport options around Lower 
High Street, and also make best use of existing 
public transport infrastructure, by supporting 
the delivery of new and significantly improved 
high quality walking and cycle links to Bushey 
Station and Arches; overcoming the severance 
caused by the current highway layout.
 St Albans Road
  Developments will be expected to support 
significant improvements to walking and 
cycling infrastructure along St Albans Road 
and at the Dome Roundabout, alongside 
implementation of bus priority measures, 
mitigating potential junction delays for buses 
on main thoroughfares and junctions.
 Watford Riverwell
  Permeability for active travel should be 
substantially improved, linking to bus stops, 
Watford General Hospital, Vicarage Road, 
Stripling Way, Thomas Sawyer Way and Ebury 
Way, along with the safeguarded disused 
former Croxley Rail Line. Developments should 
contribute to bus priority or cycle infrastructure 
on Vicarage Road and Wiggenhall Road.  Ascot Road
  Development should contribute positively 
towards Ascot Road becoming a sustainable 
transport corridor through new and 
significantly enhanced bus priority measures 
and pedestrian/cycle infrastructure. 
Improvement to active travel permeability and 
routes should include significant enhancement 
to links between Croxley View and Greenhill 
Crescent, to Tolpits Lane, to the Ebury Way and 
further east-west routes to the Town Centre.
 Town Centre Strategic Development Area
  Development should at a minimum be car-
lite, and car-free should also be considered. 
Bus priority interventions along, and in the 
vicinity of, the ring road should be supported. 
Development should support the delivery of 
high quality cycle and walking routes across and 
to the Town Centre, linking to key destinations. 
Development should contribute to reducing the 
severance caused by the ring road.
 Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area
  All major developments will be expected to 
significantly enhance pedestrian and cycle 
routes through the Watford Gateway area by 
providing high quality internal infrastructure 
and links to the Town Centre, North Watford 
and towards Bushey. The development of the 
station as a multi-modal hub should also be 
supported, including the access requirements 
for this across all modes.143 A Sustainable Travel Town
A walking and cycling 
infrastructure improvement 
town
11.41  Consideration of how best to facilitate 
walking and cycling trips must be integral 
to all design. A key principle of the 
Local Transport Plan is ‘modal shift and 
encouraging active travel’, noting that ’the 
potential public health benefits of increased 
levels of active travel indicate this should 
be a high priority, and a key feature of the 
future transport system we are planning 
for’. This contributes towards the wider 
objectives within the Local Transport Plan 
promoting Watford as a Walking and Cycling 
Infrastructure Improvement Town.
Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure 
Implementation Plan
11.42  The forthcoming Watford and Three Rivers 
Local Cycling and Walking Implementation 
Plan will identify routes and improvements 
that comprise, but are not limited to, the 
provision of pedestrian crossings, segregated 
cycle routes, and enhanced junctions, to 
facilitate a more comprehensive and safe 
cycling and walking network that connects 
to local destinations and encourages less 
reliance on private vehicle travel.
11.43  Developments should ensure that their design 
encourages walking and cycling and respects the Local Transport Plan Transport User 
Hierarchy that prioritises active travel, through 
being permeable to people both walking 
and cycling, with high quality footpaths, and 
design that reduces vehicle dominance 
and encourages cycling by all. This should 
be supported by signage that aligns with 
Watford’s existing wayfinding approach.
Cycle parking
11.44  Consideration of the needs for cycle parking 
play a key part in ensuring that design 
encourages cycling. The absence of high 
quality cycle parking, with its resulting 
inconvenience and fear of theft, is a key 
barrier to people choosing to cycle. Without 
an easily accessible and secure place for 
people to store their cycle, both at home 
and at their destination, they are unlikely to 
choose to cycle.
11.45  In designing cycle parking, attention should 
be paid to the difference in requirements for 
long-stay parking, required where people will 
leave their cycle for an extended period, for 
example, at home, work, place of education 
or a station, and thus place a premium on 
security, compared to short-stay parking, 
for example, outside a retail location, where 
convenience is the key factor. Cycle parking 
standards are set out in Appendix D and 
parking should be laid out with regard to 
the Watford Cycle Parking Supplementary 
Planning Document.Cycle parking in residential developments
11.46  The manner in which residential cycle 
parking is provided will depend on 
characteristics of the development:
 a)  In large apartment complexes, single, 
large, communal storage does not provide 
sufficient security. Multiple cycle storage 
areas or individual storage compartments 
located outside the apartment, within the 
blueprint of the building, that are capable 
of taking cycles, prams and other large 
items, should be provided;
 b)  For smaller developments or converted 
buildings, a secure, accessible communal 
area should be provided that includes 
space for non-standard cycles, such as 
cargo bikes, adapted cycles or tandems;
 c)  For houses, cycle storage should be at 
the rear, the side or within the building, as 
storage at the front can be unsightly, and 
tends to advertise to thieves that cycles 
are there. Where adequate cycle parking 
cannot be provided within residential 
developments, alternative cycle parking 
arrangements for residents should be 
provided, such as the provision of a cycle 
hangar on the highway in a location 
agreed with the Council.
144 A Sustainable Travel Town
Cycle parking in non-residential 
developments
11.47  Secure cycle storage for staff and visitors 
should be provided as part of new non-
residential developments. These should 
be part of a wider approach to encourage 
cycling that includes the provision of 
changing facilities and showers, encouraging 
a long term modal shift away from single 
occupancy vehicle use. 
11.48  To support commuting to employment and 
education destinations, security is particularly 
important. Provision for employees or 
students should have employee only access 
storage areas that are covered and include 
space for non-standard cycles, along with 
showering and changing facilities within the 
building. At primary and nursery schools, 
an appropriate proportion of long-stay cycle 
parking for students may be met through 
scooter parking.
Location of cycle parking
11.49  All major developments should provide 
short-stay cycle parking for visitors who 
will not be able to access parking provided 
for employees or residents. This should 
be convenient and readily accessible, 
preferably in the form of Sheffield Stands 
within 15m of the main entrance where 
possible, so that the ease of cycling is not 
undermined by a lengthy search for suitable 
parking. For primary schools and nurseries, short-stay cycle parking should be located 
and designed to accommodate at least two 
parental cargo bikes or cycles with trailers. 
 
Bicycle hire and share schemes
11.50  Not all residents or visitors to Watford will 
own or have access to a cycle within the 
town. The town’s bike share scheme provides 
access to bikes for those without access to 
a personal cycle. These bikes are stored at 
bays across the town and can easily be hired 
for use via a mobile phone app. Users collect 
and deposit the bikes at a bay at the start and 
completion of their trip, thus it is important 
that sufficient bays are available near to all 
potential destinations to support the scheme. 
The provision of bike share bays where it 
would support the wider bike share network, 
in agreement with the Local Authority, will be 
encouraged and could replace some on site 
visitor parking provision.
11.51  In the largest of developments it is 
encouraged that this is in the form of a 
bike share parklet that combines standard 
cycle parking with bike share bays. The 
requirements for these bays is specified in 
the cycle parking standards in Appendix D. 
To preserve the ability to enhance bike share 
infrastructure, any land set aside to support 
the installation of a bike share bay will be 
safeguarded should installation not take 
place immediately.
145 A Sustainable Travel Town
Policy ST11.4: A Walking and Cycling Infrastructure Improvement Town
  New development will be supported where it will contribute towards 
achieving a modal shift and make walking and cycling a convenient 
and efficient way to access local destinations. To be integrated into the 
adjacent and strategic walking and cycling network, proposals should 
demonstrate how they have prioritised walking and cycling through 
the provision of on site infrastructure including cycle parking facilities, 
wayfinding measures and good design for safety and security. Major 
developments should contribute towards the delivery of significantly 
improved walking and cycling routes to key destinations, prior to first 
occupancy, where viable.
 Walking
  Developments should be permeable and safe to walk through, 
including high quality footways and pedestrian crossings, adequate 
lighting and signposting. They should facilitate or deliver the links 
required to connect to existing and proposed walking routes as well 
as local amenities and public transport. Developments adjacent to the 
borough’s walking routes, as identified in the Local Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plan, will be expected to accommodate them through 
allocating space and supporting off site contributions. Cycling
  Developments will encourage people to cycle by providing an 
urban environment that is accessible and safe for all cycle trips. 
This requires high quality cycle routes that are segregated, unless 
both traffic flows and speeds are low. These routes should connect 
to local amenities, transport interchanges and the existing and 
proposed cycle network, as set out in the Local Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plan. Developments adjacent to existing and new cycle 
routes will be expected to facilitate and deliver these links through 
allocating space and contributing to infrastructure improvements.
 Cycle parking
  All development proposals will be required to provide on site cycle 
parking facilities in line with the cycle parking standards detailed in 
Appendix D. Secure and convenient cycle parking facilities should 
be designed at the outset of the scheme. Should the standards for 
visitor cycle parking mean a requirement in excess of ten spaces, 
part of this provision can be replaced with a contribution to publicly 
accessible bike share bays in a suitable location nearby, further detail 
on this is provided in Appendix D.
146 A Sustainable Travel Town
Car parking, car clubs and 
electric vehicles
11.52  Controlling car parking and providing 
alternatives to personal vehicle ownership 
have been found to be some of the most 
effective methods for managing demand. 
It can help to address issues such as the 
perception of a car-dominated environment, 
congestion, unreliable journey times, 
diminished air quality and higher carbon 
emissions. Advancing transport technology 
has the potential to drastically change 
how travel is managed and undertaken 
and opportunities are to be taken through 
new development to help future-proof the 
borough to support electric vehicle charging 
and shared mobility solutions, such as  
car clubs.
11.53  There is limited space available to support 
new development, and new schemes will 
be expected to make the most efficient use 
of the land available for redevelopment. 
Continuing to provide excessive car related 
infrastructure, particularly overgenerous 
parking, will exacerbate existing issues 
associated with the transport network and 
the environment. The requirements in Policy 
ST11.5 will also support Watford becoming 
a Sustainable Travel Town (Policy ST11.1 
‘Sustainable Travel Town’) by encouraging 
modal shift away from private car trips and 
thus reducing the impact of transport on  
the environment. Car parking standards
11.54  New development in all areas of the borough 
should provide car parking that is reflective of 
the needs of its location and that encourages 
a greater proportion of people to use 
alternative sustainable transport modes in 
the long term.
11.55  Car parking standards are set out 
in Appendix E and have been set in 
consideration to the Core Development 
Area, the availability of public transport 
modes and the type of development, in 
accordance with the National Planning 
Policy Framework. The car parking standards 
provided are maximums, to support Local 
Plan objectives by helping reduce overall 
car use and pressure on highway networks 
and infrastructure. Provision should take into 
consideration alternative forms of mobility, 
such as car club vehicles and seek to 
minimise the risk of off site parking impacts.
 
11.56  Developments that are likely to result in 
material impacts to highway safety as a 
result of insufficient parking will be refused. 
Development in the Core Development 
Area will be severely restricted (i.e. ’car-lite’), 
and this will be enforced via Section 106 
agreements. This is to minimise congestion 
in this area by discouraging vehicles where 
there are excellent public transport  
options available.Allocated and unallocated parking spaces
11.57  For all new residential developments, 
the standards set out a requirement for 
a proportion of parking spaces to be 
unallocated to any particular user. This is 
intended to accommodate vehicles that visit 
the site irregularly (such as visitors) who may 
otherwise struggle to find a parking space 
on site, and car club vehicles. Where parking 
spaces are allocated, they should be leased 
rather than sold. This will ensure that parking 
areas are used efficiently and reduces the risk 
of spaces being left vacant for any period of 
time. This policy requirement also supports 
development land being adaptable for the 
needs of subsequent users.
147 A Sustainable Travel Town
Car parking and controlled parking zones
11.58  There is a recognition that for low levels of 
on site car parking to work most effectively, 
it needs to be combined with on-street 
parking restrictions, one of the most effective 
modes of traffic demand management. This 
is particularly important for the areas located 
in the Core Development Area. Controlled 
Parking Zones are well established in the 
borough and will be kept under review as 
part of the Council’s approach to traffic 
management. New development should 
not increase parking demand and users will 
therefore be exempt, or subject to restriction, 
from obtaining permits for existing Controlled 
Parking Zones.
Parking for disabled persons
11.59  Though parking may be restricted across 
the borough, the need to provide parking 
for people with reduced mobility remains an 
important requirement as part of Watford’s 
ambitions to become a more accessible, 
inclusive borough. Disabled persons’ 
parking should form a proportion of the 
overall parking provision, rather than being 
treated as additional. Demand for accessible 
parking spaces may change over time, and 
so developers are required to future proof 
residential car parks by identifying additional 
parking spaces that could be converted to 
disabled persons’ parking spaces if needed. 11.60  Disabled persons’ parking spaces should 
not be allocated to specific dwellings, unless 
they are provided within the curtilage of 
the dwelling, and all disabled persons’ 
parking spaces should follow relevant 
design guidance. Recommended parking 
provisions for non-residential land uses 
are also provided. Where it is not possible 
to provide disabled persons’ parking at 
developments due to site constraints or 
highway safety concerns, the applicant will 
be required to demonstrate where a disabled 
person can park to access the development 
conveniently.
Parking for powered two wheel vehicles
11.61  Powered two wheeled vehicles, such 
as motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, 
contribute to reducing congestion and 
emissions and also provide more efficient use 
of space than car parking. Providing space 
to park powered two wheeled vehicles will 
increase the attractiveness of using them 
as an alternative to car ownership, and 
reduce instances of illegal parking that often 
obstruct footways. Guidance on designing for 
powered two wheeled vehicles is available 
from the Institute of Highway Engineers and 
motorcycle industry groups.Electric vehicles
11.62  Electric vehicles, that is any road vehicle 
with a battery that is intended to be charged 
from mains supply, will be encouraged for 
use where people are unable to use public 
transport, walk, or cycle to destinations. 
Whilst not reducing congestion, a move 
towards electric vehicles will reduce air 
pollution in the borough and contribute to 
local and national carbon reduction targets.
11.63  The number of electric vehicles is expected 
to increase further with the ban on the sale 
of petrol and diesel vehicles from 2030, and 
as electric vehicle technology becomes 
cheaper. It is therefore necessary to ensure 
that new developments are future proofed to 
facilitate this progression. Sufficient electrical 
capacity in new developments for current 
and future demand for charging points will 
therefore be required.
148 A Sustainable Travel Town
11.64   The parking standards require consideration 
for the provision of electric vehicles, including 
one of two types of charging infrastructure:
 a)  ‘Active provision’ requires fully wired and 
connected charging points at parking spaces;
 b)  ‘Passive provision’ requires the necessary 
underlying infrastructure (e.g. capacity 
in the connection to the local electricity 
distribution network and electricity 
distribution board, and cabling to parking 
spaces) to enable simple installation and 
activation of a charge point at a future date.
11.65  As electric vehicles become more 
commonplace around Watford, locations for 
new electric vehicle charging infrastructure 
will naturally be focused on trip origins and 
destinations, where longer charges can 
take place (such as homes and workplaces). 
Where charging points are provided at 
commercial developments, the infrastructure 
must be able to support a rapid charging 
service (i.e. a 43kW connection, taking less 
than one hour for a full charge). Car clubs
11.66  Car clubs are a form of shared mobility 
that allows individuals and businesses to 
have access to a locally parked vehicle for a 
short-term rental period. Various models are 
possible including ‘back-to-base’ and more 
flexible one way trip options, and dedicated 
parking bays are sometimes provided. 
11.67  Coinciding with changing population 
demographics, there is a recognition that the 
desire to own a car is reducing, and access 
to a vehicle for occasional use is becoming 
increasingly favourable. To support this 
change, people need to have a choice of 
easy and convenient transport options on a 
daily basis to best meet their circumstances. 
Having car club vehicles located at key 
journey origins and destinations will mean 
people can rely on this method of travel 
being possible when needed, and new 
developments must therefore support the 
growth of car clubs in the borough.
11.68  For residential schemes above ten units, 
developers are required to identify, and 
safeguard, one unallocated parking space 
for every 50 units which would become a 
car club space if needed. Car-free residential 
developments will be expected to provide 
such spaces alongside disabled spaces, or 
contribute to the equivalent volume of on-
street car club spaces within short walking 
distance, if required by the Council. This will 
help to facilitate and support effective travel 
planning measures being taken throughout 
the lifespan of the development.
11.69  Car club spaces should be situated where 
they are easily accessed and are visible 
to occupiers of the development and the 
surrounding neighbourhood. Where parking 
is inaccessible to the public, the Council 
may secure contributions to fund on-street 
car club spaces in the local area or require 
alterations to parking layouts to allow for 
accessible parking. Should a car club network 
become active in the borough, the Council 
will expect contributions to secure car 
clubs at new developments and incentivise 
membership as deemed necessary.149 A Sustainable Travel Town
Policy ST11.5: Electric V ehicles, Car Parking and Car Clubs
 Electric vehicle charging
  For all schemes, 20% of parking spaces should have active charging 
infrastructure for electric vehicles provided, all other spaces should 
have passive provision. Proposals to increase the availability of publicly 
accessible electric vehicle charging infrastructure within the borough 
will also be supported and encouraged.
 Car parking
  Development proposals should only provide car parking where it 
complies with the car parking standards set out in Appendix E. All new 
development proposals within the Core Development Area should be 
car-lite. Where these standards and requirements are met, the parking 
element of the proposal will be supported.
  For residential schemes of ten units or more, 20% of all parking spaces 
should be unallocated.
 Disabled parking
  For residential schemes of ten units or more, disabled persons’  
parking should be provided for at least 5% of units, with a  
minimum of one space; potential disabled persons’ parking  
spaces for a further 5% of units should be identified on a plan to 
facilitate conversion as required; wheelchair accessible or adaptable 
accommodation should provide one unallocated disabled persons’ 
parking space per unit.
  For non-residential schemes, provision for disabled persons’ parking will be determined on a case by case basis through pre-application 
discussions and an accurate estimate of potential demand provided in 
the Transport Statement/Assessment.
  All disabled parking spaces should be located within 50m of the 
entrance to the building that it serves, via level access.
 Car club parking
  The Council will support the development of car club networks within 
the borough, particularly those using low emission vehicles. 
  For residential schemes of ten units or more, developers should 
identify one parking space per 50 units that would be designated for 
car club use only, if supported by a car club operator (minimum of 
one space). Where parking is inaccessible to the public, the Council 
may secure contributions to fund on-street car club spaces. If no car 
club spaces are proposed, this should be supported by evidence that 
there is a no demand from car club operators for a space within the 
development. Developers may also be required to provide a financial 
contribution towards car club memberships for new residents.
 Powered two wheeler parking 
  For all schemes where parking is provided, one powered two wheeler 
parking space should be provided per 30 car parking spaces (minimum 
of two per site). All other schemes should provide sufficient powered 
two wheeler parking for the potential demand for their sites, as 
assessed in the Transport Statement/Assessment.150 A Sustainable Travel Town
Managing the transport 
impacts of development
Transport Statements and Transport 
Assessments
11.70  Transport Statements and Transport 
Assessments seek to assess and reduce 
the transport impact of a development, 
and allow the Council to evaluate the 
scheme’s compliance with relevant policies 
and objectives. They identify the need for 
mitigation and describe interventions to 
reduce traffic generation, highway safety risk 
and environmental impacts, and  
maximise accessibility. 
11.71  A Travel Plan is a long term management 
strategy for the site that seeks to deliver 
sustainable transport objectives. This is 
regularly reviewed and monitored. It should 
identify a package of measures for the 
development to improve accessibility and 
encourage the use of sustainable modes  
of travel.
 
11.72  All Transport Assessments, Statements and 
Travel Plans should follow the Transport User 
Hierarchy, as outlined in the Hertfordshire 
Local Transport Plan.
 
11.73  Planning applications for developments 
that will generate significant impact on the transport network must be supported 
by a Transport Assessment. A Transport 
Statement may be sufficient instead of 
a full Transport Assessment, where the 
development will have relatively low 
transport implications. Applicants should 
determine whether a Transport Assessment 
or Transport Statement is required, based 
on the thresholds provided in Roads in 
Hertfordshire: Highway Design Guide (2011)
11.74  Where negative impacts are identified within 
the Transport Assessment or Statement 
on the safety or operation of the transport 
network, mitigation measures should be 
developed to eliminate or significantly 
reduce these. Appropriate levels of financial 
contribution for mitigation measures will 
be sought from developers towards any 
interventions required to offset transport 
impacts via Section 106 planning obligations 
or planning conditions.
11.75  Should Hertfordshire County Council’s plans 
for a Mass Rapid Transit System progress, 
it could be expected that the total value of 
contributions is agreed via the Transport 
Assessment process based upon interventions 
directly related to the site, but that some or 
all of this maybe ultimately delivered as a 
financial contribution to the development  
of the Mass Rapid Transit System.
151 A Sustainable Travel Town
Travel Plans
11.76  A Travel Plan is required in all cases where 
a Transport Assessment is needed, as well 
as other circumstances where local factors 
make one necessary as determined by the 
Council. For smaller developments, a Travel 
Plan Statement, with a reduced quantity of 
detail, may be sufficient to accompany the 
planning application. Travel Plans should 
be produced with regard to Hertfordshire 
County Council Travel Plan Guidance (2020). 
Where the travel behaviour of the end user 
is unknown at the time of the planning 
application submission, applicants will be 
expected to prepare draft Travel Plans with 
indicative modal shift targets for the planning 
application, before agreeing to update the 
Travel Plan with site-specific data  
upon occupation.
11.77  The Travel Plan should demonstrate how 
site users are being encouraged to travel 
in a sustainable manner, with a package of 
measures to support this. They should set 
targets or objectives, with accompanying 
monitoring, management and enforcement 
approaches.
11.78  Monitoring of the Travel Plan’s progress 
should take place on an annual basis for 
a minimum of five years following full 
occupation for residential developments,  or first occupation for workplace or 
commercial developments. Travel Plans 
for educational establishments should be 
monitored for a minimum of seven years 
following first occupation. A Travel Plan Review 
document, covering results, implementation 
updates and recommended revisions, should 
be shared with Hertfordshire County Council 
within 30 days of data collection, and this will 
be assessed and recorded in Hertfordshire’s 
Travel Plan monitoring system. The Council 
will secure a fee as part of the financial 
obligations of the planning permission to 
cover Travel Plan monitoring.
11.79  Potential Travel Plan measures and objectives 
are provided within Hertfordshire County 
Council’s guidance, measures that would 
support take up of the Council’s sustainable 
transport schemes − bike share and on 
demand bus service − will be encouraged. 
11.80  Alongside discussions with Watford 
Borough Council, applicants are encouraged 
to engage with the Highway Authority 
(Hertfordshire County Council) via the 
transport pre-application advice service 
to discuss and agree the appropriate level 
of assessment and the need for other 
supporting documents to be provided, such 
as Construction Management Plans and 
Delivery and Servicing Plans. 
152 A Sustainable Travel Town
Policy ST11.6: Managing the Transport Impacts 
of Development
  A Transport Statement or Transport Assessment is required to 
support planning applications for all developments that will impact 
upon the transport network, in accordance with Hertfordshire 
County Council thresholds. They should set out:
 a)  How the development has been designed in line with the 
Transport User Hierarchy;
 b)  How the development will facilitate greater use of sustainable 
modes of transport;
 c)  The impact of all development users on the transport network 
during and after construction; and 
 d)  Proposed mitigations for any adverse impacts identified.
  A Travel Plan that encourages sustainable travel behaviour should be 
developed for all developments, meeting the requirements set out 
by Hertfordshire County Council and should be structured according 
to their guidance. This should have a clear set of objectives, 
measures to achieve these and an approach to monitoring and 
enforcement. Where required, a Construction Management Plan  
and/or a Delivery and Servicing Plan must also be provided.
  Significant negative impacts on the transport network as a result 
of new development must be satisfactorily mitigated. Developers 
will be required to contribute to and deliver appropriate transport 
infrastructure or other mitigation measures, with financial 
contributions required through planning conditions. This could 
include an agreement with the Council during the planning process 
instead for a financial contribution to the proposed Mass Rapid Transit 
System equivalent to part of all of that required for local mitigations.
153
A Healthy CommunityChapter 12154
 A Healthy Community
A Healthy Community
12.1  Good masterplanning and the high quality design of buildings, outdoor 
spaces and the relationship between them make an important 
contribution towards health and wellbeing. It can lift the spirits or have a 
negative impact on people both in terms of the physical health and their 
mental wellbeing. Internal living spaces, personal and shared, and access 
to open space are known to help people relax and counter the stress of 
modern urban life. 
12.2  Considering health and wellbeing as an opportunity can help to 
improve the quality of a scheme for both its marketability and for people 
occupying a building. Figure 12.1 shows factors that contribute towards 
health and wellbeing while the Health and Wellbeing Planning Guidance 
(Hertfordshire County Council, 2017) sets out seven themes that should 
be considered and incorporated into the planning of new developments 
to ensure they are promoting health and sustainability. These include; air 
quality, movement and access, open spaces, design, employment and 
education, and healthy food choices. The Coronavirus pandemic has 
further highlighted how important both public open space and quality 
internal living spaces within a home are to people.Figure 12.1: Factors contributing towards health and wellbeing
A Healthy 
Watford
Green 
spaceSocial 
interaction Access 
to work
Active 
populationClean air
A good 
diet
Cycling & 
walking
Health 
facilitiesMental 
health155
12.3  The health of an individual and the wider 
community is often dependent on a variety 
of issues, and the way people go about 
their everyday life. While not limited to the 
following, the Local Plan can help to positively 
influence the following contributors to health 
and wellbeing in Watford:
 •  An active population: taking steps to 
manage increasing child obesity and the 
location of unhealthy food outlets and 
providing better access to open spaces and 
community facilities.
 •  Community severance: physical and 
mental barriers such as busy roads affect the 
perception of safety, and restrict individuals’ 
mobility and social interaction. This can 
be improved through a more community 
orientated public realm that prioritises 
people and provides better access to 
services and facilities through improved 
infrastructure and public transport.
 •  Poverty and deprivation: historical 
economic, environmental and social 
patterns affect the quality of living but can 
be improved through better access to 
education, quality jobs, improving support 
for people with disabilities and providing 
high quality places to live.A Healthy Community
 •  Environmental quality: poor air quality and 
other disturbances such as noise, light, odour 
and vibration are commonly associated 
with vehicle traffic and industrial emissions. 
These can be improved through better use 
of technology, prioritising non-vehicular travel 
such as walking and cycling and also locating 
new development where people will not be 
adversely affected by pollution. Ensuring that 
uses are located where they are compatible 
will benefit physical and mental health and 
reduce conflict.
 •  Mental health: high population densities 
have higher rates of mental health issues 
compared to rural areas, including almost 
40% higher risk of depression (RTPI Planning 
for ‘wellbeings’ 2020). Well designed internal 
and external spaces within new buildings 
and outdoor public spaces provide an 
opportunity to create healthy places to live 
and improve the neighbourhood.
 •  An ageing population: the changing age 
demographic will place increasing demand 
for new homes and facilities. Providing 
adaptable and specialist homes, improving 
access to community facilities and providing 
well designed spaces that enable people 
to interact and continue to feel part of their 
community are integral to sustainable 
development.
156 A Healthy Community
Strategic Policy HC12.1: Healthy Communities
  Creating a high quality environment encourages physical activity 
through easier movement for pedestrians and cyclists, and helps 
improve people’s mental health by creating spaces (urban and green) 
that are welcoming, pleasant and encourage activity and social 
interaction between people of all ages.
 
  New development will be supported where it will contribute towards an 
inclusive and healthier community through delivering these objectives:
 An active population
  Tackling obesity in children by creating opportunities for active play 
in new development. Encouraging adults to become more active 
with a more pedestrian and cycle-friendly urban environment that is 
focused on quality safe spaces for people, not dominated by the car 
or suffering from community severance. Major developments should 
support the provision of accessible open space that offers appropriate 
opportunities for outdoor physical activity to meet local needs. This 
should be supplemented by new and enhanced green spaces to 
support health and wellbeing. Non-householder developments should 
promote active design having regard to relevant guidance, including 
that from Sport England.
 Healthy eating
  Supporting healthy eating through the protection of community 
assets, such as allotments, community orchards and planting of fruit 
trees on open spaces. Opportunities for food growing should be 
maximised within new developments. Pollution
  Improving air quality, noise and light pollution by locating compatible 
uses in the vicinity of each other, reducing the impact of vehicles 
through a modal shift and slowing average vehicle speeds.
 Poverty
  Supporting initiatives to tackle poverty, such as back-to-work schemes, 
training and education and access to jobs using good public transport.
 A healthy older population
  Providing homes and facilities to meet the needs of an ageing 
population such as adaptable and specialist homes and access to 
health facilities.
 Community facilities
  It is important to ensure community facilities are of good quality and 
are located where they can be accessed by walking, cycling and public 
transport. Consideration should also be given to sensory gardens to 
provide a diversity of colour, patterns, smell, touch, taste and sounds 
to benefit physical and mental relaxation or in particular to benefit 
disabled members of the community.157 A Healthy Community
Health Impact Assessments
12.4  The Watford Local Plan seeks to ensure that positive opportunities from 
development are optimised and that any unintended consequences do 
not have a disproportionate impact upon the population, especially those 
more at risk from health inequalities. A Health Impact Assessment (HIA) 
is an essential assessment for any development proposal to demonstrate 
that it will not have negative implications for the physical health and 
mental wellbeing of existing communities in the vicinity, as well as the 
future residents of the new development. Health Impact Assessments are 
a tool through which development can: 
 •  Understand the local community health needs and demonstrate how it 
can support these;
 • Demonstrate how it has considered health inequalities; 
 •  Meet the requirements of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
Regulations (2017) for human health; 
 •  Meets the policy requirements of the Watford Local Plan that major 
development proposals undertake a Health Impact Assessment; 
 •  Demonstrate the opportunities of a proposal and how a development 
has been positively planned.
12.5   Hertfordshire County Council has adopted a Health Impact 
Assessment Position Statement which sets out when a Health Impact 
Assessment should be undertaken and frameworks to use for each 
stage of the Health Impact Assessment process. The Health Impact 
Assessment Position Statement sets out a threshold for different types 
of development, including a threshold for the development of 100 
residential units or more to be subject to a Health Impact Assessment. 
Following a staged methodology from when a scheme is designed, 
through to construction and occupation, a clear brief is produced from 
the screening and scoping stages to determine the type of Health Impact 
Assessment that may be required. The two types of Health Impact 
Assessment are:Policy HC12.2: Health Impact Assessments
  Health Impacts Assessments are required for proposals that may 
have an adverse impact on the immediate area and affect people 
living in the development and close by. More specifically, Health 
Impacts Assessments should be provided as part of a planning 
application submitted for the following types of applications:
 a) Major residential proposals of 100 units or more;
 b)  Major transport infrastructure improvements, including major new 
roads or major new junctions, existing rail networks, rail stations 
and transport interchange areas and the proposed Mass Rapid 
Transit System along the disused former Croxley Rail link; and
 c) Any other locally or nationally significant infrastructure project.
  Where a Health Impact Assessment has identified an issue that may 
have a significant adverse impact, the applicant should set out how 
this has been addressed and mitigated as part of the proposal. • Rapid Assessment for simpler proposals; 
 •  In-depth Health Impact Assessment for more complicated or larger 
proposals.
12.6  Large development proposals can benefit from undertaking an objective 
Health Impact Assessment, which is used to inform and improve the 
design of a scheme and increase the likelihood of gaining planning 
approval, as they summarise many of the issues set out in policies in 
the Local Plan. In-depth Health Impact Assessments will be supported 
on large-scale development proposals, however, all major proposals are 
encouraged to consider undertaking a Rapid Health Impact Assessment, 
as a minimum, to support their planning application.158 A Healthy Community
Cultural and community facilities
12.7  Facilities that provide opportunities for leisure, recreation, sport and 
tourism are vital to our physical and mental health, and can be a key 
element of the overall quality of life. Such facilities need to be close to 
where people live to reduce the need to travel, and be in the heart of the 
community, a social role often filled by uses such as public houses.
12.8  Built cultural or community facilities can include education and health 
facilities, public houses, local places of worship, community centres, public 
halls, leisure and sports centres, or arts buildings. Other types of buildings 
might also function as community facilities where they meet the social, 
leisure, cultural or religious needs of Watford’s diverse communities. Such 
facilities can be listed as ‘assets of community value’ where they are of 
particular significance to the local community and this will form a key 
consideration in determining an application.
12.9  Policy HC12.3 provides protection for existing community facilities that 
play an important role in delivering a place where people want to live. 
Where major new development is proposed, or where facilities are lost 
as part of redevelopment proposals, the Council will seek the provision of 
new or replacement facilities where there is an identified demand. New 
community uses will generally be supported where the use has a clear 
benefit to the local community. Where possible, these are encouraged,  
in or near to, Local Centres, in order to reduce trips.
12.10  Proposals that result in the loss of a community facility must demonstrate 
that the facility is no longer needed and that no other community uses 
could make use of the site or facility. This should include evidence of 
consultation with the local community and community infrastructure 
providers, marketing and an analysis of local provision.Policy HC12.3: Built Cultural and Community 
Facilities
  Proposals for new, extended or improved cultural and community 
uses that address a demonstrated demand from the local 
community will be supported. Such uses should be located within 
sustainable, accessible locations close to the identified need and as 
a complementary use within, or close to, an identified Local Centre. 
Facilities that conflict with existing uses nearby will not  
be permitted.
  The loss of existing community and cultural venues will only be 
permitted where it can be demonstrated that:
 a)  The facility is no longer needed and there is no need for an 
alternative community or cultural use on that site;
 b)  In accordance with Appendix F, the property has been vacant for 
at least 12 months and there is clear marketing evidence to show it 
cannot be reused or redeveloped for community uses; or
 c)  The community or cultural uses can be re-provided of a higher 
quality in an alternative location or manner that is equally 
accessible to the community.
  Development within the curtilage of existing community facilities 
should demonstrate that the continued operation of these facilities 
is not compromised. 159
Site Allocations and 
New DevelopmentChapter 13160 Site Allocations and New Development
Site allocations and new development 
13.1  Demographic pressures, a national housing shortage and unbalanced 
regional development on a national level create significant demand for 
housing in Watford and the South East more generally. The borough’s 
proximity to London (with high housing costs in the city pushing people 
out into the surrounding areas) has resulted in challenging housing 
targets over the plan period.
13.2  There is a need to plan for these homes. The Watford Housing and 
Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA) (2021) involved an 
exhaustive search of the borough for land available for development and 
sought to assess the capacity of the urban area. The administrative area 
of Watford has a capacity for providing 13,328 units over the plan period, 
with current estimates indicating a 784 units per annum requirement.
13.3  These sites are defined on the Policies Map and set out in Figure 13.1. 
The policy is applicable to those sites identified in Tables 13.1 (housing), 
13.2 (Gypsies and Travellers), 13.3 (mixed-use), 13.4 (employment) and 13.5 
(education) which include the following information:
 • site name and map
 • the land use allocated for
 • site size
 • whether the site is part of the Core Development Area 
 • timescales
 • key development requirements and considerations
 • indicative yield (including net additional employment floorspace)Figure 13.1: Allocated sites for delivery
161 Site Allocations and New Development
13.4  The process for calculating the indicative 
yields of the site has been set out in the 
Housing and Economic Land Availability 
Assessment, as has the wider process for site 
selection. It is important to emphasise that the 
indicative yields set out are purely baseline 
scenarios used to estimate the number of 
units to be provided within the plan period, 
based on site size and the sustainability of 
the surrounding area. Ultimately, the scale of 
development should be guided by design 
quality, character and any heritage sensitivities 
which may affect the site, having regard to 
the full suite of policies in the Plan including 
Policies HO3.2: Housing Mix, Density and 
Optimising Use of Land and QD6.5:  
Building Height.
13.5  For each site allocation, the types of uses that 
are considered appropriate have been set out. 
Proposals for uses classified as sui generis 
will be supported where these are consistent 
with the uses set out in Tables 13.1 to 13.5, 
support the wider objectives for the area, 
particularly on sites that are located within a 
Strategic Development Area, and will make a 
positive contribution towards achieving these. 
Where proposals include an ancillary use 
that is not within a Use Class set out in a site 
allocation, applicants should demonstrate how 
this is consistent with the allocation and the 
positive contribution it will make to the area. 
Where there is a potential negative impact, 
applicants should demonstrate how this will 
be appropriately mitigated.
13.6  In addition to meeting the requirements set 
out in a site allocation, proposals will need to 
be prepared in accordance with policies in the 
Local Plan. For sites located within a Strategic 
Development Area, they will need to comply 
with policies set out in Chapter 2  
‘Core Development Area’.
13.7  The development requirements and 
considerations detailed in Tables 13.1, 
13.2, 13.3, 13.4 and 13.5 are not exhaustive. 
Accompanying the development 
considerations for each site allocation is 
an outline map of the site. This information 
reflects the spatial extent of the allocation as 
defined on the Policies Map. They consist of 
a mix of requirements for on site provision 
and considerations to aid scheme design by 
identifying key constraints and are bespoke 
to specific sites. All allocated sites have a 
presumption in favour of development in 
principle. However, all proposals need to 
comply with the full suite of policies in the 
Local Plan. Absence of reference to a study 
or mitigation measure does not mean that it 
would not be required if a planning application 
was submitted.162
Strategic Policy SA13.1: Allocated sites for delivery
  The sites listed in Tables 13.1 ‘Allocated sites for housing development’, 13.2 ‘Allocated site 
for Gypsies and Travellers’, 13.3 ‘Allocated sites for mixed-use development’, 13.4 ‘Allocated 
sites for employment development’ and 13.5 ‘Allocated sites for education development’ are 
defined on the Policies Map.
 
  Appropriate types of development or land uses are identified for each site allocation. Where 
mixed-use development is proposed, this may refer to specific identified uses and also consist 
of one or more of the uses set out in Table 13.3. Other ancillary uses and sui generis will be 
acceptable where they are compatible and positively contribute towards the objectives of the 
area, particularly where a site is located within a designated Strategic Development Area.
  Planning Permission will be granted for proposals that:
 a)  Accord with the policies in the Local Plan;
 b)  Have regard to any Supplementary Planning Document, masterplan or development brief 
that affects the site;
 c)  Deliver the uses identified and address the key development considerations for each  
site; and 
 d)  Provide appropriate mitigation measures for issues identified where the development 
considerations set out the need for an assessment.Site Allocations and New Development
163 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is allocated for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Retain access to the garages not allocated in the Plan;
b)  Have regard to the Waterdale Recycling Centre and Waste Transfer, which is located approximately 850m from this 
site. Its operations should be taken into account;
c)  Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
d)  Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any adverse impacts on parking in the area.
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Have regard to the waste management facility currently included in the allocation. The County Council, as the Waste 
Planning Authority, should be consulted on any applications which come forward on this site and the adopted Waste 
Local Plan Safeguarding Policy must be taken into account in the consideration of any applications;
b)  Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
c) Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the site;
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
e) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 1-5 years
Timescale: 6-15 yearsIndicative yield = 5 units
Indicative yield = 21 unitsSize (ha): 0.1
Size (ha): 0.35Site: HS01 Land and garages at Lych Gate
Site: HS02 Land and buildings at 275 Sheepcot Lane
Table 13.1: Allocated sites for housing development164 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; 
b)  Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed building, Garston Bus Garage, located directly opposite the 
site; and
c) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal; and
b) Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the site.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 6-15 years
Timescale: 6-15 yearsIndicative yield = 5 units
Indicative yield = 9 unitsSize (ha): 0.08
Size (ha): 0.17Site: HS03 Land and garages adjacent to 1 Lavinia Avenue
Site: HS04 Land and buildings at 5 Sheepcot Drive
165 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Redevelopment of the site should be in line with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built Cultural and Community Facilities’.Development proposals should:a) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment; and
b)
 Ensur
e that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the west
of the site.
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:a)
 D
emonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
b)
 Ensur
e that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings and open space
adjacent to the south of the site;
c)
 A pr
oportionate contribution for compensatory improvements to the environmental quality and accessibility of the
remaining parts of Watford’s Green Belt which include areas of existing open space and green infrastructure via a
Section 106 agreement; and
d) B
e accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide the appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road network.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 1-5 years
Timescale: 1-5 yearsIndicative yield = 9 units
Indicative yield = 93 unitsSize (ha): 0.15
Size (ha): 1.61Site: HS05 Land at the Badger Public House
Site: HS06 Land at Russell Lane
166 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the  
site; and
c) Be informed by a Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to surface water flood risk.
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Be accompanied by a parking survey to ensure that an appropriate level of car parking for the local shopping parade 
is retained;
b)  Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed buildings, 91-111 Longspring, located directly opposite  
the site;
c)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide the appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network; and
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 1-5 years
Timescale: 6-15 yearsIndicative yield = 98 units
Indicative yield = 17 unitsSize (ha): 1.3
Size (ha): 0.27Site: HS07 Land at former Mothercare site
Site: HS08 Land at the Longspring car park
167 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
b) Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the site; 
c)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk;
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
e) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 9 units Size (ha): 0.12Site: HS09 Land and buildings at 420-420a St Albans Road
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment;
b)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk; and
c) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.06Site: HS10 Land at Balmoral Road
168 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings and shopping parade 
adjacent to the site; and
c) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 7 units Size (ha): 0.09Site: HS11 Land to the rear of 53 Langley Way
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Avoid significant harm to the setting of the Estcourt Conservation Area;
b) Seek to enhance the setting and safety of the public footpath to the north west of the site;
c) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; 
d)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
directly adjacent to the site;
e) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any adverse impacts on parking in the area; and
f) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.05Site: HS12 Land and garages between 139 and 149 Queens Road
169 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Avoid significant harm to the setting of Cassiobury Registered Park, located north of the site; and
b) Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed buildings located in the vicinity of the site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 9 units Size (ha): 0.1Site: HS13 Corner of Park Avenue and Rickmansworth Road
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Future development proposals for HS14 will take account of the findings and recommendations of the Council’s 
Heritage Impact Assessment;
b)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
c)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; and
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 48 units Size (ha): 0.22Site: HS14 Land at 14-20 Upton Road
170 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
c)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the south 
of the site;
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
e)  Future development proposals for HS15 will take account of the findings and recommendations of the Council’s 
Heritage Impact Assessment.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 17 units Size (ha): 0.08Site: HS15 Land at 80 Cassio Road
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed buildings, 195-199 Rickmansworth Road located directly 
opposite the site;
b) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site via Queen Mary’s Avenue;
c)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the north 
and east of the site; and
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 12 units Size (ha): 0.16Site: HS16 Land and buildings at 176-186 Rickmansworth Road
171 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally and nationally listed buildings located in the vicinity of the site. 
A Heritage Impact Assessment may be required;
b)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; and
c) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.05Site: HS17 120-122 Exchange Road
172 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Be designed to ensure safe pedestrian and cyclist access to and from the site;
b)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
c)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
d)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site;
e) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
f) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.05Site: HS18 Car park at Vicarage Road / Exchange Road
173 Site Allocations and New Development
Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 18 units Size (ha): 0.1Site: HS19 Crown Passage car park
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b) Avoid significant harm to the High Street and King Street conservation area;
c)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the west of the site;
d)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site;
e)  Incorporate the trees to the south of the site into the design of the scheme to provide a buffer to the adjacent road network;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated or non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application; and 
h) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area.174 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3. 
An improved replacement skate park has been completed at Oxhey Park North. 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Retain the current access to the site from Lower Derby Road;
c)  Future development at HS20 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application; and
e)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network and railway line adjacent to the site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 59 units Size (ha): 0.27Site: HS20 Land at Lower Derby Road
175 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b)  Seek to engage with the landowners of sites MU16, located adjacent to the site, to maximise the benefits of development;
c)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the north of the site;
d) Retain significant trees on site wherever possible, including those with a Tree Protection Order;
e)  Future development at HS21 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design; and
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 414 units Size (ha): 1.89Site: HS21 Land at Waterfields Retail Park
176 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b)  Future development at HS22 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
c)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
e)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the west of the site;
f) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
g)  Consider how the scheme contributes to the pedestrian and cyclist experience in the area and retain the footpaths adjacent;
h)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood Zone 
2 and 3a, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
i)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided; and
j) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 110 units Size (ha): 0.5Site: HS22 Land and buildings at 252-272 Lower High Street
177 Site Allocations and New Development
Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 31 units Size (ha): 0.14Site: HS23 Land and buildings at 247 Lower High Street
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Seek to engage with landowners of sites MU16, located adjacent to the site, to maximise the benefits of development;
c)  Future development at HS23 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
d)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
e)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
f)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood Zone 
2 and 3a, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
g) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
h) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.178 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the site; and
c) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any adverse impacts on parking in the area.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.05Site: HS24 Land and garages between 41 and 61 Brightwell Road
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
b) Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the site;
c) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area; and
d) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 11 units Size (ha): 0.12Site: HS25 Land and garages to the rear of 15-17 Liverpool Road
179 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the east of 
the site;
b) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
c)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk;
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
e)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
directly adjacent to the site; and
f) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 8 units Size (ha): 0.08Site: HS26 Land and garages to the rear of 2-24 Elfrida Road
180 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a)  Enhance the green corridor and high quality cycle and walking route, which provides a key link between the Ebury 
Way and Cassiobury Park; 
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the east of 
the site; and
c) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 240 units Size (ha): 3.2Site: HS27 Land at Croxley View
181 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3. 
Re-provision of the depot and waste transfer station is required.
Development proposals should:
a) Enhance the setting of the River Colne and be designed to minimise impact on wildlife habitats; 
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the west of the site;
c)  Future development at HS28 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
d)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate design;
e)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessments for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
f)  New development proposals for the site should retain the locally listed buildings on the site. If this cannot be achieved 
the loss of these assets must be strongly justified and the replacement scheme must be of extremely high quality;
g)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
h) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
i) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 330 units Size (ha): 1.5Site: HS28 Wiggenhall Depot
182 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed building, Bushey Baptist Church, adjacent to the site;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the north of 
the site; and
c) Take account of the Pinner Road Air Quality Management Area, located to the south of the site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.05Site: HS29 41 Aldenham Road
183 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3. 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
c) Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally and nationally listed buildings located in the vicinity of the site;
d)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk;
e) Take account of the Pinner Road Air Quality Management Area, located to the east of the site;
f) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
g)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
adjacent to the site; and
h) Be accompanied by a parking survey to ensure that an appropriate level of car parking for Bushey station is retained.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 9 units Size (ha): 0.04Site: HS30 Chalk Hill car park
184 Site Allocations and New Development
Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Indicative yield = 68 units Size (ha): 0.31Site: HS31 Land at Bushey Station
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Ensure the scheme is designed to provide high quality connections to Bushey Station for pedestrians and cyclists;
c) Take account of the Pinner Road Air Quality Management Area, located to the north east of the site;
d)  Future development at HS31 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
e)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
f)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessments for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
g)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
adjacent to the site; and
h) Be accompanied by a parking survey to ensure that an appropriate level of car parking for Bushey station is retained.185 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for residential development, Use Class C3.
Development proposals should:
a) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
b)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
c) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment; and
d) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5 units Size (ha): 0.1Site: HS32 Riverside Road and garages
186 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for the provision of Gypsy and Traveller pitches.
Development proposals should:
a) Have regard to criteria a-f of Policy H03.8 ‘Gypsies and Travellers’;
b)  Ensure that the plots are protected for Gypsy and Traveller use exclusively unless it can be demonstrated that they 
are no longer required in accordance with Policy H03.8;
c) Retain and enhance the walking and cycle route immediately adjacent to the eastern boundary of the site;
d) Provide quality landscaping along the frontage with Tolpits Lane and the path along the eastern boundary of the site;
e) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Assessment; and
f) Incorporate compensatory measures for the loss of Green Belt into the scheme.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.31Site: GT01 Land at Tolpits Lane, south of Epsom Road
Table 13.2: Allocated site for Gypsies and Travellers
Indicative yield = 2 Gypsy and 
Traveller Pitches187 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including one or more of the uses defined within the 
following Use Classes: C3 residential and F2(b) meeting places for community uses. Redevelopment of the site should be 
in line with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built Cultural and Community Facilities’.
Development proposals should:
a) Take account of the significant ground level change to the south of the site; and
b) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined 
within the following Use Classes: C3 residential, E(e) medical facilities and F2(b) meeting places for community use. 
Redevelopment of the site should be in line with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built Cultural and Community Facilities’.
Development proposals should:
a) Avoid significant adverse impacts on the locally listed building, North Watford Library, located opposite the site;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings located to the north 
west of the site; 
c) Demonstrate that safe access has been provided to the site;
d)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; and
e) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 6-15 years
Timescale: 1-5 yearsIndicative yield = 12 units
Indicative yield = 13 unitsSize (ha): 0.2
Size (ha): 0.21Site: MU01 Land at Woodside Community Centre
Site: MU02 Land at 501 St Albans Road
Table 13.3: Allocated sites for mixed-use development188 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined 
within the following Use Classes: C3 residential and F2(b) meeting places for community use. Redevelopment of the site 
should be in line with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built Cultural and Community Facilities’.
Development proposals should:
a)  Seek to work collaboratively with the landowner of site MU23, which is located adjacent to the east, to maximise the 
benefits of development;
b)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; and
c) Avoid significant adverse impacts on the locally listed building, North Watford Library, located adjacent to the site.
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined 
within the following Use Classes: C3 residential and F2(b) meeting places for community use. Redevelopment of the site 
should be in line with Policy HC12.3 ‘Built Cultural and Community Facilities’.
Development proposals should:
a) Avoid significant adverse impacts on the locally listed building, North Watford Library, located opposite the site; and
b)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site.Location: Outside of CDA
Location: Outside of CDATimescale: 1-5 years
Timescale: 1-5 yearsIndicative yield = 7 units
Indicative yield = 18 unitsSize (ha): 0.1
Size (ha): 0.3Site: MU03 Land at the Lemarie Centre
Site: MU04 453 St Albans Road
189 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development for C3 residential, 
E(g)(i) office floorspace and a F1(a) primary school. 
In addition, one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following  
Use Classes would be supported to provide active ground floor frontages: C2 residential institutions, E(a), E(b), E(c), E(d), 
E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace, F1(a) education facilities and F2(b) meeting places for community uses.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area;
b) Ensure that retail re-provision on site will not exceed the existing retail floorspace;
c) Provide a new primary school;
d)  Be informed by a Traffic Impact Assessment, which should consider the impact of the proposed scheme on the 
strategic road network;
e)  Seek to work collaboratively with the landowner of site MU06, which is located adjacent to the east of the site, to 
maximise the benefits of development and to ensure that the development proposals consider the cumulative 
impacts of development, including heritage;
f)  Future development at MU05 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
g)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
h)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
i)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided; 
j)  Facilitate appropriately and proportionately towards the timely provision of required infrastructure identified in 
Watford’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan, including measures to improve access to the station for cyclists, pedestrians 
and vulnerable users; and
k)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
adjacent to the site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 1,214 C3 
Residential units
295sqm of E(g)(i) office floorspace
2,050sqm of E(a), E(c) commercial 
floorspace
2,910sqm of F1(a) education 
floorspaceSize (ha): 2.47Site: MU05 Land and buildings at 94-98 St Albans Road
190 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, C3 residential, E(g)(i)  
office floorspace, a replacement E(f) childcare facility and a F1(a) primary school.
Development proposals should:
a)  Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area, including the necessary 
improvements to the station and its operation;
b)  Facilitate the timely delivery of required infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, including 
measures to improve bus priority around the station;
c) Provide a new 3 form entry primary school;
d) Provide a replacement childcare facility; 
e)  Seek to work collaboratively with the landowners of sites MU05 and MU07 located adjacent to the site, MU23 
located north east of the site and the operator of the concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot, located 
almost entirely within the site, to maximise the benefits of development and to ensure that proposals consider the 
cumulative impacts of development, including heritage; 
f)  Whilst seeking to maximise the benefits of development, consideration will need to be given to the potential  
re-routing of vehicle access to the safeguarded mineral site via Colonial Way. Vehicle access will be required to be 
maintained at all times from Orphanage Road unless an alternative route is provided;
g)  Development will not compromise Clive Way as a safe, high quality active travel route to the Watford Junction 
Sustainable Transport Hub;
h)  In collaboration with the landowners of sites MU05, MU07 and MU23, support the delivery of a new pedestrian and 
cycle bridge that crosses the West Coast Main Line and Abbey Line and provides access to the Eastern Mobility Hub 
and Watford Junction Sustainable Transport Hub; 
i)  Support the delivery of a second crossing point from Penn Road across the railway lines in the latter part of the plan 
period, when comprehensive mixed-use redevelopment is proposed;
j)  Be informed by a Traffic Impact Assessment, which should consider the impact of the proposed scheme on the 
strategic road network;Location: CDA Timescale: 1-15 years Indicative yield = 1,232 units C3 
residential
20,998sqm of E(g)(i) office 
floorspaceSize (ha): 7.46’Site: MU06 Land at Watford Junction
Continued on next page >191 Site Allocations and New Development
k)  Have regard to the safeguarded concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot located largely within the north 
east boundary of the allocation site and the 250m Mineral Infrastructure Consultation Area which surrounds the 
safeguarded facility. The County Council, as the Minerals Planning Authority, should be consulted on any applications 
which come forward on this site and the adopted Minerals Local Plan Safeguarding Policy must be taken into account 
in the consideration of any applications; 
l)    Ensure the scheme has been planned, laid out and designed to minimise potential adverse impacts associated with 
the railway lines and the concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot and mitigation provided in line with the 
‘agent of change’ principle;
m)  Future development at MU06 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
n)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
o)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
p)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided;
q) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
r)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk; and
s)  For all noise sensitive development, be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for 
noise associated with the railway line, concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot located largely within the 
site. Early engagement with the site operator will be required to ensure that development does not prejudice the 
existing or future use of the safeguarded site and associated operations due to the introduction of noise  
sensitive receptors.Site: MU06 Land at Watford Junction
Continued from previous page >192 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and 
considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development including one or more of the uses, or a mix thereof, defined 
within the following Use Classes: B2 general industrial, B8 storage and distribution, E(g)(ii) research and development 
and E(g)(iii) industrial processes.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported: 
E(e) health facilities, E(f) crèche/nursery, E(g)(ii) research and development, E(g)(iii) industrial processes, C2 residential 
institutions, C3 residential, and C4 houses in multiple occupation.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area;
b) Result in no net loss of employment floorspace on site unless the office use is replaced with industrial uses;
c)   Seek to work collaboratively with the landowners of sites MU06, MU23 and the operator of the concrete batching 
plant and rail aggregates depot located adjacent to the site, to maximise the benefits of development and to ensure 
that the development proposals consider the cumulative impacts of development, including heritage; 
d)   Whilst seeking to maximise the benefits of development, consideration will need to be given to the potential  
re-routing of vehicle access to the safeguarded concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot via Colonial Way. 
Vehicle access will be required to be maintained at all times from Orphanage Road unless an alternative route  
is provided;  
e)   Development will not compromise Clive Way as a safe, high quality active travel route to the Watford Junction 
Sustainable Travel Hub;
f)  In collaboration with the landowners of sites MU05, MU06 and MU23 support the delivery of a new pedestrian and 
cycle bridge that crosses the West Coast Mainline and Abbey Line and provides a route to the Eastern Mobility Hub 
and Watford Junction Sustainable Transport Hub;Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years
(industrial development) 
6-15 years (long-term transitional 
mixed-use development)Indicative yield = 6,600sqm 
of B2, B8 industrial floorspace Size (ha): 1.32Site: MU07 Land and buildings at Astral House
Continued on next page >193 Site Allocations and New Development
g)   Future development at MU07 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
h)   Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
i)   Support the delivery of a second crossing point from Penn Road across the railway lines in the latter part of the plan 
period when comprehensive mixed-use redevelopment is proposed;
j) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
k)   Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required if new residential dwellings come forward; 
l)  Have regard to the safeguarded concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot adjacent to the western boundary 
of the allocation site and the 250m Mineral Infrastructure Consultation Area which surrounds the safeguarded 
facility. The County Council, as the Minerals Planning Authority, should be consulted on any applications which come 
forward on this site and the adopted Minerals Local Plan Safeguarding Policy must be taken into account in the 
consideration of any applications;
m)  Ensure the scheme has been planned, laid out and designed to minimise the potential adverse impacts associated 
with the railway lines and the concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot and mitigation provided in line with 
the ‘agent of change’ principle; and
n)  For all noise sensitive development, be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for 
noise associated with the railway line, concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot located adjacent to the site. 
Early engagement with the site operator will be required to ensure that development does not prejudice the existing 
or future use of the safeguarded site and associated operations due to the introduction of noise sensitive receptors.Site: MU07 Land and buildings at Astral House
Continued from previous page >194
 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, of C3 residential and/or E(g)(i) office floorspace.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area;
b) Support the objectives of the Clarendon Road Primary Office Location;
c)  Facilitate improvements to cycle provision on St Albans Road, particularly the narrowing of the cycle lane 
approaching the junction from the west;
d)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site;
e)  Future development at MU08 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design; and
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.12Site: MU08 22-28 Station Road 
Indicative yield = 21 units C3 
residential
480sqm of E(g)(i) office floorspace195 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, of C3 residential and/or E(g)(i) offices.
Development proposals should:
a)  Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area and the Clarendon Road Primary 
Office Location;
b)  Building heights along the Westland Road elevation should have regard to the building heights of existing properties 
on Westland Road opposite the site;
c)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings south and to the west 
of the site and to create a strong relationship with the street edge;
d)  Future development at MU09 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
e)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
f) Retain the trees on the Clarendon Road frontage;
g)  Avoid significant adverse impacts on the locally and nationally listed buildings located in the immediate vicinity of the 
site, including the locally listed building within the site boundary. If it is demonstrated to be unfeasible to retain the 
listed building on site, the design of the replacement scheme should be of an extremely high quality to justify the loss 
of the building; 
h)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk; and
i)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.68Site: MU09 Land at Watford Police Station
Indicative yield = 120 units C3 
residential
2,770sqm of E(g)(i) office floorspace196 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential. One or more, or a mix thereof, of the 
uses defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(b), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting 
places for community use would be supported to provide active ground floor frontages.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings and shopping parade 
surrounding the site;
c) Provide a quality, active ground floor frontage and landscaping along The Parade and Albert Street South;
d)  Seek to engage with the landowners of site MU13, located adjacent to the east, to maximise the benefits of 
development;
e)  Future development at MU10 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 90 units C3 
residential Size (ha): 0.51Site: MU10 Land to the rear of 125-127 The Parade
197 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development including C3 residential. One or more, or a mix thereof, of the 
uses defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(b), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting 
places for community use would be supported to provide active ground floor frontages.
Development proposals should:
a)  Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b)  Future development at MU11 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
c)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and  
non-designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
e) Provide a quality, active ground floor frontage and landscaping along The Parade;
f) Seek to engage with landowners of site MU12 located adjacent to the west to maximise the benefits of development;
g)  Comprehensive redevelopment should explore options for the provision of a high quality market which will capitalise 
on the increased residential occupancy of the Town Centre and an improved inter-relationship with Clarendon Road;
h) Provide high quality pedestrian connections between Beechen Grove and the Parade; and
i) Enhance the public realm along Beechen Grove.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.41Site: MU11 23-37 The Parade
Indicative yield = 72 units C3 
residential198 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential and one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses 
defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting places for 
community use to provide active ground floor frontages.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b) Seek to engage with landowners of site MU11 located adjacent to the west to maximise the benefits of development;
c)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application; and
e)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the railway line 
adjacent to the site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.08Site: MU12 19-21 Clarendon Road
Indicative yield = 14 units C3 
residential 199 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential and one or more, or a mix , of the uses 
defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting places for 
community use to provide active ground floor frontages.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b) Improve the setting and public realm along Beechen Grove and Albert Street South, as well as Gaumont Approach;
c) Seek to engage with landowners of site MU10 located adjacent to the west to maximise the benefits of development;
d) Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings to the north of the site;
e)  Future development at MU13 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
h) Provide no additional retail floorspace above the existing on site provision;
i)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; 
j) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
k)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 1.0Site: MU13 Land at Sainsbury’s, Town Centre
Indicative yield = 220 units C3 
residential200 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is suitable for residential led, mixed-use development including C3 residential and one or more of the uses 
defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting places for 
community use are possible on the ground floor to maintain an active frontage.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Town Centre Strategic Development Area;
b)  Future development at MU14 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
c)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application. However, due to the 
significance of the heritage assets which form the Holy Rood complex (Grade I church and Grade II ancillary 
buildings) the building height, scale and massing of any new proposals on the Exchange Road frontage should have 
regard to the heights, scale and massing of the Holy Rood Complex;
e)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; 
f) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
g) Be accompanied by a parking survey to avoid any significant adverse impacts on parking in the area.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.23Site: MU14 Land at the car park, Wellstones
Indicative yield = 40 units C3 
residential201
Development requirements and considerations
The site is suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential and F2(b) meeting places for community uses.
 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Be designed to maximise the outlook across Watford Field Recreation Ground;
c)  Future development at MU15 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
d)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design; and
e)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.11Site: MU15 18 Watford Field Road
Site Allocations and New Development
Indicative yield = 19 units C3 
residential202 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential, and a F1(a) primary school.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported to 
provide active ground floor frontages: C2 residential institutions, E(a), E(b), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace, 
F1(a) education, F2(b) meeting places for community use and F2(c) outdoor sport and recreation.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area, including the linear park;
b)  Enhance connectivity to the River Colne. This includes providing open space and a green route along the river as part 
of the linear park proposal. Re-naturalisation of the culverted River Colne will also be supported;
c)  Be informed by a Traffic Impact Assessment, which should consider the impact of the proposed scheme on the 
strategic road network;
d)  Seek to engage with landowners of site HS21, located adjacent to the west, and HS23, located adjacent to the south, 
to maximise the benefits of development;
e) Provide no additional retail floorspace above the existing on site provision;
f)  Enhance the strategic view from the railway line to the town centre. Proposals should be supported with images that 
demonstrate how a proposal will contribute towards the Watford skyline;
g)  Have building heights along the River Colne that reflect the sensitivity of the location and minimise disturbance on 
the waterway;
h)  Future development at MU16 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
i)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent 
fieldwork assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate  
masterplan design;Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 7.6Site: MU16 Land at Tesco, Lower High Street
Indicative yield = 1,338 units C3 
residential
Continued on next page >203 Site Allocations and New Development
j)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
k)  New proposals should seek to incorporate the locally listed coal duty marker into the new scheme; proposals which 
seek to relocate the monument will need to justify why this is appropriate and that the new location provides an 
enhanced setting and interpretation of the monument;
l) Adequately address the level changes on site;
m)  Have regard to the high pressure pipeline that traverses the site;
n)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood Zones 
2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
o)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network and railway line adjacent to the site; 
p)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of new dwellings to be provided;
q) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site;
r)  Facilitate the timely delivery of required infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, including a 
revised junction layout, crossing improvements and provision of a cycle path along Lower High Street; and
s) Retain significant trees on site wherever possible, including those with a Tree Protection Order. Site: MU16 Land at Tesco, Lower High Street
Continued from previous page >204 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential. In addition one or more, or a 
mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported to provide active ground floor 
frontages: E(a), E(b), E(c), E(d), E(e), E(f) commercial floorspace and F2(b) meeting places for community use on the 
ground floor.
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area including the linear park;
b)  Enhance connectivity to the River Colne. This includes providing open space and a green route along the river as part 
of the linear park proposal;
c)  Have building heights along the River Colne that reflect the sensitivity of the location and minimise disturbance on 
the waterway;
d) Provide no additional retail floorspace above the existing on site provision;
e)  Future development at MU17 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
h)  Be informed by a Traffic Impact Assessment, which should consider the impact of the proposed scheme on the 
strategic road network;
i)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided;Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 2.65Site: MU17 Land at Colne Valley Retail Park
Indicative yield = 466 units C3 
residential
Continued on next page >205 Site Allocations and New Development
Site: MU17 Land at Colne Valley Retail Park
j)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network and railway line adjacent to the site;
k) Have regard to the high pressure pipeline that traverses the site;
l)   Have regard to the overhead electricity transmission lines that traverse the site;
m)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
n)  Facilitate the timely delivery of required infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, including a 
revised junction layout, crossing improvements and provision of a cycle path along Lower High Street; and
o) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Continued from previous page >206 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential and transport improvements.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported:  
C2 residential institutions, C3 residential, E(f) crèche or nursery. 
Development proposals should:
a)  Demonstrate that an appropriate amount of land has been safeguarded for the future provision of a mass transit 
route and station; 
b) Enable improvements to the contraflow cycle lane to provide a two way cycle lane;
c) Enhance the green infrastructure network by enhancing the link between the Ebury Way and Cassiobury Park;
d)  Avoid any significant adverse impacts on the locally listed monument, the Former Sun Printer’s Clock Tower, located 
adjacent to the site; and
e) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site. Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Size (ha): 0.71Site: MU18 Land to the west of and parallel to Ascot Road
Indicative yield = 43 units C3 
residential207 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development for C3 residential use.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes: E(c)(i) financial services, 
E(c)(ii) professional services and E(c)(iii) other appropriate services in a commercial, business or service locality use 
would be supported, with E class uses suitable on the ground floor.
Development proposals should:
a)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk; and
b) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 0.45Site: MU19 Land east of Ascot Road
Indicative yield = 27 units C3 
residential208 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, for C3 residential, a F1(a) primary school, a new hospital and 
associated car park.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported:  
C1 Hotels, C2 residential institutions, E(e) medical or health facilities, F1(a) education, F2(b) meeting places for 
community use and F2(c) outdoor sport and recreation. 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Complete a review of transport impact and safety as part of a full Transport Assessment;
c)  A clearly legible, continuous pedestrian route, suitable for all users including those with mobility issues, should be 
provided from Vicarage Road to Thomas Sawyer Way along the west side of the existing hospital; 
d) Cycle infrastructure to be provided along Thomas Sawyer Way and Willow Lane;
e)  Pedestrian and cycle connections to the disused former Croxley Rail Line adjacent to the south boundary of the site 
should be provided; 
f) Enhance the public realm through the provision of a new public square;
g) Facilitate the timely delivery of required infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan;
h)  Future development at MU20 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment, recognising the former workhouse within the site boundary is a nationally listed building;
i)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
j)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application. Any taller elements of a 
proposed scheme should be located on the sections of the site farthest away from the heritage assets and buildings 
heights should step down towards the heritage assets to reflect the height of the assets;
k)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
l) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
m)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, 
and make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of new dwellings to be provided, including the 
sewerage pipe traversing the site near the existing hospital. Location: CDA Timescale: 1-15 years Size (ha): 18.1Site: MU20 Land at Riverwell and Watford General Hospital
Indicative yield = 1,383 units C3 
residential209
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential.
In addition one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes: E(a), E(c) commercial 
floorspace and F2(b) meeting places for community use would be supported on the ground floor.
 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Colne Valley Strategic Development Area;
b) Enhance connectivity to the River Colne;
c)  Have building heights along the River Colne that reflect the sensitivity of the location and minimise disturbance on 
the waterway;
d)  Be designed to help facilitate provision of a potential pedestrian/cycle crossing over the River Colne in the future, as 
set out in the South West Hertfordshire Transport and Infrastructure Plan;
e)  Future development at MU21 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
f)  Future development must demonstrate that any negative impacts on the significance of the designated and non-
designated heritage assets, and their setting, identified in the Heritage Impact Assessment, or any subsequent fieldwork 
assessment, have been avoided and if this is not possible, minimised through appropriate masterplan design;
g)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
h) Provide no additional retail floorspace above the existing on site provision;
i)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk;
j)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided; 
k)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network and railway line adjacent to the site;
l) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; and
m) Take account of the Pinner Road Air Quality Management Area, located to the north-west and south-east of the site.Location: CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 0.8Site: MU21 Land at Colne Bridge Retail Park
Site Allocations and New Development
Indicative yield = 141 units C3 
residential210
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for mixed-use development, including C3 residential.
In addition, one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported to 
provide active ground floor frontages: E(a) retail sale of goods other than hot food, E(b) food and drink for consumption 
(mostly) on the premises, E(d) indoor sport, recreation or fitness, F1(a) education and F2(b) meeting places for 
community use.
Development proposals should:
a)  Avoid significant adverse impacts on the locally listed buildings, the North Watford Library and Former Odhams Press 
Hall, located adjacent to the site;
b) Provide no additional retail floorspace above the existing on site provision;
c)  Be informed by a Traffic Impact Assessment, which should consider the impact of the proposed scheme on the 
strategic road network;
d) Be informed by a Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to surface water flood risk; 
e)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, and 
make provision for upgrades where required due to the scale of the new dwellings to be provided; 
f) Retain significant trees on site wherever possible, including those with a Tree Protection Order;
g)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road and 
employment land adjacent to the site; and
h) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 7.03Site: MU22 Land at Asda, Dome Roundabout
Site Allocations and New Development
Indicative yield = 422 units C3 
residential211 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and  
considerations
This site is considered suitable for mixed-use development including one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined 
within the following Use Classes: B2 general industrial, B8 storage and distribution, E(g)(ii) research and development 
and E(g)(iii) industrial processes.
In addition, one or more of the uses defined within the following Use Classes would be supported: E(e) health facilities, 
E(f) crèche/nursery, C2 residential institutions, C3 residential and C4 houses in multiple occupation. 
Development proposals should:
a) Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area;
b)  Seek to work collaboratively with the landowners of sites MU06 and MU07 and the operator of the concrete batching 
plant and rail aggregates facility located west of the site, to maximise the benefits of development and to ensure that 
the development proposals consider the cumulative impacts of development, including heritage;
c)  Have regard to the safeguarded concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot located west of the boundary of 
the allocation site and the 250m Mineral Infrastructure Consultation Area which surrounds the safeguarded facility. 
The County Council, as the Minerals Planning Authority, should be consulted on any applications which come forward 
on this site and the adopted Minerals Local Plan Safeguarding Policy must be taken into account in the consideration 
of any applications;
d)  Whilst seeking to maximise the benefits of development, consideration will be given to the potential re-routing of 
vehicle access to the safeguarded concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot via Colonial Way. Vehicle access 
will be required to be maintained at all times from Orphanage Road unless an alternative route is provided; 
e)  New development will not compromise Clive Way as a safe, high quality active travel route to the Eastern Mobility 
Hub and Watford Junction Sustainable Transport Hub;
f)  In collaboration with the landowners of sites MU05, MU06 and MU07 support the delivery of a new pedestrian and 
cycle bridge that crosses the West Coast Main Line and Abbey Line and provides a route to the Eastern Mobility Hub 
and Watford Junction Sustainable Transport Hub; Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years (short-term 
industrial redevelopment) 
6-15 years (long-term transitional 
mixed-use development)Indicative yield = 8,215sqm of 
industrial floorspaceSize (ha): 1.98Site: MU23 Land at Colonial / Clive Way
Continued on next page >212 Site Allocations and New Development
Site: MU23 Land at Colonial / Clive Way
g)  In the case of residential development, provide mitigation for any adverse impact resulting from the industrial uses 
on site in line with the ‘agent of change’ principle;
h)  Future development at MU23 will take into account the results and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
i)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application;
j) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site; 
k)  Take account of the potential impact on water and wastewater infrastructure in conjunction with Thames Water, 
and make provision for upgrades where required if new dwellings come forward; and
l)  For all noise sensitive development, be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation 
for noise associated with the railway line, concrete batching plant and rail aggregates depot located west of the 
site. Early engagement with the site operator will be required to ensure that development does not prejudice the 
existing or future use of the safeguarded site and associated operation due to the introduction of noise receptors.Continued from previous page >213 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for office-led development including one or more, or a mix thereof, of the uses defined 
within the following Use Classes: E(g)(i) offices and C1 hotels.
Development proposals should:
a)  Support the wider objectives of the Watford Gateway Strategic Development Area and the Clarendon Road Primary 
Office Location;
b)  Contribute towards the sustainability principles of the Plan while acknowledging that BREEAM ‘Excellent’ standards 
are not achievable; 
c)  Future development at EM01 will take into account the findings and recommendations of the Council’s Heritage 
Impact Assessment;
d)  Specific mitigation measures will be identified through the preparation of a further detailed Heritage Impact 
Assessment for the site, to be submitted prior to the determination of any application; and
e)  Ensure that the scheme is designed to minimise impacts on the low level residential dwellings adjacent to the south 
of the site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5,153sqm of office 
and commercial floorspace
6,165sqm of hotel floorspaceSize (ha): 0.24Site: EM01 Cassiobury House, 11-19 Station Road
Table 13.4: Allocated sites for employment development214 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for industrial uses and may include one or more of the uses defined within the following 
Use Classes: B2 general industrial, B8 storage and distribution, E(g)(ii) research and development, E(g)(iii)  
industrial processes.
Development proposals should:
a)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is in Flood 
Zones 2 and 3, and is also subject to groundwater and surface water flood risk; 
b) Ensure that a safe access to the site has been provided; 
c) Be designed to enable access from the disused former Croxley Rail Line to Thomas Sawyer Way; and
d) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 5,800sqm of B2, B8, 
E(g)(ii), E(g)(iii) industrial floorspaceSize (ha): 0.58Site: EM02 Land to the South of Wiggenhall Industrial Estate
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for industrial uses and may include one or more of the uses defined within the following 
Use Classes: B2 general industrial, B8 storage and distribution, E(g)(ii) research and development, E(g)(iii)  
industrial processes.
Development proposals should:
a)  Be informed by a site specific Flood Risk Assessment and Surface Water Drainage Strategy as the site is subject to 
groundwater and surface water flood risk; 
b)  Provide mitigation for any adverse impact resulting from the industrial uses on site in line with the ‘agent of change’ 
principle; and
c) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 6,935sqm of 
industrial floorspaceSize (ha): 1.7Site: EM03 Gateway Zone
215 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
This site is considered suitable for industrial uses and may include one or more of the uses defined within the following 
Use Classes: B2 general industrial, B8 storage and distribution, E(g)(ii) research and development, E(g)(iii)  
industrial processes.
Development proposals should:
a)  Provide mitigation for any adverse impact resulting from the industrial uses on site in line with the ‘agent of change’ 
principle; and
b) Take account of the potential risk of contamination on site.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 1-5 years Indicative yield = 900sqm of 
industrial floorspaceSize (ha): 0.09Site: EM04 Land Between 14-18 Greenhill Crescent
216 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for the development of an education facility.
Development proposals should:
a)  Provide appropriate mitigation for the detached playing field for Park Gate Junior School in line with the Playing Pitch 
Strategy (2020);
b)  Have regard to the Colne Way Waste Transfer Station, which is located directly west of the site. Mitigation for any 
negative impacts arising from the site’s proximity to the waste site should be provided in line with the ‘agent of 
change’ principle; 
c)  Complete a review of transport impact and safety as part of a full Transport Assessment which will include mitigation 
for pupils crossing the A41. Pedestrian and cycle access should be taken from The Meadows to the north;
d) Explore the potential for a pedestrian and cycle link across Meriden Park between the site and Garsmouth Way;
e)  Be accompanied by a Noise Assessment and provide appropriate mitigation for noise associated with the road 
network adjacent to the site; and
f) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Ecological Appraisal.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 1.74Site: ED01 Former Meriden School Site
Table 13.5: Allocated sites for education development11
11 Note that mixed use sites MU05, MU06, MU16 and MU21 are also required to provide a primary school on site as part of the wider scheme.217 Site Allocations and New Development
Development requirements and considerations
The site is considered suitable for the development of an education facility.
Development proposals should:
a) Establish clear connections and desire lines with the residential areas to the north;
b)  Complete a review of transport impact and safety as part of a full Transport Assessment. This will include 
consideration of the provision of a ‘parent drop off’ within the site to prevent parking, and associated issues on the 
surrounding residential roads;
c)  Pedestrian and cycle access should be taken from Leggatts Way with potential for an additional access via  
Broad Road;
d)  Demonstrate suitable off site playing field arrangements with consideration to safeguarding and land ownership and 
in consultation with Hertfordshire County Council;
e)  Ensure appropriate separation or buffers between development and the Harebreaks Wood Local Nature Reserve 
directly south of the site; and
f) Be accompanied by a Preliminary Roost Assessment.Location: Outside of CDA Timescale: 6-15 years Size (ha): 1.07Site: ED02 Former Bill Everett Centre
218
Appendices219 Appendix A: Monitoring Framework
Appendix A: Monitoring Framework
Policy CDA2.1: Watford Gateway 
Strategic Development Area; 
Policy CDA2.2: Town Centre 
Strategic Development Area; Policy 
CDA2.3: Colne Valley Strategic 
Development AreaPolicy SS1.1: Spatial Strategy
Net additional homes 
completed within each 
Strategic Development AreaPercentage of completions on 
previously developed land
Number of residential completions 
within the Core Development Area/
Rest Of Town
Increase the 
number of homes90% employment, 
80% residential
Not applicable
Not applicablePlanning 
applicationsPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applications
Planning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsIncrease the amount 
of office/industrial 
floor spaceNet additional office and industrial 
floor space within each Strategic 
Development AreaChapter 1: 
A Spatial Strategy 
for Watford
Chapter 2: 
Core Development 
AreaMonitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy HO3.2: Housing Mix, Density 
and Optimising Use of LandPolicy HO3.1: Housing Provision Number of dwellings granted 
planning permission and net 
residential completions
Number of residential permissions 
that have lapsed without 
implementation
Density of new residential 
developments (dph)
Percentage of family-sized 
units within new residential 
developments13,328 net additional 
dwellings between 2021 
and 2038, equivalent to 
784 homes per year
At least 95+ dph within 
the Core Development 
Area and 45+ dph 
elsewhere in the town
At least 20% of all 
new homes to be 
family-sized (three 
bedrooms or more)Planning 
applications and 
site visits
Planning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsChapter 3:  
Homes for 
a Growing 
Community
Policy HO3.3: Affordable Housing Percentage of new residential units 
that are classified as affordable 
housingAt least 35% of all 
residential units on 
sites of 10 or more 
dwellings to be 
affordablePlanning 
applications220
Policy HO3.4: Build to Rent Number of discounted market rent 
units on build to rent developments35% of all residential 
units on build to rent 
schemes (on sites of 10 
or more dwellings) to 
be affordable Planning 
applications
Policy HO3.5: Specialist Care and 
Supported LivingNumber of specialist care and 
supported living bed spaces 
completedNo net loss of bed 
spaces Planning 
applications
Policy HO3.6: Student and  
Co-Living HousingNumber of student bed spaces 
completedNot applicable Planning 
applications
Policy HO3.8: Gypsies and 
TravellersNumber of pitches granted 
planning permissionFulfil the identified need 
for Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches in the borough Planning 
applicationsPolicy HO3.7: Self-Build and Custom 
HousebuildingNumber of self-build plots provided 
and completedProvide a self build plot 
for every 10 dwellings 
on sites of 50 or more 
non-flatted homesPlanning 
applications
Policy HO3.9: Residential 
ConversionsNumber of planning permissions 
granted for Houses in Multiple 
Occupation where existing 
residential conversions exceed 10%
Number of conversions of 
residential units into smaller unitsNot applicable
Not applicablePlanning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsMonitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Chapter 3: 
Homes for 
a Growing 
CommunityAppendix A: Monitoring Framework221
Policy VT5.1: Supporting Vibrant 
Retail Centres
Policy VT5.2 Watford Town Centre
Policy VT5.3 Local CentresPolicy EM4.2: Designated  
Industrial Areas
Policy EM4.3: Office Development
Policy EM4.4 Economic 
Development Outside Designated 
Employment Locations
Maintain percentage of ground 
floor units, within a defined Town, 
District or Local Centre which are in 
a Main Town Centre Use
No net loss in active ground floor 
uses within the defined Town, 
Centre boundary
No net loss in active ground 
floor uses within the defined 
Town, District and Local Centre 
boundariesNumber of dwellings designed to 
be dementia friendly
E(g)(i) class office floorspaceLoss of B2, B8 or E(g)(ii) class 
floorspace
Loss of E(g)(i), B2 and B8 class 
floorspace (outside designated areas)
Not applicable
No net loss
No net loss2% of new homes on 
developments of 50 
dwellings or more to 
be dementia friendly
No net lossNo net loss
No net loss
Planning 
applications
Land use surveys
Land use surveys
Land use surveysPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsChapter 4:  
A Strong Economy
Chapter 5:  
A Vibrant TownMonitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy HO3.10: Building Standards 
for New HomesNumber of dwellings delivered 
that comply with M4(2) and M4(3) 
standardsAll new homes to 
comply with M4(2) 
standard, and on 
developments of 10 
homes or more, 4% 
to comply with M4(3) 
standard Planning 
applicationsChapter 3: 
Homes for 
a Growing 
CommunityAppendix A: Monitoring Framework222
Policy CC8.2 Sustainable 
Construction Standards for  
Non-Residential Development
Policy CC8.3 Sustainable 
Construction and Resource 
ManagementPolicy CC8.1 Mitigating Climate 
Change and Reducing Carbon 
Emissions
Number of new residential 
developments which meet carbon 
emission reduction standardsPercentage of carbon reduction 
since 2018
Percentage of major non-residential 
developments which meet 
BREEAM standards
19% energy efficiency 
above Part L of the 
Building Regulations 
(2013) or any updated 
government standard, 
whichever results in a 
higher target.Reduction in Carbon 
emissions above 2018 
baseline
100% of major 
non-residential 
developments 
meeting BREEAM 
excellent standard
Planning 
applications and 
post completion 
certificatesUK local authority 
and regional carbon 
dioxide emissions 
national statistics
Planning 
applicationsChapter 8:  
A Climate 
EmergencyPolicy HE7.2 Designated Heritage 
Assets; Heritage and The Historic 
Environment, Policy HE7.3 Non-
Designated Heritage Assets; Policy 
HE7.4 ArchaeologyNumber of buildings granted and 
refused planning permission that 
exceed the base building height
Number of applications granted 
planning permission contrary to 
advice from Historic EnglandNumber of buildings/structures on 
the Heritage at Risk Register
Number of conservation areas 
that are considered to be in the “at 
risk” category as set out by Historic 
EnglandNot applicable
NoneReduce number of 
buildings/structures 
on the Heritage at 
Risk Register. No 
Conservation areas 
should be in the “at 
risk” categoryPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsHeritage at Risk 
RegisterMonitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy QD6.2 Design Principles; 
Policy QD6.3 Public Realm; Policy 
QD6.4 Building Design
Policy QD6.5 Building HeightNumber of planning applications 
refused on design groundsNot applicable Planning 
applicationsChapter 6:  
An Attractive Town
Chapter 7: 
The Historic 
EnvironmentAppendix A: Monitoring Framework223
Policy CC8.5 Managing the Impacts 
of DevelopmentNumber of planning permissions 
refused on pollution or disturbance 
groundsZero refusals Planning 
applicationsPolicy CC8.4 Managing Air Quality Number of Air Quality Monitoring 
AreasReduction in the 
number of Air Quality 
Management AreasPlanning 
applicationsChapter 8:  
A Climate 
EmergencyMonitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy NE9.8 Biodiversity Biodiversity net gain as per DEFRA 
biodiversity metric10% net gain Planning 
applications Policy NE9.3 Blue Infrastructure 
Network; Policy NE9.4 Flood Risk 
and Mitigation; Policy NE9.5 Surface 
water managementNumber of applications granted 
planning permission contrary to 
Environment Agency adviceNo planning 
permissions granted 
contrary to the advice 
of the Environment 
Agency on flooding and 
water quality groundsPlanning 
applicationsPolicy NE9.2 Green Infrastructure 
Network; PolicyGains and losses to the areas of 
designated green infrastructureNo net loss Planning 
applications
Policy NE9.6 Protecting Open 
Space; Policy NE9.7 Providing New 
Open SpaceGains and losses to Open Space No net loss Planning 
applicationsChapter 9: 
Conserving 
and Enhancing 
the Natural 
Environment
Policy IN10.1 Integrated 
Infrastructure Delivery; Policy IN10.2 
Providing Infrastructure to Support 
New DevelopmentDelivery of infrastructure set out in 
the Infrastructure Delivery PlanNot applicable Planning 
applications and
Infrastructure 
Funding Statements
Policy IN10.3 Development 
ContributionsDeveloper contributions paid on 
new developmentsNot applicable Planning obligations 
and agreements, 
planning applications 
and Infrastructure 
Funding StatementsChapter 10: 
InfrastructurePolicy CC8.3 Sustainable 
Construction and Resource 
ManagementNew homes achieving 110 litres per 
person per day100% of new homes Planning 
applicationsAppendix A: Monitoring Framework224
Monitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy ST11.1 Sustainable  
Travel Town
Policy ST11.4 A Walking and Cycling 
Infrastructure Improvement Town
Policy ST11.4 A Walking and Cycling 
Infrastructure Improvement Town
Policy ST11.5 Electric Vehicles, Car 
Parking and Car Clubs
Policy ST11.6 Managing the 
Transport Impacts of Development
Policy HC12.2: Health Impact 
Assessments
Policy HC12.3: Built Cultural and 
Community FacilitiesPercentage of new housing within 
400m of a bus stop or railway station
Percentage of new developments 
granted planning permission with 
policy-compliant cycle parking 
provision
Percentage of people walking and 
cycling for transport
Percentage of electric vehicles  
within the borough’s total car 
ownership mix
Level of car ownership
Percentage of developments which 
have an active Travel Plan
Number of qualifying planning 
schemes with Health Impact 
Assessments completed
Number of community facilitiesNot applicable
100%
Improvement on 
baseline levels
Improvement on 
baseline levels
Improvement on 
baseline levels
All schemes over 
100 dwellings
Not applicablePlanning 
applications
Planning 
applications
Hertfordshire 
County Council 
travel survey
Department for 
Transport Census 
data
Planning 
applications
Planning 
applications
Planning applications 
Land use surveyChapter 11:  
A Sustainable 
Travel Town
Chapter 12: 
A Healthy 
CommunityAppendix A: Monitoring Framework
Policy SA13.1: Allocated Sites for 
Delivery – Table 13.1: Allocated Sites 
for Housing Development
Policy SA13.1: Allocated Sites for 
Delivery – Table 13.2: Allocated Site 
for Gypsy and TravellersNumber of housing allocations 
permitted, started or completed over 
the monitoring year
Progress on the Gypsy and Traveller 
allocated site (Site GT01) over the 
monitoring year8,604 dwellings over 
the plan period
2 Gypsy and Traveller 
pitches over the plan 
periodPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsChapter 13:  
Site Allocations and 
New Development225
Monitoring Indicator Relevant Policies Chapter Target Source
Policy SA13.1: Allocated Sites for 
Delivery – Table 13.3: Allocated Sites 
for Mixed-Use Development
Policy SA13.1: Allocated Sites for 
Delivery – Table 13.4: Allocated Sites 
for Employment Development
Policy SA13.1: Allocated Sites for 
Delivery – Table 13.5: Allocated Sites 
for Education DevelopmentNumber of mixed-use allocations 
permitted, started or completed over 
the monitoring year
Number of employment allocations 
permitted, started or completed 
over the monitoring year
Number of allocated sites for 
education development permitted, 
started or completed over the 
monitoring year8,604 dwellings over 
the plan period
12,799sqm of 
industrial floorspace 
over the plan period
19,428sqm of office 
floorspace over the 
plan period
Delivery of sufficient 
new education 
facilities over the 
plan periodPlanning 
applications
Planning 
applications
Planning 
applicationsChapter 13:  
Site Allocations and 
New DevelopmentAppendix A: Monitoring Framework226 Appendix B: Housing Trajectory
Appendix B: Housing Trajectory
2021/22
2022/23
2023/24
2024/25
2025/26
2026/27
2027/28
2028/29
2029/30
2030/31
2031/32
2032/33
2033/34
2034/35
2035/36
2036/37
2037/38
TotalYear
925
609
725
248
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,507Commitments 
(completions and  
extant permissions)
344
144
374
732
848
835
540
735
407
905
703
590
515
374
347
211
0
8,604Housing completions 
from site allocations
0
0
0
158
158
158
158
158
158
158
158
158
159
159
159
159
159
2,217Windfall allowance
1,269
753
1,099
1,138
1,006
993
698
893
565
1,063
861
748
674
533
506
370
159
13,328Annual housing 
completions
1,269
2,022
3,121
4,259
5,265
6,258
6,956
7,849
8,414
9,477
10,338
11,086
11,760
12,293
12,799
13,169
13,328
139,663Cumulative housing 
completions227 Appendix B: Housing Trajectory
Housing Trajectory 2021-2038
Cumulative annual housing need Cumulative housing deliveryWindfall allowance Annual housing needCompletions through extant planning consents (excluding site allocations) Completions on site allocations2031/32 2030/31 2029/30 2028/29 2027/28 2026/27 2025/26 2024/25 2023/24 2022/23 2021/221,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
014,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
2032/33 2033/34 2034/35 2035/36 2036/37 2037/38
Total number of homesNumber of homes per year228 Appendix C: Transport Infrastructure Requirements
Appendix C: Transport Infrastructure Requirements
20mph Speed Limit
Internal Walking and Cycling Links
High Street Sustainable Transport Hub
Junction Improvement
Cycle and Walking Access
Cycle and Walking AccessBus Prioritisation
Cycle and Walking Access
Enhanced Public Realm
Bus Prioritisation
Bus PrioritisationMass Rapid TransitMass Rapid TransitColne Valley Strategic Development Area
Bushey Arches
St Albans RoadOn all internal roads, with design appropriate to low speeds.
Linking town centre, Bushey Arches, Oxhey, Vicarage Road, Watford General Hospital and Riverwell.
At junction of High Street/Water Lane to provide interchange for multiple modes.
Revised layout of Waterfields Way/Lower High Street junction to improve visibility of signals and safety of all 
road users.
To Bushey Station through Oxhey Park and linking to enhanced provision on Lower High Street, reducing 
severance of Bushey Arches Gyratory.
Enhanced cycle infrastructure along St Albans Road. Crossing improvements for both walking and cycling at 
Langley Road/St Albans Road junction.Bus priority along the length of Lower High Street, extending around Exchange Road/Beechen Grove Gyratory.
Enhanced cycle infrastructure along length of Lower High Street.
At Lower High Street/Exchange Road junction.
Bus priority along the length of Lower High Street.
Along length of St Albans Road from, and including, Dome Roundabout to town centre.To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.Infrastructure Description229 Appendix C: Transport Infrastructure Requirements
20mph Speed Limit
Internal Walking and Cycling Links
Cycle and Walking Access
Cycle and Walking AccessInternal Walking and Cycling LinksBus Prioritisation
Mass Rapid Transit
Mass Rapid TransitRiverwell
Ascot RoadOn all internal roads, with design appropriate to low speeds.
Linking Watford General Hospital, Stripling Way, Thomas Sawyer Way and Ebury Way.
Cycling infrastructure improvements along Vicarage Road between Hagden Lane and Fearnley Street.
Cycling infrastructure improvements along Harwoods Road, Chester Road, Queens Avenue and Whippendell 
Road linking Watford General Hospital and Ascot Road. 
Resurfacing of the Ebury Way.
Cycling infrastructure improvements along Vicarage Road between Hagden Lane and Fearnley Street.
Cycling infrastructure improvements along Harwoods Road, Chester Road, Queens Avenue and Whippendell 
Road linking Watford General Hospital and Ascot Road.Connecting Croxley View, Greenhill Crescent, Tolpits Lane, Watford Station, and all weather access to the 
Ebury Way from Tolpits Lane and King George V Playing Field.Along Vicarage Road between Hagden Lane and Fearnley Street.
To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.
To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.Infrastructure Description230 Appendix C: Transport Infrastructure Requirements
Cycle and Walking AccessInternal Walking and Cycling Links20mph Speed Limit
20mph Speed Limit
Watford Junction Sustainable 
Transport Hub, Railway Station and 
Bus Station Upgrades 
Penn Road Connectivity and
Station Access Improvements
Bradshaw Road Quietway
Cycle and Walking AccessMass Rapid TransitEastern Mobility Hub and 
Station BridgeJunction Improvement
Bus Prioritisation
Mass Rapid TransitTown Centre Strategic Development Area
Watford Gateway Strategic Development AreaOvercome ring road severance via pedestrian and cycle crossing improvements at gateways to the town 
centre: Derby Road, Water Lane, Lower High Street, Vicarage Rd and Market Street.
Enhanced cycle infrastructure along Hempstead Road.
Enhanced cycle infrastructure along St Albans Road and Rickmansworth Road.Across town centre both north/south and east/west.On all internal roads, with design appropriate to low speeds.
On all internal roads, with design appropriate to low speeds.
Prioritise pedestrian, cycle and bus movements whilst limiting through traffic at the western station entrance. 
Improvements to bus priority around the bus station.
New pedestrian and cycle bridge over the Abbey Line to connect Penn Road with land to the east of the Abbey 
line, improvements to the station access for vulnerable users, and improvements to the station car park access.
Link for vulnerable road users from Watford Junction Station through the new Station Quarter West 
development and Bradshaw Road to Balmoral Road.
Crossing improvements at Langley Road/St Albans Road and Hempstead Road/Stratford Way junctions to 
improve connectivity for cyclists.
Enhanced cycle infrastructure along St Albans Road.To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.The Eastern Mobility Hub, located east of the railway lines at Watford Junction station with a new multi-storey 
car park, a new station bridge connecting the two platforms and infrastructure provision for vulnerable 
road users via an extended link from Clive Way through to Orphanage Road. Improved access to the Eastern 
Mobility Hub through upgrade works along the existing route of Imperial Way, Clive Way and Reeds  
Crescent/Orphanage Road.Full signalisation of Beechen Grove/Rickmansworth Rd roundabout and improved lane guidance and signage.
Bus prioritisation on the Exchange Road/Beechen Grove Gyratory.
To support route as developed by Hertfordshire County Council.Infrastructure Description231 Appendix D: Cycle Parking Standards
Appendix D: Cycle Parking Standards
1.25 spaces per unit
2.00 spaces per unit1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 2 bedrooms
1 space per 150 sqm
1 space per 250 sqm
1 space per 20 bedrooms
1 space per 150 sqm
1 space per 100 sqm
1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 5 staffLong-Term 
(employee/resident)
Long-Term 
(employee)Residential
Non-ResidentialC3 Dwelling House 1 Bed
C3 Dwelling House 2+ BedC2 Residential Institutions
C4 Houses and Multiple Occupation
B2 General Industrial
B8 Storage and Distribution
C1 Hotels 
E Shops, Financial Professional 
Services, Restaurants and Cafes
E Office, R&D, Light Industry in 
Residential Area
E Clinic, Health Centre, Crèche, day 
nursery or centre
E Sports facilities, gymnasiums etc.
F Schools and Nurseries1 space per 20 units1 space per 20 units
1 space per 20 units
1 space per 1,000 sqm
1 space per 1,000 sqm
1 space per 50 bedrooms
1 space per 20 sqm
1 space per 500 sqm
1 space per 3 staff
1 space per 100 sqm
1 space per 8 studentsShort-Term 
(visitor)
Short-Term 
(student/visitor)1.25 spaces per unit
1.75 spaces per unit1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 2 bedrooms
1 space per 250 sqm
1 space per 500 sqm
1 space per 20 bedrooms
1 space per 175 sqm
1 space per 125 sqm
1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 8 staff1 space per 500 sqm
1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 125 sqm
1 space per 10 studentsLong-Term 
(employee/resident)
Long-Term 
(employee)1 space per 20 unitsN/A
1 space per 20 units
1 space per 1,000 sqm
1 space per 1,000 sqm
1 space per 50 bedrooms
1 space per 40 sqmShort-Term 
(visitor)
Short-Term 
(student/visitor)Other Areas High Sustainability Area
MinimumsUse Class232 Appendix D: Cycle Parking Standards
1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 175 sqm1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 5 staff1 space per 5 staff
1 space per 5 staff
As per most relevant other standard
To be considered on a case by case basis in discussion with the CouncilLong-Term 
(employee)Non-Residential
F Universities and Colleges
Drinking Establishments and 
TakeawaysF2 Community Halls
F2 Swimming Baths, Ice Rinks, 
Outdoor Sport or RecreationF1 Other uses (including  
non-residential education and 
training, libraries, museums,  
religious institutions etc.)
Developments requiring ten or more visitor parking spaces may be required to include within this provision bike share bays, either on the site or at a 
suitable location within the vicinity that would serve the development if agreed with the Council and appropriate stakeholders. The volume of bays 
and positioning for these will be determined on a case by case basis, but no more than half of visitor parking provision should be formed of bike share 
bays as opposed to regular cycle parking.Cinemas, concert halls etc
Sui generis
Transport Hubs1 space per 8 students
1 space per 20 sqm1 space per 100 sqm
1 space per 100 sqm1 space per 100 sqm
1 space per 100 sqmShort-Term 
(student/visitor)
1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 175 sqm1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 8 staff1 space per 8 staff
1 space per 8 staff 1 space per 125 sqmLong-Term 
(employee)
1 space per 10 students
1 space per 40 sqm1 space per 125 sqm
1 space per 125 sqm1 space per 125 sqmShort-Term 
(student/visitor)Other Areas High Sustainability Area
MinimumsUse Class233 Appendix E: Car Parking Standards
Appendix E: Car Parking Standards
Residential
Non-residentialC2 Residential Institutions
C3 Dwelling House 1 Bed (spaces per unit)
C3 Dwelling House 2 Bed (spaces per unit) 
C3 Dwelling House 3+ Bed (spaces per unit)
C4 Houses of Multiple Occupation (spaces per unit)
B2 General Industrial (spaces per 150sqm)
B8 Storage and Distribution (spaces per 150sqm)
C1 Hotels (spaces per bedroom)
E Shops (spaces per 100sqm)
E Financial/Professional Services (spaces per 100sqm)
E Restaurants and Cafes
E Office (spaces per 100 sqm)
E R&D, Light Industry in Residential Area (spaces per 150sqm)
E Clinic, Health Centre, Crèche, day nursery or centre
E Sports facilities, gymnasiums etc.
F1 Schools and NurseriesN/A
0.3
0.3 
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Car free
Car free
Car free
0.5
0.5
Car free
Car free
Car freeN/A
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.5
N/A
1
1
N/A
N/A
N/AOther Areas Core Development Area
MaximumsUse Class234 Appendix E: Car Parking Standards
Non-residential
F1 Universities and Colleges
F1 Other uses (including non-residential education and training, 
libraries, museums, religious institutions etc.)
F2 Community Halls
F2 Shops smaller than 280 sqm mostly selling essential goods, 
at least 1km from another similar shopF2 Swimming Baths, Ice Rinks, Outdoor Sport or Recreation
Drinking Establishments and Takeaways
Cinemas, concert halls etc.
Sui generis
Transport Hubs
Where no standard is indicated car parking provision to be considered on a case by case basis in discussion with the Council, with car parking 
requirements to be evaluated within the Transport Assessment/Statement and will be expected to align with sustainable travel ambitions set out 
within the Local Plan Chapter 11 ‘A Sustainable Travel Town’.Car free
Car free
Car free
Car freeCar free
Car free
Car free
As per most relevant other standard
To be considered on a case by case basis in discussion with the CouncilN/A
N/A
N/A
N/AN/A
N/A
N/AOther Areas Core Development Area
MaximumsUse Class235 Appendix F: Marketing Requirements
Appendix F: Marketing Requirements
Marketing Initiative 
Marketing Board
Local NewspaperMarketing ParticularsBudget
£xx.xx
£xx.xx
£xx.xxJan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DecA number of policies in the Local Plan require evidence of marketing prior 
to allowing the redevelopment or change of use of a building or land. This 
appendix sets out the detailed requirements for marketing to justify that there is 
no longer a demand for the existing use and therefore to justify a change of use. 
Vacant or under-used premises should be continuously marketed under their 
existing use. Where the premises are in poor condition or have been partially 
demolished, the exercise should be limited to marketing of the site as a potential 
redevelopment site to reflect the existing use.
Length of marketing
Prior to applying to change the use of a building protected under the relevant 
policies of the Local Plan (retail, employment and community facilities) the 
property should be marketed for a period of at least 12 months.
Marketing strategy
Before marketing begins, a strategy should be prepared to demonstrate how 
the property will be marketed. The marketing strategy should contain:
•  Background – why the property is being marketed.
•  Location – including consideration of context and links to transport 
networks as well as general setting (i.e. employment area/local centre).•  Descriptions – including details on floorspace, layout, and car parking  
as relevant.
•  Planning – a summary of the existing planning use, site history and any 
restrictions (i.e. Article 4).
• Marketing recommendations – this should consider:
 •  Basis of instruction – sole agent or joint agent etc. 
 •  Method of disposal – private treaty or formal/informal bids.
 •  Advertisement options – sale boards, internet, PR, publications, mailing etc.
•  Expenditure – the budget for the marketing campaign should be 
proportionate to the anticipated return from the property. As a guide the 
budget should be about 3% of the anticipated return from the property (for 
example, a property with a guide rent of £120,000 per annum should have a 
marketing budget of around £3,600).
•  Guide price – this should be commensurate with the current market price 
for comparable premises. It is expected that the value of the property will be 
derived from an expert RICS registered value or accredited member of RICS 
(Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors). 
•  Guide terms – these should be flexible and take into account prevailing 
market conditions. The length of leases should not be overly prescriptive.
The strategy should include a marketing matrix similar to the template below.236 Appendix F: Marketing Requirements
The extent of marketing initiatives will vary based 
on the type of premises being advertised. However, 
as a minimum the following initiatives should be 
employed for all premises:
•  Marketing board – this should be relative to 
the type and size of premises. A simple for sale 
board may be appropriate for small commercial 
premises and community facilities. For larger 
commercial units larger boards giving details of 
the property including the guide price should be 
employed. Boards should be clearly visible from 
main transport routes.
•  Marketing particulars – including the following:
 •  Location
 •  Internal and external photographs
 •  Description of accommodation
 •  Terms (leasehold, freehold, long lease etc.)
 •  Guide Price/Rent
 •  Current planning position
 •  Services and Utilities
 •  Energy Performance Certificate
 •  Rateable value and business rates
 •  VAT status
 •  Legal and professional costs
 •  Contact information for the agent •  For larger commercial units and tourist 
accommodation sites, which are more likely 
to have a regional or national audience, the 
particulars (including layouts and photos) should 
be set out in a bespoke brochure.
•  Press advertisement – for small commercial units 
and community facilities an advert should be 
placed and maintained in the local newspaper, 
and specialist publications as appropriate. For 
larger commercial units specialist publications 
should always be used. In addition, for large 
commercial units a press release should be given 
to local and regional press.
•  Online advertisement – the premises should be 
published on the agent’s website as well as at least 
one national commercial property search engine. 
For very large or significant commercial units a 
bespoke website for the property could  
be created. 
•  Targeted advertisement – where appropriate 
other providers should be informed directly that 
the premises is being marketed. This is likely to 
be particularly relevant for community facilities 
where there may be a requirement for alternative 
provision.
Marketing report
If, following the 12 months of marketing, there has 
been no success in selling or letting a unit then 
a report detailing the marketing undertaken and 
demonstrating compliance with these requirements 
should be prepared and submitted alongside any planning application for redevelopment or change 
of use. The marketing period must have ended 
no more than nine months before the date of 
submission of a planning application.
The marketing report must demonstrate:
•  The original marketing strategy (in accordance 
with the above requirements). 
•  The duration and dates of the marketing 
campaign (minimum 12 months).
•  Evidence that the marketing strategy was 
delivered – photos of marketing boards, copies of 
particulars, screenshots of online adverts, copies 
of press articles and adverts.
•  A full log of relevant correspondence throughout 
the marketing campaign. This should include, 
where relevant, details of reasons why the 
prospective occupier(s) deemed the premises 
unsuitable. If any offers were rejected the grounds 
for rejection must be provided.
•  If the record of enquiries indicated a lack of 
interest the report should demonstrate measures 
taken to alter the strategy to increase interest. 
In summary, the marketing statement should 
include all details and evidence of the steps taken to 
market premises as detailed above. If the Authority 
is not satisfied that these requirements have been 
met then additional marketing may be required 
before the proposal can be considered acceptable. 237 Glossary
Appendix G: Glossary
Active travel
Non-motorised travel, such as walking and cycling. 
Active frontage
Ground floors where windows and doors face onto 
the street, avoiding blank walls and which enable 
people to see into and out of buildings.
Adaptation (climate change)
Modifications necessary to maintain life in 
response to climate change effects and expected 
negative impacts. 
Adaptations housing
Changes made to a home allowing safer,  
easier access.
Affordable housing
Housing for sale or for rent for those whose needs 
are not met by the market (including housing that 
provides a subsidised route to home ownership 
and/or is for essential local workers); and which 
complies with one or more of the following 
definitions:
a)  Affordable housing for rent: 
  Meets all of the following conditions: (i) the rent 
is set in accordance with the government’s 
rent policy for Social Rent or Affordable Rent, 
or is at least 20% below local market rents 
(including service charges where applicable); 
(ii) the landlord is a registered provider, except 
where it is included as part of a Build to Rent 
scheme (in which case the landlord need not be a registered provider); and (iii) it includes 
provisions to remain at an affordable price for 
future eligible households, or for the subsidy to 
be recycled for alternative affordable housing 
provision. For Build to Rent schemes affordable 
housing for rent is expected to be the normal 
form of affordable housing provision (and, in this 
context, is known as Affordable Private Rent).
b) Starter homes: 
  Is as specified in sections 2 and 3 of the Housing 
and Planning Act 2016 and any secondary 
legislation made under these sections. The 
definition of a starter home should reflect 
the meaning set out in statute and any 
such secondary legislation at the time of 
plan-preparation or decision-making. Where 
secondary legislation has the effect of limiting 
a household’s eligibility to purchase a starter 
home to those with a particular maximum level 
of household income, those restrictions should 
be used.
c) Discounted market sales housing: 
  Is that sold at a discount of at least 20% below 
local market value. Eligibility is determined 
with regard to local incomes and local house 
prices. Provisions should be in place to ensure 
housing remains at a discount for future eligible 
households.
d)  Other affordable routes to home ownership: 
is housing provided for sale that provides a 
route to ownership for those who could not 
achieve home ownership through the market. It includes shared ownership, relevant equity 
loans, other low cost homes for sale (at a price 
equivalent to at least 20% below local market 
value) and rent to buy (which includes a period 
of intermediate rent). Where public grant 
funding is provided, there should be provisions 
for the homes to remain at an affordable price 
for future eligible households, or for any receipts 
to be recycled for alternative affordable housing 
provision, or refunded to government or the 
relevant authority specified in the funding 
agreement
Air quality management areas
Identified areas where air quality objectives are not 
being met.
Agent of change principle
The new use is responsible for mitigating any future 
impacts on existing surrounding uses. Seeks to 
prevent development creating a negative impact on 
the local area (for example noise pollution).
Archaeological written scheme of 
investigation
A document which outlines proposed 
archaeological works to be undertaken including 
fieldwork and post-excavation.
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR)
A report that summarises the performance of 
planning policies and is used to identify how 
effectively the Local Plan is implemented.238 Glossary
Appendix G: Glossary
Base
The lower section of a taller building which is seen 
and experienced from street level.
Bike share scheme
A pool of bikes owned by a local authority or 
private company available for individual use on a 
short-term basis by members.
Biodiversity
The amount of variety in plants, animals and 
insects within a specific area. Higher amounts 
of biodiversity are important for sustaining 
ecosystems and habitats.
Biomass
Living matter within an environmental area, for 
example plant material, vegetation, or agricultural 
waste used as a fuel or energy source.
Bioswales
Channels which move and hold storm water and 
run off through vegetation and rock to remove 
debris and pollutants.
Blue infrastructure
Networks of water including (but not limited to) 
rivers, ponds, lakes and canals. 
BREEAM (Building Research Establishment 
Environmental Assessment Method)
An assessment that measures the sustainability 
of a new building including issues related to energy, health and wellbeing, innovation, land use, 
materials, management, pollution, transport, waste 
and water.
Brownfield land
Land that was previously developed with any type 
of fixed infrastructure.
Building regulations
Government standards set for design and 
construction which apply to most new buildings 
and alterations to existing buildings in England  
and Wales. 
Car club
A pool of cars owned by a local authority or 
private company available for individual use on  
a short-term basis by members.
Carbon neutral
A combination of reducing and offsetting 
emissions of the greenhouse gas carbon resulting 
in no net release.
Carbon offset
A method to reduce emissions by compensating 
elsewhere. These offsets are measures in tonnes of 
carbon dioxide-equivalent.
Car-lite development
Residential development with minimal or no car 
parking, where travel is mainly via walking, cycling 
and public transport.Circular economy
A model of production and consumption, which 
involves sharing, leasing, reusing, repairing, 
refurbishing and recycling existing materials and 
products as long as possible . In this way, the life 
cycle of products is extended. In practice, it implies 
reducing waste to a minimum. When a product 
reaches the end of its life, its materials are kept 
within the economy wherever possible.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
A charge levied on new developments to support 
infrastructure delivery. Introduced by the Planning 
Act (2008). 
Comparison retail
Retail items not bought on a frequent basis, for 
example televisions and white goods (fridges, 
dishwashers etc).
Conservation area
An area designated under the Planning Act 1990 
(Listed Buildings and Conservation) as being 
of special historic or architectural interest the 
character of which should be preserved  
and enhanced.
Construction management plan
A plan to address procedures and methods of 
construction prior to commencement. 239 Glossary
Controlled parking zones
An area where all on street parking is controlled 
and restricted by the local council. 
Culvert
An artificial, impermeable channel, tunnel or similar 
structure which enables water to flow under or 
through a built-up area.
Combined heat and power
A power system that generates both heat  
and electricity. 
Curtilage
The boundary of a development site or property.
Delivery and servicing plan
A plan to manage logistics of how to provide 
services such as waste collection and freight 
delivery to a development.
Demand Responsive Transport (DRT)
Flexible form of bus services that vary routes and 
timetables according to demand, passengers’ book 
spaces to join at an agreed time and place.
Design and access statement
A report statement submitted as part of a planning 
application which should explain how a proposed 
development is a suitable response to the site and 
its setting and how it will be accessed by  
future users.
Development contributions
Development contributions is a collective 
term mainly used to refer to the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and Planning Obligations 
(commonly referred to as ‘Section 106’ or ‘S106’ 
obligations after Section 106 of the Planning Act). 
These are planning tools that can be used to 
secure financial and non-financial contributions 
(including affordable housing), or other works, to 
provide infrastructure to support development and 
mitigate the impact of development.
East of England forecasting model
This is a computer model developed by Oxford 
Economics to project economic, demographic and 
housing trends in a consistent fashion across the 
East of England and beyond, and is used by  
local authorities.
Employment land areas of search
Areas identified within the Hertfordshire County 
Council Waste Site Allocations document, as being 
compatible with waste management uses but 
currently have little potential for redevelopment. 
Endemic
Something that is native and regularly found in a 
certain area.
Exception test (flooding)
A test applied to sites with flood risk, when there 
are not enough suitable sites with lower or no risk 
of flooding available for use. The test is required 
to show that the sites with flood risk will be safe 
to develop and that any sustainability benefits of 
developing the site will outweigh the risk of flooding.
Evidence base
Data collected by a local authority to support and 
justify policies.Flexible workspace
Shared working space in new developments, used 
by residents to work from home.
Flood risk assessment
A way to determine the likelihood of flooding in 
specific areas.
Flood zones
Areas of land which are mapped by the 
Environment Agency into flood zones. Flood Zone 
1 is least likely to experience a flooding event and 
Flood Zone 3 has the highest risk.
Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA)
An area that is not constrained by administrative 
boundaries but takes account of how the 
economy works in a local area. This takes account 
of the relationships between where people live  
and work and how the regional economy  
links together.
Green infrastructure
Networks of green space which are multifunctional 
and offer environmental and social benefits for 
the surrounding area. This can include parks and 
gardens, green corridors, natural areas, amenity 
spaces and allotments.
Greenhouse gases
Gases which occur naturally but due to human 
activity are intensifying climate change effects.
Health impact assessment
An assessment of how a proposal may potentially 
affect health and wellbeing of a population.240 Glossary
Habitable rooms
Any room which is used (or intended to be used) 
for sleeping, cooking, eating or living. Rooms which 
are not included would be hallways, service rooms, 
laundry rooms and bathrooms.
Hardstanding
An area of hard surfacing which is often used  
for parking.
Heat pumps
A device which can transfer thermal energy to 
capture existing heat and move it inside to heat a 
home or building using electricity.
Hectare (ha)
A unit of measurement commonly used to 
measure land. 1 hectare = 10,000 square metres  
= 2.5 acres.
Houses in multiple occupation 
A property rented out to people who are 
considered to be at least three separate 
households and who have shared facilities such as 
kitchen and bathroom.
Housing mix 
The range of unit sizes (E.G. 1-bed, 2-bed, 3-bed 
units) and different types of homes (e.g. traditional 
houses, apartments). 
Infill development
When small areas of vacant land in urban areas  
are developed.Intensification
Further development within the existing  
urban area. 
Land assembly powers
An organisation that has legal powers to buy 
property at a fair price to combine land parcels 
from different ownerships.
Local centres
An area including shops and facilities for  
local people. 
Locally listed building
Buildings, structures or monuments of local 
interest that contribute to the heritage, identity 
and streetscape of Watford. Locally listed buildings 
do not merit statutory listing under the Planning 
Act (1990), but are considered to be of local 
architectural or historic value.
Main Town Centre uses
Retail development (including warehouse clubs 
and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment 
and more intensive sport and recreation uses 
(including cinemas, restaurants, drive-through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, 
health and fitness centres, indoor bowling 
centres and bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture 
and tourism development (including theatres, 
museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and 
conference facilities).
Major development
In terms of residential development, greater than 
10 dwellings or 0.5 hectares. In terms of other development, a floorspace increase of greater than 
1000 square meters is considered to be major 
development. 
Mansard
In relation to taller buildings this is the middle 
section of the buildings and is sometimes set in or 
narrower than the base section.
Mass Rapid Transit (MRT)
Urban transport system capable of carrying large 
numbers of passengers quickly. Encompasses 
transport modes that run on roads, rails or a 
combination of these.
The Metropolitan Green Belt
A statutory designation around London that exists 
to restrict urban sprawl, protect the countryside 
from encroachment, stop the merging of towns 
and encourage the recycling of brownfield land. 
Ministry of Housing, Communities and 
Local Government (MHCLG)
The government department responsible for 
planning and local government. 
Minor development
In terms of residential development, less than 
10 dwellings or 0.5 hectares. In terms of other 
development, a floorspace lower than 1,000 
square meters would be considered to be  
minor development. 
Mixed-use development 
A development that is comprised of different land 
uses, such as employment and residential uses.241 Glossary
Nationally described space standards
Government defined standards set out in Building 
Regulations for the Gross Internal (floor) Area of 
new dwellings of any tenure at a defined level of 
occupancy as well as floor areas and dimensions 
for key parts of the home, notably bedrooms, 
storage and floor to ceiling height.
Nationally listed building
A building or monument that is protected because 
of its national historical or architectural interest 
under the Planning Act (1990).
National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF)
The national policy document which provides the 
framework to government policies to guide Local 
Planning Authorities, particularly when preparing a 
Local Plan.
Natural surveillance
When building design encourages people to 
overlook a space with windows, balconies, front 
gardens or entrances. 
Objectively Assessed Need (OAN)
Using a standardised methodology, the number of 
new homes required to meet the future needs of 
the population.
Overheating
Discomfort to occupants from high temperatures 
caused by highly insulated and airtight buildings 
with inadequate natural or mechanical  
ventilation systems. Permeability
Is a measure of the number of alternative routes 
which are available for movement through an 
area; areas with a high number of choices are 
considered to have good permeability.
Permitted development rights
Permission to carry out certain limited forms 
of development without the need to make an 
application to a local planning authority, as 
granted under the terms of the Town and Country 
Planning (General Permitted Development) Order.
Place-making
The process of creating high quality accessible 
places that people want to live, work, play and 
learn in.
Planning condition 
These can be attached to a planning permission 
which require a developer to address specific 
issues. 
Plot ratio
The ratio of the floor area of a building to the land 
on which it sits. It is often used to measure how 
intensively land is being used. 
Policies map
Areas covered by Local Plan Policies and proposals 
identified on an Ordnance Survey Map. 
Pop-up
This is the top section of the building and is the 
section which is most visible in the skyline and 
panoramic views across a place.Positive frontage
An edge or side of a building or a boundary 
wall/fence with an interesting and well designed 
elevation or boundary treatment which provides 
an engaging and attractive edge to the  
public space.
Public realm 
Parts of the town that are available for everyone  
to use, including streets, public squares and  
open spaces.
Renewable energy 
Energy from renewable sources such as sunlight, 
wind, rain and geothermal heat. The use of these 
resources to create energy is sustainable for 
human consumption.
Retail hierarchy
Classifies and ranks retail areas based upon the 
role, range of choice, distance people will travel 
and popularity from outside the town.
Riparian
Area adjacent to a river or similar body of water.
Section 106 Agreement
A reference to Section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act (1990) allows a Local 
Planning Authority to enter a legally-binding 
agreement or planning obligation with a 
landowner in association with the granting of 
planning permission. These agreements are a 
way of delivering or addressing matters that are 
necessary to make a development acceptable 
in planning terms. They are used to support the 
provision of services and infrastructure.242 Glossary
Self-build and custom build housing
When an individual, or a group of individuals, 
organises the design and construction of their 
own home.
Severance effect
The dividing effects of busy roads on the 
movement of people and communities.
Single and dual aspect 
A single aspect dwelling only has windows and 
openings to the exterior on one side and a dual 
aspect dwelling has openings and windows to the 
exterior on at least two sides.
Sequential test (flooding)
A test that aims to steer new development to the 
areas with the lowest probability of flooding.
Sequential test (retail)
A test that aims to steer main town centre uses 
towards town centre locations first. If no town 
centre locations are available, the test steers the 
uses towards edge of centre locations next, then 
out of centre locations.
Specialist care and supported living 
accommodation
This includes the following forms of housing: 
•  Age-restricted general market housing:  
This type of housing is generally for people aged 
55 and over and the active elderly. It may include 
some shared amenities such as communal 
gardens, but does not include support or  
care services. •  Retirement living or sheltered housing: 
This usually consists of purpose-built flats or 
bungalows with limited communal facilities such 
as a lounge, laundry room and guest room. It 
does not generally provide care services, but 
provides some support to enable residents to live 
independently. This can include 24 hour  
on site assistance (alarm) and a warden or  
house manager. 
•  Extra care housing or housing-with-care: 
This usually consists of purpose-built or adapted 
flats or bungalows with a medium to high level 
of care available if required, through an onsite 
care agency registered through the Care Quality 
Commission (CQC). Residents are able to live 
independently with 24 hour access to support 
services and staff, and meals are also available. 
  There are often extensive communal areas, 
such as space to socialise or a wellbeing centre. 
In some cases, these developments are known 
as retirement communities or villages – the 
intention is for residents to benefit from varying 
levels of care as time progresses. 
•  Residential care homes and nursing homes: 
These have individual rooms within a residential 
building and provide a high level of care meeting 
all activities of daily living. They do not usually 
include support services for independent living. 
This type of housing can also include dementia 
care homes.
Soakaways
A ditch or pit which is filled with loose rock or 
rubble used to manage water.Standard methodology
The methodology set out by the government to 
identify the annual, minimum number of homes to 
be planned for.
Statutory
Something that is required by law.
Street canyon
A street which has tall buildings along both sides 
which results in the ground level experience being 
similar to a natural canyon.
Sui generis 
A type of land use that is not defined by other land 
use classifications.
Supplementary planning document
A document which supports the Local Plan by 
providing more detail and guidance on a topic or 
an area. These are non-statutory documents.
Surface water flooding
Flooding caused by rainwater that cannot be 
absorbed into the ground or is caused by poor 
drainage systems. 
Sustainable development
Defined by the United Nations General Assembly 
as ‘meeting the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs’. In terms of planning, the 
National Planning Policy Framework states that 
sustainable development should be viewed in a 
social, economic and environmental context. 243 Glossary
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)
An approach to drainage which seeks to control 
the flow of water and reduce the risk of sewer 
discharge and/or flooding. 
Target Emission Rate (TER)
A standard for energy efficiency of a building 
expressed as kilograms of C02 per square metre.
Tenure
The ownership or rental of a property.
Tenure blind
Homes designed to make types of housing 
indistinguishable. 
Topography
The shape and relief of the land resulting in a 
particular and distinctive landscape or town scape, 
often relating to height above sea level.
Transport assessment
A comprehensive review that sets out transport 
issues, and proposed mitigations for these, relating 
to a proposed development. The assessment also 
identifies measures to improve accessibility and 
safety for different travel modes, including walking 
and cycling.Travel plan
A long-term management strategy for a site that 
seeks to encourage sustainable travel.
Urban grain
The size, shape and pattern of plots, buildings and 
streets in an area or neighbourhood that are a 
constituent part of the character of the places. 
Use classes
The Town and Country Planning Order (1987) 
places different land uses into categories. In 
practice, changes between use classes are likely to 
require planning permission. A list of the planning 
use classes can be found in Appendix B. 
Viability
Ensuring that developer costs and policy 
obligations do not compromise the deliverability of 
a development.
Water stress
When the amount of water being consumed 
exceeds the amount that is readily available for use 
it leads to water stress. Areas of water stress are 
determined by the Environment Agency.
Windfall development 
Development sites that are not specifically 
identified in the Local Plan.244
Watford District Plan 2000 Policies
Policy No. Title
SE7 Waste Storage, Recovery and Recycling in New Development
SE20 Air Quality
SE21 Air Quality Management Areas
SE22 Noise
SE23 Light Pollution
SE24 Unstable and Contaminated Land
SE25 Potentially Hazardous or Polluting Development
SE26 Watercourses
SE27 Flood Prevention
SE28 Groundwater Quality
SE36 Replacement Trees and Hedgerows
SE37 Protection of Trees, Woodlands and Hedgerows
SE39 Tree and Hedgerow Protection in New Development
SE40 Landscape Character Assessment
T10 Cycle Parking Standards
T21 Access and Servicing
T22 Car Parking Standards
T24 Residential Development
T26 Car Free Residential Development
H9 Back Garden Development
H10  Planning Agreements for Educational and Community 
Facilities
H13 Conversions
H14 Conversions: Provision of Family-sized Units
H15 Non-Residential Proposals in Residential Areas
H16 Retention of Affordable HousingGlossary
Appendix H: Planning Policies Superseded by the Watford Local Plan 2021-2038
Policy No. Title
E1 Employment Areas
E2 Employment Use Outside Identified Employment Areas
E5 Environmental Considerations
S5 Non-Retail Uses in Prime Retail Frontage
S6 Non-Retail Uses within the Harlequin Shopping Centre
S7 Secondary Retail Frontage
S9  Non-Retail Uses in North Watford Shopping Centre/ 
Local Shopping Frontages
S11 Use Class A3 Food and Drink
S12 Planning Conditions for Use Class A3 Food and Drink
E2 Employment Use Outside Identified Employment Areas
E5 Environmental Considerations
S5 Non-Retail Uses in Prime Retail Frontage
S6 Non-Retail Uses within the Harlequin Shopping Centre
S7 Secondary Retail Frontage
S9  Non-Retail Uses in North Watford Shopping Centre/ 
Local Shopping Frontages
S11 Use Class A3 Food and Drink
S12 Planning Conditions for Use Class A3 Food and Drink
U15 Buildings of Local Interest
U17 Setting of Conservation Areas
U18 Design in Conservation Areas
U19 Small-scale Developments in Conservation Areas
U20 Demolition in Conservation Areas
U24 Shopfronts
U25 Advertisements and Signs245
Core Strategy 2006-2031 Policies
Policy No. Title
Vision Vision of Watford in 2031
SO1 A Family Friendly Town Centre
SO2 Sustainable Neighbourhoods
SO3  Enhance Watford’s regional, economic and  
transportation role
SO4  Enhance Watford’s regional health, recreational, 
educational, cultural and social role
SO5  Enhance Watford’s environment, green infrastructure and 
heritage assets
SS1 Spatial Strategy
SPA1 Town Centre
SPA2 Watford Junction
SPA3 Health Campus
SPA4 Lower High Street
SPA5 Dome Roundabout
SPA6 Western Gateway
IP1 Croxley Rail Link
IP2 Abbey Flyer
IP3 Watford Junction Interchange
SD1 Water
SD2 Climate ChangeGlossary
Policy No. Title
TLC1 Town Centre Development
TLC2 Neighbourhood Centres
HS1 Housing Supply and Site Selection
HS2 Housing Mix
HS3 Affordable Housing
HS4 Gypsies and Travellers
EMP1 Economic Development
EMP2 Employment Land
T1 Regional Transport Node
T2 Location of New Development
T3 Improving Accessibility
T4 Transport Assessments
T5 Providing New Infrastructure
INF1 Infrastructure Delivery and Planning Obligations
UD1 Delivering High Quality Design
UD2 Built Heritage Conservation
GI1 Green Infrastructure
GI2 Green Belt
GI3 Biodiversity
GI4 Sports and Recreation246
 