Woking Local Development Document
Woking Core Strategy
October 2012
www.woking2027.info2 Woking Borough Core Strategy
3 Woking Borough Core Strategy
The Council is delighted that it has adopted its Core Strategy during a period when the planning system is
undergoing significant change. It will provide the certainty that local residents, businesses and developersneed about the future direction of growth in the area. 
The Core Strategy provides a clear vision of what the area will look like by 2027 and the means to achieve that.
It responds to the key issues that residents, businesses and visitors have said they want the Council toaddress, including: the provision of well-designed homes to meet the needs of all sections of the community,the creation of high quality jobs for a sustainable economy and the provision of shops and facilities to meet theday-to-day needs of the community . The Core Strategy also includes policies to address pockets of deprivationin the borough and at the same time, it sets out a robust defence for the protection of the physical and naturalenvironment and the heritage assets of the Borough.
The Core Strategy has evolved through various stages with public involvement at each stage. The Council has
ensured that partnership work with local residents and businesses was central to its preparation and, as aresult, a variety of views were considered and discussed. It is this consultation with stakeholders that providedvaluable input and the Council would like to thank everyone who participated in the process.
Whilst the outcome might not satisfy everyone, the Council believes that the Core Strategy strikes a good
balance between all the conflicting needs and aspirations for the Borough. This is something that has beensupported by the Independent Inspector who conducted the Core Strategy Examination. 
The adoption of the Core Strategy is only the beginning of the journey 
to achieve the vision set out in it.  On-going involvement from local residents, businesses and developers willbe needed and it is hoped that the community will show similar commitment to its delivery as it did with its preparation.
The Core Strategy aims to deliver its vision by 2027, to improve the wellbeing of the community and provide a
high quality environment where people have chosen to live and work.
Councillor Graham Cundy
Portfolio Holder for PlanningDouglas J. Spinks
Deputy Chief Executive
Foreword4
List of Contents
Woking Borough Core StrategyIntroduction ..................................................................................................................5
Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges for Woking to 2027 ........................16
Spatial vision, objectives and strategy......................................................................27
CS1 – A spatial strategy for Woking Borough ..................................................................................29
Key diagram of Woking Borough .................................................................................................. ..33
Planning for places ....................................................................................................34
CS2 – Woking Town Centre ........................................................................................................ ......34
CS3 – West Byfleet District Centre .............................................................................................. ....38
CS4 – Local and Neighbourhood Centres and shopping parades ................................................40CS5 – Priority Places ........................................................................................................... .............44
Borough wide policies ..............................................................................................51
CS6 – Green Belt................................................................................................................ ..............51
CS7 – Biodiversity and nature conservation ....................................................................................5 5
CS8 – Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Areas ..................................................................58CS9 – Flooding and water management ..........................................................................................61CS10 – Housing provision and distribution ......................................................................................6 3
CS11 – Housing mix ............................................................................................................. ...........68
CS12 – Affordable housing ...................................................................................................... ........70
CS13 – Older people and vulnerable groups ..................................................................................75CS14 – Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople ..................................................................78CS15 – Sustainable economic development....................................................................................81CS16 – Infrastructure delivery ................................................................................................. .........86
CS17 – Open space, green infrastructure, sport and recreation ....................................................89CS18 – Transport and accessibility............................................................................................. .....93
CS19 – Social and community infrastructure ..................................................................................97CS20 – Heritage and conservation ................................................................................................ 100
CS21 – Design.................................................................................................................. ..............102
CS22 – Sustainable construction ................................................................................................ ..106
CS23 – Renewable and low carbon energy generation ................................................................112CS24 – Woking’s landscape and townscape ................................................................................115CS25 – Presumption in favour of sustainable development ..........................................................116
Implementation and monitoring of the Core Strategy ............................................122
Appendix 1 Evidence base supporting the Core Strategy........................................................................... .....124
Appendix 2 Site boundaries ...................................................................................................... ........................125
Appendix 3 Town, District and Local Centre boundaries ........................................................................... .......129
Appendix 4 Open space provision standards ....................................................................................... ...........138
Appendix 5 Delivering and monitoring ............................................................................................ ..................141
Appendix 6 List of Saved (and Superseded) Policies of Woking Local Plan (1999) ......................................158
Glossary ....................................................................................................................... .....1651.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.05
Woking Borough Council has a statutory responsibility to prepare Local Development Documents
(LDD) that will collectively replace the Woking Borough Local Plan (1999). The Core Strategy is a key
LDD because it will provide the local strategic planning policy context within which all the other LDDswill be prepared. The Core Strategy has been prepared in a timely manner in accordance with theCouncil’s adopted Local Development Scheme.
The Core Strategy covers the period up to 2027 but also ensures that its implementation will not
compromise the ability of future generations to meet their needs. It has a geographical coverage of
the whole Borough. Its policies and proposals are justified by robust and up-to-date evidence. A listof the key evidence base is included in Appendix 1. There is a clear path for its implementation andan in-built mechanism for monitoring its performance. It builds in sufficient contingencies andflexibility to adapt to uncertainties.
The Core Strategy enhances the existing strengths and opportunities of the Borough to the benefit of
everyone, but also addresses the weaknesses and threats that exist within it. For example, Woking
Borough is nationally recognised for its work and commitment to environmental improvement andmitigation of the adverse impacts of climate change. It has made significant investment in an energyefficient infrastructure, which future development could be made to utilise and the Core Strategyincludes policies to enable this to be achieved. Woking’s community is relatively affluent. However ,there are pockets of deprivation, which the Core Strategy seeks to address. In this regard, it sets outa locally distinctive policy to deal with pockets of deprivation at Sheerwater , Maybury and LakeviewEstate in Goldsworth Park. These areas have been identified by Woking and Surrey StrategicPartnerships for priority action and investment.
The Core Strategy contains an analysis of the current state of the Borough and the key challenges
facing the area. It sets a clear vision of what the Borough will look like by 2027 and a clear sense of
direction for how the vision will be achieved. It seeks to respond to the challenges facing localresidents, workers and visitors and does so by taking into account national and international planningpolicies, regulations and directives. 
Public involvement has been integral to its preparation, and the aspirations of the local community as
expressed in the Sustainable Community Strategy have been a key objective. The Council has valued
and taken into account comments received from public consultation exercises. The Core Strategy hasbeen prepared in accordance with the Statement of Community Involvement.
The social, economic and environmental effects of the Core Strategy have been assessed through a
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated to overcome any
adverse impact. A Habitats Regulation Assessment of the Thames Basin Heaths Special ProtectionArea and the Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham Special Area of Conservation has been carriedout to complement the SA. The Core Strategy therefore strikes a good balance between the threestrands of sustainable development – social, economic and environmental. The Council is confidentthat the implementation of the Core Strategy will help create a sustainable community in which peoplewill choose to live, work and visit. 1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
Woking Borough Core Strategy1.0 Introduction6
1.0 Introduction
What is the Core Strategy and what will it mean to the people who live, work in and visit
Woking Borough?
The Core Strategy sets out the overall local strategic context for the preparation of the other Local
Development Documents. It is visionary, proactive and based on robust evidence.  
The Core Strategy will affect the lives of people who live, work in and visit Woking Borough in a variety of
ways. 
It sets out the overall approach to managing development and change in the Borough.
It identifies the broad location for new homes, jobs, community facilities and services and how they
will be delivered.
It sets the framework for the provision of affordable housing in the Borough.It sets out quality standards for design and sustainable construction that development has to meet to
be acceptable in Woking Borough.
It sets out a framework for securing the necessary infrastructure to support development, including
transport, education, health, utilities, community facilities, open spaces and green infrastructure andhow this will be delivered. Details of this are set out in an Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
It identifies Woking Borough’s contribution towards minimising the adverse impacts of climate change
and how it intends to meet its international and national obligations towards environmentalimprovement.
It provides specific policy guidance to protect the Borough’s diverse habitats, biodiversity,
geodiversity, heritage, Green Belt and important built features such as listed buildings, historiclandscapes, ancient monuments and Conservation Areas.
Overall, it sets a framework for delivering the aspirations of the local community as set out in the
Surrey and Woking Sustainable Community Strategies, and seeks to improve the well-being of thecommunity .  
The Core Strategy has been prepared to be in general conformity with National planning policy and all
other regional and international requirements. This is one of the legal requirements that the Core
Strategy had to meet to be judged sound. 
Of the Local Development Documents that the Council has committed to prepare the following will be
Development Plan Documents (DPD): 
Core Strategy DPD
Site Allocations DPDDevelopment Management Policies DPD. 
The timetable for the preparation of these DPDs is set out in the Council’s Local Development Scheme,
which can be found on the Council’s website (www.woking.gov .uk). 1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
Woking Borough Core Strategy7Sustainability Appraisal of Development Plan Documents is a statutory requirement. In this regard, a
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) Report has been prepared to support the Core Strategy . The SA is
published as a separate document, but its findings have been used to inform the policies andproposals of the Core Strategy . The SA has been prepared as an integral part of the Core Strategyprocess.
How has the Core Strategy been prepared? 
Five key principles underpin the preparation of the Core Strategy .
Effective involvement of key stakeholders and the general public at all relevant stages of the
process in accordance with the Statement of Community Involvement.
Corporate approach to its preparation, hence the involvement of all service areas of Woking
Borough Council with strong support from the Corporate Management Group.
Robust, credible and up-to-date evidence to justify policies and proposals. Appropriate scrutiny and involvement of Councillors through relevant committees of the Council. In
particular , a cross-party working group has been established to oversee the preparation of theCore Strategy .
Efficient management of the process in accordance with the Local Development Scheme.
In the context of the above principles, a summary of the key stages for the production of the 
Core Strategy with timescales is set out in Figure 1 overleaf.
A Consultation Statement has been prepared as a separate document setting out 
the extent   of public involvement in the Core Strategy process. 1.14
1.151.12
1.13
Woking Borough Core Strategy
8
1.0 Introduction
Woking Borough Core StrategyApproval of a Local Development Scheme that identifies the LDF documents that the Council 
wish to prepare and the timescales for preparing them (latest version approved October 2011)
Adoption of a statement of Community Involvement, which sets out how and when the Council 
wishes to involve the community in the preparation of its LDF documents (approved July 2011)
Engagement of the Statutory Organisations and key stakeholders to define the scope of the 
Sustainability Appraisal (July 2009)
Preparation of a Scoping Report of the Sustainability Appraisal (July 2009)
Publication of an Issues and Option Document for public consultation (October 2009)
Appraisal of Options and identification of preferred options (March 2010)
Draft Core Strategy for consultation (November 2010)
Core Strategy Publication document for consultation (July 2011)
Core Strategy submitted to the Secretary of State (October 2011)
Adoption of the Core Strategy (October 2012)Examination Hearings (March/ April 2012)Fig 1: Process for preparing the Core Strategy9The evidence base to inform the Core Strategy
An up-to-date evidence base is necessary to ensure that the policies of the Core Strategy are
justified and deliverable. A great deal of information from a variety of sources has been used to
inform the Core Strategy . Appendix 1 of the SA Report includes a list of this information. Otherdocuments included in the evidence base are included as Appendix 1 of this document. Referenceto the evidence base has also been made throughout the Core Strategy where relevant.
Context for the Core Strategy
Changes to the planning system
The Government is rolling out a number of changes to the planning system. These were introduced
in the Localism Act 2011 (the Act). The Act is driven by six key actions, which are to:
  lift the burden of bureaucracy
empower communities to do things their wayincrease local control of public financediversify the supply of public servicesopen government to public scrutiny, andstrengthen accountability to local people.
The relevant aspects of the Act that have significant implications for the Core Strategy are:
the intended abolition of Regional Strategies
the duty to co-operate in relation to planning for sustainable developmentintroduction of Neighbourhood Planningendorsement of the use of Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) to secure developer contributions
towards infrastructure provision.
On 27 March 2012, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which
replaces all existing Planning Policy Statements (PPS) and Planning Policy Guidance (PPG) as well as a
number of Circulars and guidance notes. Embedded in the NPPF is the overall goal of achievingsustainable development. The Sustainability Appraisal of the Core Strategy provides useful evidence ofhow the Core Strategy contributes towards achieving this goal. In preparing the Core Strategy, care hasbeen taken to ensure that it does not repeat national planning policy, because in itself, national planningpolicies are a material planning consideration when determining planning applications.
The NPPF can be viewed on the Department for Communities and Local Government’s website.1.16
1.17
1.18
1.19
Woking Borough Core Strategy
10
1.0 Introduction
There is no doubt about the Government’s commitment to promote growth. It is also committed to the
plan-led system and expects local authorities to set out their growth targets in their Local Development
Documents (LDD). Local authorities are encouraged to speed up the preparation of their LDDs toprovide the necessary framework to deliver the Government’s objectives for growth. The policies of theCore Strategy reflect the above national context and have been prepared expeditiously to provide theframework for the delivery of locally generated growth in the context of national planning objectives.
Neighbourhood plans
The Localism Act makes provision for the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans. Neighbourhood plans
are designed to empower local communities to take control in shaping the places they live and work in.
There is no statutory duty for communities to prepare Neighbourhood Plans, only a right to do so if theywish. Organisations such as Parish Councils and neighbourhood forums may decide to prepareneighbourhood plans for their area. It is also proposed that businesses will be able to bring forwardNeighbourhood Plans. It is a permissive regime and local authorities are required to consider anyrequest from local communities who wish to prepare neighbourhood plans. Once adopted,neighbourhood plans will form part of the statutory development plan for the area.
The Core Strategy offers in-principle support for neighbourhood plans that meet the following
requirements.
Have regard to national planning policy .Have regard to the other development plan documents in the area.Are in general conformity with the strategic policies and proposals in the Core Strategy .Are compatible with European Union Directives and obligations.Have a clear definition of the geographical area to be covered by the Neighbourhood Plan.
Furthermore, the Act and accompanying Regulations set out detailed requirements such as the number
of people that can comprise a neighbourhood forum. These requirements will also have to be met.1.22
1.231.211.20
Woking Borough Core Strategy11The preparation of Neighbourhood Plans follows a process that is defined by the Act and
accompanying Regulations. This includes:
a geographical definition of the neighbourhood.the Neighbourhood Forum will have to apply to the Local Authority to prepare a Neighbourhood
Plan and there should be pre-application consultation preceding the application
Neighbourhood Plans will have to be submitted for Independent Examination and the Examiner
will have to issue a report with recommendations
if judged to be sound, a referendum will be held and the plan will be adopted if 50% or more of
those voting are in favour
It needs to be emphasised that Neighbourhood Plans cannot plan for less development than what
is identified in the Core Strategy and/or the development plan for the area.
The Council will help to define the geographical scope of neighbourhoods, provide advice on the
preparation of the plans throughout their key stages and validate plans to ensure that they meet all
the necessary requirements. 
Key implications of the revocation of the South East Plan on the Core Strategy
The Core Strategy had originally been prepared in the context of the South East Plan. However , the
Council is fully aware of the Government’s intention to revoke Regional Strategies and had taken that
into account before the Draft Core Strategy was published for consultation. Specifically, the South EastPlan contains spatial policies concerning the scale and distribution of new housing, priorities for newinfrastructure and economic development, the strategy for protecting the countryside, biodiversity andthe built and historic environment and tackling climate change and safeguarding natural resources. TheCouncil had contributed to providing the evidence to justify the requirements of the South East Plan.This evidence has been tested at an Examination in Public and has proven to be reliable. Some of theevidence used to inform the South East Plan has also been used to inform the housing target for theCore Strategy .
The Council therefore considers that the level of growth being planned through the Core Strategy
represents a reasonable and realistic target for the Borough. Furthermore the policies of the Core
Strategy are justified by evidence collated at the local level.
The South East Plan required Woking to provide for 5,840 net additional dwellings between 2006
and 2026 (an annual average of 292 per annum). Based on local evidence of past completionrates and future housing land supply, as identified in the Council’s Strategic Housing LandAvailability Assessment (SHLAA) and future direction of growth, it is considered that this level ofhousing provision is deliverable and justified. It should be noted that local evidence (StrategicHousing Market Assessment - SHMA) highlights a need for an additional 499 new affordablehomes every year in the Borough and a total of 594 new homes every year when taking intoaccount demand. This is around double the South East Plan requirement. Given the level ofenvironmental constraints present in the Borough, it is considered that the provision of an averageof 292 dwellings per annum represents a reasonable level of housing growth for Woking and isdeliverable. The SA Report assesses the impacts of alternative housing targets and providesfurther justification for the decision to adopt a target of 292 dwellings per annum.1.24
1.25
1.26
1.27
Woking Borough Core Strategy
12
1.0 Introduction
The South East Plan identified Woking as a Regional Hub due to its importance as a centre of
economic activity and in recognition of its importance as a transport interchange. This means thatWoking is a focus for improvements to the transport network and for major retail and employmentdevelopment and infrastructure improvements. The evidence and justification for this designation as aRegional Hub still stands and it is considered that the Council, through the Core Strategy, shouldcontinue to manage growth and emphasise the Borough’s significance to the regional economy . Inparticular the Core Strategy will deliver sustainable development and achieve a sustainable andbalanced community, for example, by reducing the need to travel through closer alignment of locallabour supply and demand. 
Woking Town Centre is a Primary Retail Centre in the regional hierarchy and was identified as a
Centre for Significant Change in the South East Plan. This means that it is expected to evolvesignificantly in terms of the range of town centre uses. This reflects the Council’s current direction inrespect of Woking Town Centre, and the proposed level of retail and commercial floorspace growthwhich can be supported by local evidence contained in the Town, District and Local Centres Study
and Employment Land Review. 
Surrey Strategic Partnership Plan (2010 - 2020) 
Surrey County Council and Woking Borough Council have prepared Sustainable Community Strategies
with their partners to demonstrate how they will work together to improve the social, economic and
environmental well-being of their respective areas. The over-arching Sustainable Community Strategy forSurrey is the Surrey Strategic Partnership Plan, which was published in April 2010. It covers the periodup to 2020. The Surrey Strategic Partnership Plan includes a specific section that deals with a summaryof the local priorities for Woking Borough. The Core Strategy provides a positive framework for deliveringthose aspects of the Community Strategy that have spatial implications. 
Ten priorities are identified and are described in detail under the following themes.
Children and young people.
Safer and stronger communities.Health and well-being.Economic development.Housing, infrastructure and environment.1.28
1.29
Woking Borough Core Strategy13It also identifies the following specific aims for Woking Borough.
Creation of a strong community spirit with a clear sense of belonging and responsibility to
promote a clean, healthy and safe environment.
A transport system that is accessible and has good links, recognising Woking’s potential as a
transport hub.
Giving local people and key workers access to good quality and affordable housing.A community which values personal health and well-being.Providing opportunities and encouraging people to participate in learning throughout their lives,
so they progress and reach their full potential.
Woking Sustainable Community Strategy 
This strategy sets out six key aims, which define the Woking Partnership’s vision for the Borough.
These are:
a strong community spirit with a clear sense of belonging and responsibilitya clean, healthy and safe environmenta transport system that is linked and accessible, recognising Woking’s potential as a transport hubaccess to decent affordable housing for local people and key workersa community which values personal health and well-beingproviding opportunities and encouraging people to participate in learning throughout their lives so
they progress and reach their full potential. 
Surrey Minerals and Waste Development Framework
Surrey Waste Plan (2008)
Surrey County Council is responsible for the preparation of the Surrey Waste Plan. The Plan was
adopted in May 2008 and sets out the planning framework for the development of waste
management facilities in Surrey . It is part of the developmental plan and its provisions are a materialconsiderations in planning decisions. In particular , the Proposals Map published alongside the CoreStrategy, identifies safeguarded sites and designated safeguarding areas identified in the Mineralsand Waste Development Framework.
Surrey Minerals Plan (2011)
Surrey Minerals Plan Core Strategy and Primary Aggregates Development Plan Documents (DPDs)
were adopted in July 2011. They form part of the Surrey Minerals and Waste Development
Framework. The Plan provides the policy framework to guide minerals development in the county . Itreplaced the Surrey Minerals Local Plan 1993. The Proposals Map illustrates designated MineralsSafeguarding Areas within Woking Borough. Surrey County Council has adopted its AggregateRecycling Joint DPD (February 2013) for the Surrey Minerals and Waste Plan. This will also be takeninto account in planning decisions. 1.30
1.31
1.32
1.33
Woking Borough Core Strategy
14
Other plans and programmes
The Core Strategy is influenced by a significant number of other plans, strategies and programmes such
as the Local Transport Plan produced by Surrey County Council. A review of these has assisted in
identifying objectives, targets and indicators to monitor the performance of the policies and proposals of
the Core Strategy . Appendix 1 of the Sustainability Appraisal Report which supports the Core Strategyincludes a list of these documents, the objectives and requirements that they seek to achieve and their
relationship to the Core Strategy . A di agram showing the relationship between the key plans and the Core
Strategy is set out in Figure 2 below:1.34
Woking Borough Core Strategy1.0 Introduction
Woking 
Borough 
Council 
Policies and 
Strategies
National 
Planning 
Policy Local 
Evidence 
Base 
ResearchCore 
Strategy
Surrey 
County 
Council 
Policies/ 
Strategies/
DocumentsInternational 
Guidance/
DirectivesFig 2: Relationship between other key plans, strategies and programmes and the Core Strategy15Sustainability Appraisal (SA)
It is a statutory requirement to carry out a SA of the Core Strategy to assess its impacts on social,
economic and environmental objectives. The SA has been undertaken as an integral part of the Core
Strategy process. It has been an iterative process where outcomes have been fed back to inform thepolicies and proposals of the Core Strategy . The process includes an appraisal of options todemonstrate that the preferred options chosen for the Core Strategy are the best when tested againstreasonable alternatives. Furthermore, each policy has been appraised and appropriate mitigationmeasures incorporated within the Core Strategy to deal with any adverse impacts. The SA has beensubject to public consultation and has been published as a separate evidence base to support theCore Strategy . Full details can be found atwww.woking.gov.uk/council/planningservice/ldfsustainability_appraisal
Proposals Map
It is a statutory requirement to prepare a Proposals Map (also known as the ‘adopted policies map’)
which:
identifies areas of protection, including the Green Beltidentifies safeguarded sites and designated safeguarding areas identified in the Minerals and
Waste Development Framework. 
sets out the areas to which specific policies apply .
The Council has published a new Proposals Map alongside the Core Strategy . 
It has been agreed with the Environment Agency that the Proposals Map should not include areas at
risk of flooding. This information is contained in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and any future
advice and/or new information that will be provided by the Environment Agency . This approach isnecessary to enable the flood risk data to be updated when required. Users should contact bothWoking Borough Council and the Environment Agency to confirm the most up-to-date information. 1.35
1.36
1.37
1.38
Woking Borough Core Strategy
16
2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027
The following spatial portrait provides an overview of the current state of the Borough and includes a
description of the key characteristics of the area. It also sets out the key issues and challenges facing
the Borough which have informed the development of the policies in the Core Strategy . 
Geography
The Borough of Woking is located in north-west Surrey, about 40 km (25 miles) from London and is
6,400ha in area. Woking is the main town which is located in the centre of the Borough. Woking is a
modern town which is currently undergoing renewal. The vast majority of the population lives in the mainbuilt-up part of the Borough which is dotted with smaller centres, known locally as “the villages”. WestByfleet in the east and Knaphill in the west are the largest centres with other key centres being Byfleet,Sheerwater , Horsell, Goldsworth Park, and St. Johns. A few small villages, of which the largest areBrookwood and Mayford, lie just outside the main built-up area. 
Outside this main urban area, the remaining 60% of the Borough is Green Belt. Relatively little of the
Green Belt land is in active agricultural use, the main uses are open spaces, playing pitches, golf
courses, commercial nurseries and horse grazing. There is also a significant amount of low densityresidential property, and some industrial premises, in the Green Belt. The Green Belt also containsextensive heathland. The most significant areas of heathland, Horsell Common, Sheets Heath andBrookwood Heath, are designated as part of the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area (SPA).Sheets Heath also forms part of the Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham Special Area of Conservation(SAC). In addition there are six Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) all or part of which are foundwithin the Borough: Ash to Brookwood Heaths, the Basingstoke Canal, Colony Bog and Bagshot Heaths,Horsell Common, Smart’s and Prey Heaths, and Whitmoor Common (fragment only).
The Borough lies on the north bank of the River Wey, with water meadows and flat relatively fertile land
by the river , and gently undulating sandy ground to the north and west, which form attractive local
features. However , the land alongside the Wey and Hoe Stream is liable to flood and currently, around3,500 properties in the Borough are located within such areas. Work is currently underway on the HoeValley Scheme, which is a comprehensive development proposal including a significant flood alleviationscheme for the area. 2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
How to strike a balance between the need to protect and/or enhance the Thames Basin Heaths Special
Protection Area and the Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham Special Area of Conservation and theneed to achieve growth to meet the needs of the community .
The need to protect the purpose and integrity of the Green Belt from the growing pressure for further
development that cannot all be accommodated within the urban area and/or on previously developed sites.17
Historic development
The development of Woking as a major town only started with the coming of the railway in 1838. Until
that time, the area now occupied by Woking Town Centre was open heathland and much of the rest of
the Borough was occupied by nurseries, the most significant one being Slocock Nurseries. One ofthe main legacies of Woking as a heathland and horticultural area is the extensive tree cover . WokingBorough is mentioned in the Domesday Book and was originally a village on the River Wey, some twomiles to the south of the current town centre. In Tudor times, it was the location for one of Henry VIII’sroyal palaces, remains of which can still be seen today in Old Woking. 
Woking has developed into the large modern town we see today, over the last 150 years. Housing
development, originally intended for wealthy London commuters, was built in areas such as The
Hockering, Hook Heath, Pyrford and West Byfleet. Woking Town Centre grew into a Victoriancommercial centre, with public buildings, shops and workers’ housing. Large areas were used forhorticulture to serve the London and local markets. In the 1950s, Sheerwater was developed as aLondon County Council housing and industrial estate, and many families relocated there fromLondon. In the 1970s and 80s, Goldsworth Park was developed, as a major new community ofaround 5,000 homes. The population of Woking Borough has grown from under 5,000 in 1851 to over92,000 in 2011 when the Core Strategy was prepared.
Major industrial estates have existed in Byfleet and Sheerwater for more than 50 years, and over the
last 40 years, Woking Town Centre has become a major employment centre, with substantial officeand retail development. Today, Woking has nearly as many people commuting into the Borough towork as those who commute out.
Redevelopment in Woking Town Centre over the last 40 years has resulted in the demolition of much
of the original Victorian town centre. ChristChurch is the only listed building of historic interest.Elsewhere in the Borough, the original villages still contain medieval churches and many buildings ofarchitectural and historic significance, as well as a number of conservation areas. Scheduled ancientmonuments, sites of archaeological significance, historic gardens and areas of historic landscapeinterest all form part of Woking’s cultural heritage and deserve appropriate protection for futuregenerations to enjoy . There is a need to not only protect, but also to enhance such assets and theirsettings while responding to modern development pressures. A Character Study, which also looks atthe Conservation Areas, has been undertaken to provide evidence about how some of these assetscould be protected. The Heritage of Woking Study also provides additional information.2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
How to achieve a balance between the existing character of the area and the design of new
development that incorporates high sustainable construction standards.
How to ensure a design approach that is flexible to accept tall buildings in the town centre whilst
retaining the general image of Woking.18
2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027
Characteristics of the population
The population of Woking in 2009 was estimated to be 92,400. The 2001 Census showed that Woking
had a slightly younger population than England as a whole, with 20.6% under 16, compared with 20.2%nationally, and 14.6% over 65 compared with 15.9% nationally . These are relatively small differences, andin general, Woking is close to the national average. As shown in Graph 1 below, the number of people inall age groups is increasing over the plan period, with the exception of the 15-29 age group. In commonwith the nation as a whole, the forecast is for the proportion of older people to rise in the future.Compared to other age groups the number of people at retirement age has the steepest increase overthe 20 year period. There is some spatial variation in the age profile. The youngest populations are foundin the Goldsworth Park and Maybury and Sheerwater areas.
Graph 1: Projected age group populations in Woking, 2008-2027
In 2001, the proportion of residents from a black or minority ethnic background was 8.7%. This was the
highest proportion in Surrey, but slightly below the average for England as a whole of 9.1%. Thispopulation, largely Asian and Asian British, mainly lives in Maybury and Sheerwater , where over 30% ofthe population is from a Black and Minority Ethnic (BME) group.
Woking has relatively low levels of deprivation. The Borough as a whole is within the top 10% of least
deprived local authority areas in the country . However , high levels of affluence in the Borough maskpockets of relative and absolute deprivation, with the Dartmouth Avenue and Devonshire Avenue area ofSheerwater being identified as within the 14% most deprived areas nationally and the most deprivedarea in Surrey . 2.9
2.10
2.11
Woking Borough Core StrategySource: ONS 2008-based Subnational Population Projections, 2010.19Housing
In 2007, around 80% of homes in Woking consisted of houses, and almost 20% were flats and
maisonettes. The single largest component was detached houses, which made up almost 29% ofhomes, which is well above the national average of 23%. The proportion of flats is around theaverage for England of 19%, however , more than half of all flats are in and around Woking TownCentre. In the remainder of the Borough, almost 90% of accommodation is made up of houses.
In 2001, 77% of homes were owner-occupied, compared with 69% in England as a whole. All parts of
the Borough are dominated by owner-occupied housing. Even those areas where many homes wereoriginally built as local authority housing now have a majority of owner-occupied properties, reflectingthe impact of council house sales. The lowest proportion of owner-occupied housing is in Mayburyand Sheerwater at 57%.
Information from the Land Registry shows the mean average house price in the Borough in Q2 of
2012 was £353,826 which is consistently higher than the mean of £280,259 for the South East and£238,638 for England and Wales. The median house price (Q2 2012) is lower at £265,000 for WokingBorough but is still significantly higher than the median for England and Wales at £180,000. Althoughthe number of property transactions fell significantly in 2008 with the economic downturn, pricesremain high and both the mean and median have been fairly stable since 2007. The difficulty inaccessing mortgage finance coupled with the requirement for larger deposits and long-termaffordability pressures has led to an inability for many potential first time buyers to purchaseproperties. The ratio of lower quartile house price to lower quartile earnings in 2011 was 11.01(source CLG based on ASHE).   The need for affordable housing for those who cannot afford to obtainhousing on the open market is considerable. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment shows thatthere is a need for an additional 499 new affordable homes per annum. The majority of the unmetneed is for family housing.
The Council has to plan for the housing needs of all members of the community; this includes the
needs of groups with specific needs such as the elderly and Gypsies, Travellers and TravellingShowpeople.2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
The increasing rate of growth of the elderly population and the need to plan to meet their needs.
There are pockets of deprivation within the community that need to be addressed.
20
2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027
The economy
Woking’s economy is generally buoyant, and predominantly made up of the service sector . The
percentage of Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA) claimants in Woking in March 2012 was 1.9% compared to2.8% for the South East and 4.1% for Great Britain (Office for National Statistics). Economic activity ratesin Woking Oct 2010 – Sept 2011 were 79.7% compared to 79.2% for the South East and 76.1% for GreatBritain (ONS). Woking has a highly skilled resident workforce compared to national and regionalaverages and wage levels are also comparatively high. 
In 2008 there were 45,700 employee jobs in the Borough, compared to 47,000 residents in employment
in Oct 2010 – Sept 2011.  In 2008 the largest employment sector of Woking’s economy was financial, ITand other business service activities (37.6%). This is significantly higher than the national average of22% and includes considerable representation from the IT and telecoms sectors, as well as financialservices. 
The representation of other sectors tends to be at or below the national average. The manufacturing
sector , and the public administration, education and health sectors are particularly under-represented. Inthe case of manufacturing, this reflects the position in much of the South East. As far as publicadministration, education and health are concerned, this is due to the fact that Woking has no universityeducation facility or major hospital within the Borough boundary . 
The biggest concentration of employment is in Woking Town Centre, principally in retail and office jobs.
The other main employment centres are in the business parks and industrial estates in Sheerwater andByfleet. Unlike some other parts of Surrey, there are relatively few large modern out of town businessparks and Woking Town Centre remains the single most important employment location. The vacancyrate for employment floorspace (including retail) in Woking in 2004/5 according to ODPM data was 10%which is around the average for the South East. However , local surveys of vacancy of employment usesidentified a rate of around 23% in 2004/5 and 19% in 2009
1. 2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
The urban area is surrounded by the Green Belt and other environmental designations such as the Thames
Basin Heaths Special Protection Area and the Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham Special Area ofConservation. The need to identify sufficient land that is available and suitable in sustainable locations tomeet all types of housing need continues to be an issue.
There is significant unmet need for affordable housing, which will have to be delivered in a period of severe
public sector budget constraint and an economic downturn; The need to balance the priority to secureaffordable housing with the viability of development schemes is challenging.
The need to meet the accommodation needs of the elderly as the rate of the elderly population continues to
increase.
The need to meet the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers in sustainable locations.There is significant need for family homes, in particular , affordable family homes that cannot all be met in
high density flatted accommodation in the main urban centres.
1 2004/5 figure Council Survey, 2009 figure Lambert Smith Hampton 21Woking’s major hotel, the Holiday Inn, is located in Woking Town Centre. There are also several
smaller budget hotels. These hotels cater mainly for business visitors. The main conference andmeeting venue, H.G. Wells Conference and Events Centre, is also in Woking Town Centre.
Retail offer
Woking Town Centre is the focus of retail floorspace in the Borough. Woking has over 80,000 sq.m of
retail floorspace, making it the second largest shopping centre in Surrey after Guildford. It has twocovered shopping centres, The Peacocks and Wolsey Place, which provide the majority of thefloorspace. Woking Town Centre provides for the majority of shopping needs in the Borough, althoughlocal residents do shop further afield, particularly in Guildford. There is also an edge-of-town centrefood store - Morrisons, which provides for the needs of residents in the locality . The second largestshopping centre in the Borough, West Byfleet, has around 15,000 sq.m of floorspace. 
Out of town retail parks are relatively limited in Woking. There are small retail parks at Byfleet, and
Oriental Road Woking, and a larger retail park just outside the Borough at Brooklands. 
Supermarkets at West Byfleet, Goldsworth Park and Knaphill provide for local convenience shopping.
Knaphill and West Byfleet also have a range of other shops. The remaining local centres, includingByfleet, Horsell, Kingfield, St. Johns and Sheerwater , provide for basic local needs. Vacancy rates inall the centres are low.2.20
2.21
2.22
2.23
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
How to ensure that there is sufficient land at sustainable locations to meet modern business needs.
How to control the loss of employment land to alternative uses at a period when the Government’s
economic agenda is pro-growth.
How to set a positive framework to support business start ups and small businesses.How to deal with unallocated employment sites within the Green Belt without compromising its openness.
Key issues and challenges
How to define the boundaries of the town centre and its shopping area to reflect its functionality and
focus of activities.
How to define the hierarchy of centres in the Borough to reflect their status and functionality .
22
2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027
Leisure and community facilities
Woking is generally well provided for in terms of open space provision. There is very good access to
large areas of semi-natural green space from all parts of the Borough, with around 500ha of heath,woodland and canal and river banks with public access. Nowhere in Woking is more than 2km from alarge accessible green space.
Provision of playing pitches and children’s play areas is generally adequate, although there are some
local shortages which need to be addressed. There are 11 golf courses, which are one of the mainoccupiers of land in Woking’s Green Belt.
Woking Town Centre’s New Victoria Theatre is one of the largest and most successful theatres in the
South East region. This is part of the Ambassadors complex which also hosts a smaller communitytheatre and a multi-screen cinema. There is an exhibition space called The Lightbox in the town centre.The town centre’s evening economy has grown in recent years, but still provides for a mainly localcatchment. In addition to the cinema and theatre, Woking has a number of leisure facilities. The BigApple family entertainment complex includes ten pin bowling, laser quest, and children's soft play with aGala Bingo on the upper floors. 
Woking Leisure Centre and Pool in the Park are within walking distance from Woking Town Centre and
provide opportunities for indoor sports and swimming. There is a range of public and community hallsserving most local areas, and some joint-use arrangements to enable public use of school sportsfacilities.
Generally, public satisfaction with leisure and community facilities is high at around 80%, and there are
no major gaps in public provision. However , it is difficult for community and faith organisations to findsites for larger premises. Some local organisations have outgrown their existing facilities and are activelylooking to relocate. The price of land in the urban area makes this difficult to achieve.
Transport and accessibility
Woking has the second busiest railway station in Surrey, after Guildford, and has excellent connections
to London Waterloo. Other stations serve the local areas at Byfleet and New Haw, West Byfleet,Brookwood and Worplesdon. The bus network is focussed on Woking Town Centre. Most bus routes tendto run at 30-minute intervals during the day with limited evening and weekend services. 
Public transport accessibility to Woking Town Centre is generally acceptable, however , accessibility to
key facilities such as St Peters Hospital and further and higher education colleges is less good, andsome parts of the Borough are beyond the Government’s guideline travel time by public transport tothese facilities. The Council is already working in partnership with the County Council and otherstakeholders as part of Transport for Woking and with promoters of the Gateway project to ensure thedevelopment of an integrated interchange facility in the vicinity of the Rail Station. Woking has beendesignated a Cycle Town.
The M25 motorway passes through the Borough but there is no junction. The nearest junctions (10 and
11) are both more than four miles from Woking Town Centre and more than three miles from the nearestmajor employment area at Byfleet. The A320 runs through the Borough and provides a good link with theM25, Guildford and Chertsey . There is peak hour traffic congestion, particularly in Woking Town Centreand in the Monument Road area. 2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
2.31
Woking Borough Core StrategyWoking Town Centre is well served by car parks. There are around 9,000 non-residential parking
spaces, around 5,000 of which are public pay car parks, the rest are private business spaces.Currently, all-day parking in Woking Town Centre costs £8, and short stay parking £2.20 for twohours. These rates are broadly comparable to other similar town centres in the area. Small car parksserve the local centres and employment areas. These are generally free of charge apart from in WestByfleet where a modest charge is made.
Car ownership in Woking is very high. Only 15% of households do not have a car , compared with
27% nationally . Only the ward of Maybury and Sheerwater has above the national average ofhouseholds without a car , at 28%. In total, there are 1.4 cars for every household in Woking,compared with 1.1 nationally . Not surprisingly, the private car is the dominant means of transport inWoking. In 2001, almost 70% of people working in Woking drove to work. 
Cross-cutting issues
The following issues cut across many topic areas. 
Climate change
The Council has long been committed to protecting the environment
and to tackling the adverse impacts of climate change. The Boroughhas one of the most extensive decentralised renewable and lowcarbon energy infrastructures in the UK. Its work on this isnationally recognised. Over the last two decades, the Council hasbeen at the forefront of a radical programme of investment inLZC (low or zero carbon) energy for which it has receivednational and international acclaim including the Queens Awardfor Enterprise (2001) and Beacon authority awards forSustainable Energy (2005/06) and Tackling Climate Change(2008/09). In 2009, the Council received Carbon Trust Standardcertification for its carbon reduction programmes, and has alsobeen the subject of numerous case studies and best practiceexamples, by bodies such as the Carbon Trust, AuditCommission and environmental organisations.2.33
2.34
2.352.32
23
 Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
How to accommodate the proposed growth identified in the Core Strategy without significantly
exacerbating the existing situation. In particular , how the Core Strategy will encourage a modal shift fromcar based travel to environmentally friendly alternatives such as walking, cycling and public transport.
How to strike a balance between the need to meet the parking needs of local businesses and residents
and managing the level of congestion in the area. In particular , how to achieve the balance withoutundermining local economic activity .
Woking Leisure
Centre and Pool in the Park arewithin walkingdistance fromWoking Town Centre
24
The Council intends to build upon this success and continue its position as a leading authority on climate
change. However , introducing some of these environmentally sustainable measures into developmentschemes could be expensive. The challenge is setting a framework that encourages renewable and lowcarbon energy generation and the delivery of high standards of sustainable construction of buildings,without compromising the viability of schemes. The Council has a network of Combined Heat and Power(CHP) stations in which the waste heat generated from the production of electricity is used for heatingand cooling rather than wasted. The Council has set up Thameswey Limited, which is an independentcompany to help deliver its climate change objectives. 
The security of water as an important resource is a key issue. Balancing demand and supply in the long-
term, to meet the community’s need, would require management of the competing pressures ofeconomic growth, risk of pollution, climate change and environmental protection. There is presently ahigh per capita daily consumption of water in the Borough that needs to be managed.
To avoid development in areas at risk of flooding is an important consideration of the Core Strategy .
There are some areas of the Borough that are liable to flooding. This situation should not be exacerbatedby further growth identified in the Core Strategy .
Infrastructure and services
The Core Strategy demonstrates how development will be supported by appropriate and adequate
infrastructure. The definition of infrastructure is wide ranging in this regard and it includes transport,education, health care, social and community facilities, parks and open spaces, green infrastructure,public services and utilities. An Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been prepared to set out how and whenthe necessary infrastructure will be provided to support the growth identified in the Core Strategy . Themechanism for securing funding to deliver the infrastructure is a key issue. The Council will continue toconsider appropriate delivery mechanisms taking into account the latest Government advice.2.36
2.37
2.38
2.39
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey issues and challenges
Woking is recognised for its work to tackle the adverse impacts of climate change. Setting a framework that
encourages renewable and low carbon energy generation and the delivery of high standards of sustainableconstruction of buildings without compromising the viability of schemes will be a significant challenge.
The security of water supply as an important resource against a background of growth.There are some areas liable to flooding. Planning to avoid development in a flood zone and/or ensuring that
further growth does not exacerbate the existing situation is an important issue for consideration.
Key issues and challenges
How to ensure that the delivery of infrastructure and services keep pace with development.2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027Cross boundary issues 
Woking Borough Council will proactively work with its neighbouring authorities and other
stakeholders to discuss and address common issues of cross boundary significance. It is difficult topredict all cross boundary issues that may emerge during the life of the Core Strategy . However ,Woking Borough Council offers in-principle support to work with its partners if any issues emerge.There are existing examples of partnership groups such as Planning Working Group and SurreyPlanning Officer’s Society to facilitate partnership working. At this stage two key cross boundaryissues are relevant to the implementation of the Core Strategy . These are as follows.
The strategic protection of the Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area (SPA) - The SPA in
Woking Borough covers part of Horsell Common, Brookwood Heath and Sheets Heath. Togetherwith the nearby Wealden Heaths SPA and the Ashdown Forest SPA, the Thames Basin Heathsform part of a complex of heathlands in Southern England that support important breeding birdpopulations. The need for the strategic protection of the SPA to conserve its integrity is anobjective the Council shares. It proactively works with the other Surrey local authorities and NaturalEngland to strategically monitor and mitigate any adverse impacts on the SPA. A Joint StrategicPartnership Board, of which Woking Borough Council is a member , exists to coordinate actions todeal with SPA matters.
Mitigation of traffic movement – At the moment, there are no major transport schemes of cross
boundary significance to Woking Borough. However , the Council will work with others toensure that the transport impacts of development with cross boundary implicationsare fully assessed and mitigated. Transport for Woking and Transport for Surreypartnership groups have been established to coordinate transport mattersacross Woking and Surrey respectively .
Analysis of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threatsof the Borough
Based on a review of the available evidence, including the spatial
portrait and the key challenges facing the Borough, an analysis,known as a SWOT analysis, has been used to define theStrengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT)that exist within the Borough. This is set out in Table 1overleaf, and has been used to inform the objectives of theCore Strategy .2.40
2.41
25
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
26
 Woking Borough Core Strategy2.0 Spatial portrait and key issues and challenges
facing the Borough to 2027
Strengths
Excellent physical access links to nearby areas by
rail and road, including to London, Gatwick, andHeathrow airports.A successful, thriving local economy with a range ofglobal businesses.Residents are highly educated with higher thannational average earnings.Good quality open space within and around theBorough.Strong labour market.Low levels of unemployment.Unique and important physical and natural assetssuch as listed buildings and European status habitats.Well established local resident groups who arewilling to participate in the decision making process.Proactive and ambitious Council, which is willing tolead on innovation and work in partnership withothers to deliver key projects.Well established Local Strategic Partnership.Good health enjoyed by residents.
Opportunities
Investment in efficient energy infrastructure.A good local framework for mitigating the impacts ofclimate change.Well established partnerships and partnership working.Good relationship between transport and economichubs.Proximity to London.Proximity to two international airports.Enterprise and innovation culture.Compact urban area where most places are easilyaccessible to the town centre by walking or cyclingwith opportunities to reduce car travel.Woking is a Cycle Town with opportunities forinvestment in cycling. Opportunities exist for efficient use of land, inparticular , previously developed land.Opportunities for high technology industries tocomplement existing ones such as McLaren.The Council owns land that can be used to aiddevelopment, such as Wolsey Place.The Council own Thameswey Limited, which is anindependent company to facilitate good qualitydevelopment and good practice.Scope to improve infrastructure through theinfrastructure delivery plan and developer contributions.Scope to enhance biodiversity and importanthabitats through strategies to mitigate impacts onSpecial Protection Areas.Scope to improve the railway station and its environs.A Transport for Woking Partnership Group, includingNetwork Rail and South West Trains who arecommitted to station and service improvements.Weaknesses
Lack of affordable housing.
Pockets of congestion.Increasing size of elderly and dependantpopulation.Pockets of deprivation. Borough is constrained by sensitive environmentaldesignations.Several areas are liable to flood.Cultural dependency on car use.Lack of dependable public transport services insome areas.
Threats
Development pressures on biodiversity andgeodiversity are increasing.Increasing levels of car use and its consequentimplications on climate change.House prices are higher than national average,which is a deterrent to first time buyers and jobseekers.Shortage of land for development.Global economic circumstances and implicationson public sector investment to create thenecessary environment for local businesses tothrive.Increasing threat of the impacts of climatechange.High levels of car use and the consequent threatof poor air quality . Global competition.New global knowledge economies.Development land and pressures for housingdevelopment.Staff recruitment and retention difficulties.Continuous increase in carbon footprint andwaste production.Complacency of economic position.Risk of increased energy and food prices and theuncertainties in their supply .Risk of insufficient water supply to meet need.Table 1: SWOT analysis of the Borough27The spatial vision of the Core Strategy paints a clear picture of where the community would like the
Borough to be by 2027. It encapsulates the aspirations of the local community as expressed in theSurrey and Woking Sustainable Community Strategies. It is compatible with the visions set out in theSurrey and Woking Sustainable Community Strategies and is fully endorsed by the WokingPartnership, which is the Local Strategic Partnership for the Borough. It provides a sense of focusand direction for the policies and proposals that form the path for delivering the Core Strategy . Itenhances the strengths and opportunities that exist in the Borough and addresses its weaknessesand threats.
The preparation and delivery of the Core Strategy involved all service areas of the Council. Business
managers and the Corporate Management Group signed up to the spatial vision and are committedto its delivery . 
To deliver the vision, the following clear and deliverable objectives are set in no particular priority
order . These objectives will ensure that policies and proposals that flow from them are specific to thedelivery of the overall vision. They also have a direct bearing in tackling the threats and weaknessesthat exist in the Borough.
1)To enable a diverse range of development such as offices, housing, shops, leisure and cultural
facilities in Woking Town Centre to enable its status as a centre of regional significance to bemaintained. Development will be of high quality and high density to create an attractiveenvironment for people to live, do business and visit.
2) To enable attractive and sustainable development of the district and local centres to provide
convenient access to everyday shops and local services, local community facilities, parks andopen spaces.3.2
3.3
Woking Borough Core Strategy3.0 Spatial vision, 
objectives and strategy
Spatial vision
Woking will be a Borough of high environmental quality and standards where people choose to live, work
and visit, an exemplar in the achievement of sustainable growth. 
Woking will be a regional focus of economic prosperity centred on a vibrant, enhanced town centre that
provides a good range of quality shops, jobs, cultural facilities, services and infrastructure to cater for theBorough’s needs, surrounded by distinct communities anchored by attractive district and local centresproviding convenient access to everyday shops, services and local community facilities. 
Woking will be a sustainable community where the benefits of growth and prosperity are shared throughout
the Borough without pockets of deprivation. 
New development in the Borough will be well designed to respect the character of the area. New housing
development will help to meet the needs of all sections of the community . 
A green Borough where people will have easy access to good quality green spaces and infrastructure for
recreation and leisure. 
The Borough will have a balanced and sustainable multi modal transport system that links homes, jobs and
key services and by doing so improves the overall health and well-being of all residents.
28
3)To enable the provision of well designed homes of different types, tenures and affordability to meet
the needs of all sections of the community . This will be in sustainable locations and at densities thatmaximise the efficient use of urban land without compromising the distinctive character of the localarea.
4)To protect the integrity of the Green Belt and to harness its recreational benefits for the community . 
5)To enable a buoyant local economy with good quality offices, business parks and industrial areas,
which meet the needs of modern business. This will mainly be encouraged in Woking Town Centre,West Byfleet District Centre and the employment areas.
6) To lead the way in high quality sustainable development that minimises the adverse impacts of
climate change. This will be achieved through maximising opportunities for implementing renewable
energy technologies, maximising the efficient use of energy and water in buildings and managingwaste effectively .
7)To maintain and improve air and water quality and manage effectively the impacts of noise and light
pollution.
8)To encourage the high quality design of buildings, neighbourhoods and the public realm that creates
a sense of place where people feel safe to spend time and interact without fear of crime.
9)To ensure that the provision of community infrastructure, including key services and facilities, keeps
pace with the growth of the Borough. This will include schools, healthcare, water supply, drainage
and flood alleviation, leisure, green infrastructure and community facilities.
10)To work in partnership with Surrey County Council and other stakeholders with an interest in
transport provision to deliver a transport system that enables people to access key services,
facilities and jobs by all relevant modes of travel. In particular , by encouraging the use of public
transport and creating a safe environment for people to walk and cycle to the town, district and localcentres.
11)To provide an integrated and effective transport interchange that has an improved Woking Railway
Station as a focus.
12)Topreserve and enhance the cultural, historic, biodiversity and geodiversity features of the
Borough and make them accessible to the benefit of residents.
13)To significantly reduce both absolute and relative deprivation in Sheerwater , Maybury and the
Lakeview Estate in Goldsworth Park.
Woking Borough Core Strategy3.0 Spatial vision, objectives and strategy29
 Woking Borough Core StrategyCS1: A spatial strategy for Woking Borough
The Core Strategy will make provision for the delivery of the following scale of uses between 2010 and
2027.
4,964 net additional dwellings, with an overall affordable housing provision target of 35%28,000 sq.m of additional office floorspace and 20,000 sq.m of warehousing floorspace. 93,900 sq.m of additional retail floorspace.
Most of the new development will be directed to previously developed land in the town, district and local
centres, which offers the best access to a range of services and facilities. The scale of development thatwill be encouraged in these centres will reflect their respective functions and nature. The hierarchy ofcentres is defined in Table 2. The impact of development will be fully assessed to ensure it does notadversely impact on sensitive environmental designations such as the Thames Basin Heaths SpecialProtection Areas, Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), the Green Belt and other important built and naturalfeatures such as Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and Ancient Monuments. It is a clear objective of theCore Strategy to protect and/or enhance these assets. Development will be located to take full account ofthe relative risk of flooding in the Borough. 
Woking Town Centre will be the primary focus of sustainable growth to maintain its status as an economic
hub with a flourishing, diverse and innovative economy and a transport hub which provides transportservices, links and communication linking people to jobs, services and facilities. The town centre isdesignated as a centre to undergo significant change and the provision of a range of shops, culturalfacilities, jobs and housing to meet locally identified needs and the needs of modern businesses will beencouraged. Main town centre uses as defined in the NPPF , will be acceptable in principle, subject to therequirements of the policies of the Core Strategy . 
In the town centre, well designed, high density development that could include tall buildings and which
enhances its image will be encouraged, but without compromising on its character and appearance and
that of nearby areas.
Development located in the District, Local and Neighbourhood Centres to provide housing, jobs and
convenient access to everyday shops, services and local community facilities will also be encouraged. Thismust be well designed to enhance their unique and distinctive characters and attractiveness. Uses that willprovide convenient access to the everyday needs of the community, including jobs and housing will beencouraged at the District and Local Centres but at a scale that will not compromise their character and/orfunctionality .A spatial strategy for Woking
The challenge for the Core Strategy is to plan and distribute development in a sustainable manner
and to ensure that each of its elements is well integrated functionally and physically to create asustainable community for Woking. The vision for the Core Strategy sets out the kind of sustainablecommunity that is envisaged by 2027. However , the path to achieve this vision rests with the strengthof the underlying spatial strategy to deliver it. In this regard, the spatial strategy set out belowprovides a clear direction of how the vision for the Core Strategy will be delivered. It provides thecontext for the rest of the policies and proposals of the Core Strategy .3.4
30
 Woking Borough Core StrategyWhilst the preference is for the location of most new development to be in the main centres, infill development
and/or redevelopment of previously developed land in the built-up area of the Borough will be acceptable inprinciple, subject to a full assessment of impacts where relevant and appropriate mitigation measures to makethe proposal acceptable. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) and the EmploymentLand Review (ELR) provide the evidence of the existence of such sites. 
The ward of Maybury and Sheerwater and Lakeview Estate of Goldsworth Park are identified as Priority Places
for specific actions to address pockets of deprivation in the areas. 
A Site Allocations Development Plan Document will be prepared to allocate specific deliverable sites for the
proposed development. 
The Green Belt and Woking Town Centre are identified as broad locations for the future direction of growth
direction of growth to meet housing need between 2022 and 2027. A review of the Green Belt boundary willbe carried out before 2016 to ensure that the release of Green Belt land for development does not undermineits purpose and integrity . The review will be carried out as an integral part of the Site Allocations DPD.  
Details of how the overall strategy will be delivered are set out by the rest of the policies of the Core Strategy . The Council will work proactively with its partners to seek the comprehensive delivery of all elements of the
Core Strategy and the infrastructure requirements to support it.
The area of the Green Belt identified in Figure 3 as a broad location for growth is an area of search from which
specific sites will be identified through the review of the Green Belt boundary . The areas identified as broadlocation for growth in Figure 3 are also identified on the Key Diagram (Map 1).
Figure 3: Areas identified for growth3.0 Spatial vision, objectives and strategy31Reasoned justification
At the heart of the spatial strategy of the Core Strategy is the key objective to achieve sustainable
development, which will create a sustainable community in Woking where people will choose to live,work and visit. The delivery of this objective will require a clear strategy, which is not only about thequantity of development that is planned to meet housing and employment needs, but also about wherethe developments are located and how the developments functionally relate with each other .Consequently, the need to concentrate most new development in sustainable locations where facilitiesand services are easily accessible by all relevant modes of travel such as walking, cycling and publictransport is paramount. The town, district and local centres are the most sustainable location for newdevelopment in this context because they offer a range of services and facilities that will enable thisobjective to be achieved.
The strategy seeks to provide a good synergy between transport infrastructure and economy of the
town centre. 
Land is a limited and finite resource in Woking. Its efficient use is central to the strategy to deliver the
vision for the Core Strategy . The strategy therefore seeks to maximise the efficient use of land byconcentrating most new development on previously developed land at high densities. However , itrecognises that there are limited types of uses and local needs, which by their nature can best bemet on Greenfield land outside the main centres. Examples of this are housing for the elderly and theneed for family homes. If Greenfield land is to be used for development outside the confines of themain centres, the strategy will require good integration of the development with the wider community .Consideration will be given to the biodiversity value of previously developed land when sites areallocated for development or planning applications are determined.
Whether a building is considered ‘tall’ will depend on the relationship between the building and the
surrounding built form. In assessing a building’s suitability in terms of height, consideration will be givento the relative height of the building compared to neighbouring buildings, the building’s mass, thetopography of the site and impact on the Borough skyline, and the context of the building’s location interms of any historic, conservation or amenity constraints. Tall buildings can act as gateway and focalpoints in the Town Centre and they can represent the efficient use of land. Proposals should be of thehighest architectural quality and enhance the street scene and character of the area. Further guidancewill be set out in the Woking Town Centre Area Action Plan.
The built-up area of the Borough is surrounded by the Green Belt and other unique habitats and species
of European significance. There are also a number of listed buildings, Conservation Areas, AncientMonuments and historic landscapes in the Borough. The spatial strategy ensures that development issensitive to conserving and enhancing the assets and heritage of the Borough without stifling creativityand innovation. Furthermore, it seeks to ensure that development does not adversely impact on theseassets.
Some areas of the Borough are liable to flooding. The flooding that occurred in 2000 is a clear
reminder of its effects. A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment has been carried out to inform decisionsabout the location of development. Development will be directed away from areas liable to flood. Thestrategy will also ensure that development does not exacerbate incidents of flooding in the Borough.
Woking is generally an affluent community . The Council is concerned to ensure that this does not
mask the pockets of deprivation that exist within the Borough. The Ward of Maybury and Sheerwaterand the Lakeview Estate of Goldsworth Park are identified as Priority Places where specific types ofdevelopment will be targeted to address the underlying causes of deprivation in the areas.
The Core Strategy identifies sufficient sites to deliver at least 10 years of its housing requirement. The
Green Belt and Woking Town Centre are identified as broad locations for the future direction of growth toidentify sufficient sites to meet the housing requirement for the last five years of the period of the CoreStrategy .
The Council is committed to preparing a Site Allocations DPD to allocate specific sites to meet the
proposed level of development. The timetable for the preparation of the document is set out in theCouncil’s adopted Local Development Scheme.3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
Woking Borough Core Strategy
32
 Woking Borough Core StrategyIf end users are satisfied with outcome of development proposed in the core strategy, it will have achieved
its functional purpose. The strategy will ensure that public involvement is central to its delivery .
Hierarchy of centres
Different centres in the Borough perform different functions in meeting the needs of the Borough as a whole
and their immediate surroundings. To regulate the amount and manage the location of development andreflect the wider functions of centres in the Borough, the main centres will be categorised as set out in Table 2below. A Town, District and Local Centres Study has been carried out to provide evidence and justification forthis categorisation.
The role, function and specific proposals for these centres are set out in the Woking, West Byfleet, and
Local and Neighbourhood Centres policies. Map 1 is a Key Diagram of Woking Borough showing thehierarchy of centres and other key figures. Appendix 3 includes Insert Maps showing the geographicalboundaries of the Town Centre, District Centre and the Local Centres.3.15
3.163.14
Hierarchy Location Function
The Borough’s principal centre, an important locationfor shopping, offices, entertainment, cultural andcommunity activities and a key transport interchange.Serves the whole Borough. Has a primary role withinthe regional economy .
The second largest centre in the Borough with aprimary role to serve the needs of Byfleet, West Byfleet,Pyrford, some small centres just outside the BoroughBoundary and the rural hinterland surrounding it. Atransport interchange that connects the area with bothWoking and other parts of the region.
Local centres vary in size. Goldsworth Park is anchoredby a supermarket but others provide only a basic levelof convenience shopping. Primarily provide a localconvenience and service function for the surroundingresidential areas. Serve the day-to-day needs of theresidents in the immediate surrounding area. 
Vary in size. Serve the day-to-day needs of theresidents in the immediate surrounding area. 
Of purely neighbourhood significance. Provide abasic level of convenience shopping within walkingdistance of the majority of homes within the urbanarea.Anchor Hill, Barnsbury, BlackbridgeRoad, East Hill, Gorsewood Road,Guildford Road, Hermitage Road,Maybury, Maybury Road, OrientalRoad, Rydens Way, Wych Hill.Brookwood, Mayford, Old Woking,Pyrford, Walton Road, WestfieldByfleet, Goldsworth Park, Horsell,Kingfield, Knaphill, Sheerwater , St. JohnsWest ByfleetWoking
ShoppingparadesNeighbourhoodCentresLocal CentresDistrict CentreTown Centre3.0 Spatial vision, objectives and strategy
Table 2 Hierarchy of Centres33
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Map 1: Key diagram of Woking Borough showing the hierarchy of centres and other 
key featuresCS2: Woking Town Centre
The Council will support the development of the town centre as the primary centre for economic development
in the Borough and as a primary economic centre in the South East. The Town Centre is the preferred locationfor town centre uses
3and high density residential development. New development proposals should deliver
high quality, well designed public spaces and buildings, which make efficient use of land, contribute to thefunctionality of the centre and add to its attractiveness and competitiveness.
The Council will facilitate the delivery of the following specific proposals in the town centre. The timetable set
out to deliver the proposals is indicative and any proposal which brings forward the redevelopment of the towncentre in a comprehensive manner will be considered on its merits.
34
4.0 Planning for places
Woking Town Centre
Woking Town Centre2is an important centre of economic activity and key interchange on the rail
network. It is the largest centre in the Borough and a primary centre in the context of the South East. TheCore Strategy evidence base identifies potential for significant additional commercial and residentialdevelopment in Woking Town Centre over the plan period, as set out in the policy . Investment of anappropriate level and scale will be promoted to enable the town centre to grow and evolve significantly,enhancing its retail offer and role as a thriving employment centre. Development of a dynamic andsuccessful town centre is central to the achievement of sustainable development in the Borough. 
Policy CS2 applies to all development in the town centre, including retail, business, residential, leisure,
arts, culture, tourism and community facilities. In accommodating new growth, the Council will requirebest practice in urban design to ensure developments of the highest standard along with quality in thepublic realm and better access to public transport.4.1
4.2
Over the life of the Core Strategy Housing
2010-2027 = 2,1804When Development type and
indicative amount 
Over the life of the Core Strategy Employment
Approximately 27,000 sq.m ofadditional office floorspace to beprovided in the town centre as partof mix-used developments
4
2012 – 2016 17,500 sq.m of A1 retail including 10,800 sq.m of
comparison and 6,700 sq.m of convenience floorspace.
2016 – 2021 26,200 sq.m of A1 retail including 25,400 sq.m of
comparison and 800 sq.m of convenience floorspace
2021 – 2027 up to 23,900sq.m of A1 retail. Up to 23,100 sq.m of
comparison and 800 sq.m of convenience floorspaceRetail
Potential for up to 75,300 sq.m ofadditional A class floorspaceincluding 67,600 of A1 retail madeup of 59,300 sq.m of comparisonand 8,300 sq.m of conveniencefloorspace
Social, community and transport
infrastructure The proposed development will be supported by adequate
infrastructure as set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. The list willbe reviewed regularly to see if intended objectives are being achieved.
Woking Borough Core Strategy2 Woking Town Centre boundary is defined on the Proposals Map. 
3 As defined in the Glossary .4 Up to 15% of this provision could be accommodated within the Butts
Road/Poole Road employment area, which lies adjacent to the town centreboundary .The proposals will be achieved through:
1.mixed-use high density redevelopment of existing sites
2.refurbishment of outmoded sites
3.intensification of existing sites
4.change of use of existing employment uses where this will not undermine the delivery of the proposed
development set out in the policy and the other objectives of the Core Strategy
5.safeguarding of existing office floorspace where there is evidence to justify that.
The primary shopping area comprises primary and secondary frontages and will be the main focus,
particularly at ground floor level, for A1 retail uses. A1 retail uses will therefore be protected within theprimary frontages. The Council will consider favourably change of use proposals to other A Class useswithin secondary frontages if it can be determined they would not have significant harmful effects on thefrontage, crime and disorder and the vitality and viability of the town centre. 
The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment, the Employment Land Review and the Town, District
and Local Centres Study provide sufficient justification of the need for the proposed development and thetown centre’s capability to accommodate the proposed level of growth.
A Site Allocations DPD will identify specific sites to deliver the proposals. The policies of the Development
Plan for the area and the available evidence base will inform decisions about any proposal that will comeforward in advance of the Site Allocation DPD. 
The town centre will also be the preferred location for other town centre uses as defined in the Glossary
including hotels and cultural and entertainment facilities. Proposals for such uses will be permitted where it canbe demonstrated there is a need for the development and the proposals deliver the objectives of the CoreStrategy and do not undermine the delivery of the specific proposals set out above. 
The loss of existing cultural and entertainment facilities within the town centre will be resisted, unless there
is no demand for such facilities or demand can be met from alternative provision within the town centreeither through new or co-located facilities. The Council recognises the importance to the well-being of thecommunity of adequate community facilities and social and community infrastructure and will seek tosafeguard existing facilities and promote new ones where appropriate, as set out in policy CS19.
The Council will support improvements to the market to help ensure that it remains attractive and
competitive, providing the community with wider consumer choice.
The town centre, as a focus for economic growth, is significantly influenced by Woking’s role as a transport hub.
The Council will work with partners to continue to improve public transport and cycle facilities in the centre.
Given Woking Town Centre’s importance to the future prosperity of the Borough, an Area Action Plan will be
developed which will set out in detail how the proposed development will be managed to create the visionenvisaged for the town centre.
35
 Woking Borough Core Strategy36
4.0 Planning for places
Woking Borough Core StrategyReasoned justification
Mixed-use, high density development within town centres makes the best use of urban land in the most
sustainable locations, and helps to reduce the use of private cars and create sustainable communities.The boundary of the town centre (as shown on the Proposals Map) has been revised inwards so thatdevelopment and investment is focused in the heart of the town, maintaining its compact nature andmaking the best use of land closest to the station.
The Peacocks Shopping Centre opened in 1992 and contains over 70 stores including anchor stores
Debenhams, Next, TK Maxx and H&M. Work to modernise and extend the front of the centre wascompleted in 2010. The improvements form the first phase of a proposal to improve the connectivitybetween the Peacocks Centre and Wolsey Place as well as the retail environment around Town Square.Wolsey Place, Woking’s original shopping centre offers over 67 stores including Sainsbury and Boots. Workon revitalising the entrance and providing just under 1,000 sq.m of new floorspace was completed in 2012.
Plans are also underway to redevelop part of the secondary shopping area in Woking Town Centre in a
project known as Woking Gateway . An agreement between a property developer and the Council wassigned in June 2009 enabling the property developer to establish proposals to transform the area. Theproposed site runs from Albion House in the east to Cawsey Way in the west, encompassing High Street tothe south and Commercial Way to the north. A planning application has yet to be submitted but is likely tocomprise a mix of residential, leisure, office and retail space along with public transport facilities andpublic spaces.
The Town, District and Local Centres Study took into account proposed retail development in
surrounding areas outside of Woking Borough. The Council will continue to monitor the impact of retailprovision in these areas on Woking Town Centre and other centres in the Borough.
Woking Town Centre is the economic hub of the Borough providing 70% of its office floorspace.
However , in 2009 22% of this floorspace was vacant, mainly due to the significant number of outmodedoffices within the centre which do not adequately cater for modern business needs. In order to retainand attract businesses to Woking Town Centre and enhance its role as a business location, the majorityof further office development required in the Borough over the plan period will be accommodated in thetown centre and the Council will support the redevelopment of outmoded stock. 
Woking Town Centre provides a strong cultural and entertainment offer and is an ideal location for the
development of further facilities to strengthen this offer . There is also potential to broaden theappeal of the evening economy, for example with more high quality restaurants. The Town,District and Local Centres Study identified that residents are likely to increase theirexpenditure on leisure by 26%, more than twice the national average, between 2009 and2026. Increasing the cultural and entertainment offer is in line with the Council’s CulturalStrategy and will benefit the quality of lives of residents as well as boosting theeconomy .
Woking Town Centre is the preferred location for hotels to cater for business and other
visitors to the Borough, because of its strong public transport links, concentration ofbusinesses, and entertainment and cultural facilities. Applications for lower densityovernight accommodation in locations elsewhere in the Borough with good access tosustainable forms of transport will be considered on their merits. 4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.8
4.94.6
37To capitalise on Woking’s excellent transport links and motivated by the Government's wish to
promote an integrated transport network, Woking Borough Council is working in partnership with keystakeholders from the transport industry and local organisations, to promote Woking rail station as atransport hub of regional significance. An improved and upgraded public transport system for thearea and improved traffic flows to other parts of the region will further add to Woking Town Centre’sreputation as a well-connected business centre.
Delivery strategy
As the town centre is expected to undergo significant change, the Council will prepare an Area
Action Plan which will also include details of how the delivery of tall buildings will be managed. TheCouncil will work with Surrey County Council, Network Rail, South West Trains and other keystakeholders through Transport for Woking and Cycle Woking to deliver transport improvements.
The Council will also work with retail and business membership organisations such as the Woking
Town Centre Partnership and Woking Chamber of Commerce and Surrey Chambers of Commerce, toassist and encourage retailers and businesses. 
Monitoring and review 
Number of net additional dwellings (and density) permitted and completed within the town centre boundary .
Net change in B1 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in the town centre and the Poole Road/Butts
Road area.
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed within the town centre
boundary and net change.
Percentage of new A1 retail floorspace (sq m) located in the primary and secondary shopping frontages.Net change in hotel bed spaces (permitted and completed) within the Town Centre boundary and the rest of
the Borough.
Vacancy rates in the primary shopping frontage, secondary shopping frontage and the rest of town centre.Number of transport improvements in the town centre including cycle parking spaces provided and
improvement schemes to the cycle network.  
Net change in community facility floorspace (sq m) (as defined by policy CS19) permitted and completed in
the town centre.
Number of traders trading at the Farmers Market.4.10
4.11
4.12
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey evidence base
Town, District and Local Centres Study, September 2009, produced by Roger Tym and Partners.
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009, 2010 and 2011 update.Economic Viability Assessment 2010 produced by Adams Integra.Employment Land Review (incorporates Employment Position Paper (January 2010), and Market
Appraisal (April 2010) produced by Lambert Smith Hampton.
Surrey Hotel Futures, September 2004, produced by Tourism Solutions and ACK Tourism.Transport Assessment, 2010, produced by Surrey County Council.
38
4.0 Planning for places
West Byfleet District Centre
West Byfleet is the second largest centre in the Borough. Due to its size, range of uses and accessibility it
has been designated as the only District Centre in the Borough. It has good accessibility, benefiting from amainline railway station on the London to Portsmouth line and frequent bus services into Woking TownCentre. There are a good range of services within the centre including a library, a modern health centre, fourhairdressers, an optician, four banks, a travel agent, four estate agents and two chemists. West Byfleet has areasonable retail offer including a medium-sized supermarket, two convenience stores, a butcher , and florist.West Byfleet benefits from a number of restaurants which are particularly popular in the evenings. 
The retail ranking of the centre declined between 1998 and 2008 and it is has been suffering a relatively
high vacancy level although this is starting to improve. The physical environment of part of the centre isoutdated.
West Byfleet District Centre contains the second highest concentration of office floorspace in the Borough.
However , in 2009 the vacancy rate for commercial office space was 25%, and over the last decade anumber of planning permissions have been granted for the redevelopment of outmoded office units toresidential, particularly along Pyrford Road. 
 Two areas of West Byfleet are defined as Conservation Areas, as indicated on the Proposals Map. West
Byfleet has a community feel which is enhanced by the centre having two primary schools and twochurches. It also benefits from a large recreation ground, which includes children’s playground, and multi-use games area.
4.15
4.164.13
4.14
CS3: West Byfleet District Centre
High density mixed-use development will be encouraged within West Byfleet District Centre as indicated on
the Proposals Map. All new development should be well designed and integrated, and enhance localcharacter .
The Council will facilitate the delivery of the following specific proposals at the district centre. The timetable set
out to deliver the proposals is indicative and any proposal which brings forward the redevelopment of thedistrict centre in a comprehensive manner will be considered on its merits.
Town centre and residential uses will be acceptable in principle subject to the following requirements.
1.A1 retail uses will be focused in the Primary Shopping area.
2.The change of use of A1 retail uses will be permitted where this would not have significant harmful effects
on the Primary Shopping area, crime and disorder or the vitality and viability of the centre.Over the life of the Core Strategy Housing
2010-2027 = 170 unitsWhen Development type and indicative amount 
Over the life of the Core Strategy Employment
1,000 to 1,500sq.m of additional office floorspaceto be provided as part of mix-used developments
Over the life of the Core Strategy Retail
Potential for up to 13,000sq.m of additional A class floorspace including 12,500sq.m of A1retail made up of 10,500sq.m of comparison and2,000sq.m of convenience floorspace
Woking Borough Core Strategy3.In the Primary Shopping area residential and office development should be provided above ground floor
level in order to retain active frontages.
4.The Council will safeguard office floorspace within West Byfleet District Centre and support office
redevelopment where it does not result in an overall loss of office floorspace.
5.The Council recognise the importance to the well-being of the community of adequate community
facilities and social and community infrastructure and will seek to safeguard existing facilities andpromote new ones where appropriate, as set out in policy CS19.
The Council will work in partnership with service providers, to ensure that access to and within the area is
improved for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport users.
39 Woking Borough Core StrategyReasoned justification 
The Town, District and Local Centres study did not consider that West Byfleet had the physical capacity
or catchment to achieve anywhere near as much retail development as Woking Town Centre.Development of this scale would not be appropriate in a district centre. However , it is considered thatthere is the potential to considerably expand the current floorspace, as set out in the policy . Developmentof this scale would help the vitality and viability of the centre which is suffering from the effects of theeconomic downturn. 
The level of additional office development identified is modest as the market appraisal of employment
floorspace in the Borough found limited demand for office development within West Byfleet andrecommended that the volume of office stock should not increase significantly . In this regard, it isconsidered that only a small increase in floorspace may be achieved, mainly as part of any redevelopmentof Sheer House and its immediate surroundings. This would improve the quality of office provision in thecentre, and together with completion of the Broadoaks scheme, assist in improving the profile of the centreas a business location.
Delivery strategy
This policy will be implemented through the development management process. 
The Council will also work with business membership organisations such as Woking Chamber of
Commerce and the West Byfleet Business Association to assist and encourage business.
Monitoring and review 
Number of net additional dwellings (and density) permitted and completed within West Byfleet DistrictCentre.
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in West Byfleet Centre.Net change in B1 floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) in West Byfleet District Centre.Net change in floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) within the Primary Shopping area and
percentage of this as a total of A1 permitted and completed.
Net change in social and community facility floorspace (sq m) (as defined by policy CS19) permitted and
completed in West Byfleet District Centre.
Number of cycle parking spaces provided.Number of cycle journeys made.4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
Key evidence base
Town, District and Local Centres Study, 2009 produced by Roger Tym and Partners.
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009, 2010 and 2011 update.Employment Land Review (incorporates Employment Position Paper (January 2010), and Market
Appraisal (April 2010) produced by Lambert Smith Hampton.
CS4: Local and neighbourhood centres and shopping parades
Local and neighbourhood centres and shopping parades, as indicated on the Proposals Map, will retain town
centre uses wherever viable, in order to meet the day-to-day needs of the local community . Local centres areconsidered appropriate for a low level of retail growth in order to fulfil their function as local service centres, asset out in the table below. Knaphill is the largest of the local centres and is considered to have the potential toachieve a modest amount of development. The figures are set out separately for Knaphill but combined for theother local centres.
40
4.0 Planning for places
Local and neighbourhood centres and shopping parades
With the exception of Woking Town Centre and West Byfleet District Centre, Woking Borough is made up
of a network of local and neighbourhood centres, known locally as the “villages”. The hierarchy ofcentres is set out in Table 2 in Section 3.
Local Centres all have primary schools and churches which give them a focus and sense of community .
They vary in size from Byfleet and Knaphill (in the east and west of the Borough respectively) which arethe largest, to Sheerwater and Goldsworth Park which are the most compact. There is a train station inBrookwood (a Neighbourhood Centre) but none of the local centres have a train station so private car ,bus and cycling are the predominant means of transport to the town centre and the rest of the Borough.However , those living nearby often walk into the centres.
On the whole neighbourhood centres are smaller with a more limited retail offer but all have a church,
primary school or public house providing a focal point. The neighbourhood centres and shoppingparades provide a more limited range of functions and only basic services; however they can beessential to meeting everyday local needs.4.22
4.234.21
Woking Borough Core StrategyOver the life of the Core Strategy Housing
2010-2027 = 250 unitsWhen Development type and
indicative amount 
Local Centres
Over the life of the Core Strategy
Knaphill
Over the life of the Core StrategyRetail
Local Centres
Potential for up to 3,200sq.m ofadditional A class floorspace including2,600sq.m of A1 retail made up of900sq.m of comparison and 1,700sq.mof convenience floorspace
Knaphill
Potential for up to 3,000sq.m ofadditional A class floorspace including2,400 of A1 retail made up of 700sq.mof comparison and 1,700sq.m ofconvenience floorspace41
 Woking Borough Core StrategyMixed use development with a small amount of retail will be encouraged in local centres provided it
accommodates local needs, contributes to the vitality and viability of the centre and is appropriate to therole and function of the centre in the hierarchy . Floorspace is expected to meet the needs of those livinglocally and not a wider catchment.
The change of use of A1 retail premises to other town centre uses will only be permitted where:(i)the floorspace is vacant
(ii)the unit is not an anchor unit 
(iii)the change of use is not considered harmful to the vitality and viability of the centre as a whole
(iv)existing facilities which provide for people’s day-to-day needs are protected.
In neighbourhood centres and shopping parades the Council will seek to protect and retain local shops
and other small scale economic uses such as post offices, petrol stations and public houses, because ofthe importance of these uses for meeting the everyday needs of those living locally . Proposals fordevelopment in these centres must relate to the scale, role and function of the centre in the settlementhierarchy and will be determined on individual merit, taking into account the requirements of nationalplanning policy . 
No retail growth figures have been set out for the Neighbourhood Centres but they are considered
appropriate for a small amount of retail growth in order to fulfil their function of meeting day-to-day needs. 
The role and function of the Local and Neighbourhood Centres will be protected by the Council and out of
centre development that threatens their vitality and viability will be strongly resisted. 
The change of use of office premises will only be permitted where: (i)the floorspace is vacant 
(ii)the proposed use accords with policies in the Core Strategy
(iii)with the exception of self-contained ground floor premises, detailed evidence is provided to show the
premises have been actively marketed without success for at least 12 months. 
Where applications are put forward for the redevelopment of office premises to alternative uses, evidence
will be required to show that there is a lack of demand for office use in the local centre.
Reasoned justification 
The Council does not consider that the Local Centres have the physical capacity or catchment to
achieve significant retail development, but considers that there is potential over the plan period formodest growth as set out in the policy above. With the exception of Knaphill, it is not consideredappropriate to plan for a specific amount of floorspace in any of the centres. Any application shouldbe determined on individual merits taking into account how the proposals relate to the role andfunction of the centre in the wider hierarchy . Additional floorspace development is only expected tomeet local needs and not that of the wider catchment. Allowing limited expansion of existing shopscan be key to maintaining their viability .
The NPPF promotes town and other centres as important places for communities and the
Government wants new economic growth and development for main town centre uses to be focusedin existing centres to ensure their vitality and viability .4.24
4.25
42
4.0 Planning for places
Anchor units include supermarkets, convenience stores and post offices. It is not appropriate to define a
size in terms of square metres as this will vary depending on the size of the centre but they are likely tobe the largest units in any centre.
The local centres listed below provide varying quantities of B use employment floor space which
collectively serve a useful purpose in the context of the local micro economies and assist in creating amix of uses within the centres. 
Local centres addressed by this policy:
Byfleet Goldsworth ParkHorsell KingfieldKnaphill SheerwaterSt Johns.
Delivery strategy
This policy will be implemented through the development management process. 
Monitoring and review 
Number of net additional dwellings (and density) permitted and completed by centre.
Net change in A1 retail floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in local centres, neighbourhood centres
and shopping parades.
Net change in other A class floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in local centres, neighbourhood
centres and shopping parades.
Net change in B1a floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in local centres.Local Service Provision Audit to be undertaken every 2 years.Number of transport improvements in the centres.Number of A1 units lost (absolute) and as a percentage of A1 units in the Neighbourhood Centre or Shopping
Parade.
Number of post offices, petrol stations or pubs lost to be recorded separately .Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 and B1a floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed (sq m) in
Neighbourhood Centres.  
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed outside the
Town, District and Local Centres, Neighbourhood Centres and Shopping Parades.  4.26
4.27
4.28
4.29
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey evidence base
Town, District and Local Centres Study, 2009 produced by Roger Tym and Partners.
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009, 2010 and 2011 update.Employment Land Review (incorporates Employment Position Paper (January 2010),
and Market Appraisal (April 2010) produced by Lambert Smith Hampton.
43Priority Places
The Core Strategy seeks to achieve a sustainable community for Woking and improve upon the well-
being of its people. It sees sustainable communities as places where people want to live, work andvisit now and in the future. A place that meets the diverse needs of its residents, and that is sensitiveto the environment. Sustainable communities are safe, inclusive and well planned places that offerequality of opportunity and good services for all.
Woking is a relatively prosperous Borough. However , small pockets of deprivation exist where
disadvantaged communities, often home to the most vulnerable people in society, do not benefit fromthe surrounding affluence. The Council is committed to working with partners to ensure thatresources are targeted in order to bring about positive change in these areas. 
The Surrey Strategic Partnership, of which Woking Borough Council is a member , has identified the
ward of Maybury and Sheerwater as one of four ‘Priority Places’ in the county which will be subject tomultiple interventions by county-wide and local partners in a coordinated manner in order to deliverits targets. The area has around 3,500 households. The need to address areas of deprivation is a keypart of the spatial vision and objectives of the Core Strategy . 
The ward of Maybury and Sheerwater is comprised of six sub areas. The Devonshire Avenue and
Dartmouth Avenue area of Sheerwater being identified as within the 14% most deprived areasnationally, and the most deprived area in the county
5. It is ranked the most deprived area in the county
for health deprivation and disability, income and employment, and ranked fourth in the county foreducation, skills and training levels. The underlying issues in Maybury and Sheerwater are complex,and vary between the different sub areas. There are a number of Council and Partnership papers thatset out these issues in detail. 
In addition to the identification of Maybury and Sheerwater as a Priority Place, at the local level,
through the work of the Woking Partnership, the Lakeview Estate area of Goldsworth Park has alsobeen identified as a Priority Place to which resources should be targeted. The Lakeview Estate is thesecond most deprived area in Woking Borough and falls within the 28% most deprived areas nationally .Although levels of deprivation are not as acute as in Maybury and Sheerwater , the Lakeview Estateexperiences some specific socio-economic issues, particularly relating to having one of the highestconcentrations of socially rented family accommodation in the Borough, and a high number of singleparent households. The Lakeview Estate is a small geographical area, home to around 630 householdsin a relatively high density development. Therefore, the application of this policy has a wider reach thanjust the Lakeview Estate and extends to the Goldsworth Park area generally, where the local social andcommunity infrastructure that serves Lakeview is located.4.30
4.31
4.32
4.33
4.34
Woking Borough Core Strategy
5 Indices of Multiple Deprivation, 2007 (CLG). 44
4.0 Planning for places
CS5: Priority Places
The Council will work with partners to target resources to the Borough’s Priority Places.
The ward of Maybury and Sheerwater .The Lakeview Estate area of Goldsworth Park.
The objectives for these areas are set out in the Priority Places Action Plan
6. The Council will take a proactive
approach to achieve these objectives by working with its partners to implement a number of schemes whichwill make a positive contribution towards addressing the challenges in these areas. 
Maybury and Sheerwater
HousingThe Council will enable the provision of around an additional 250 new homes in Maybury and Sheerwaterbetween 2010 and 2027. In Maybury, these homes will primarily be provided through the redevelopment ofpoor quality housing stock and outmoded and outdated employment floorspace
7. In Sheerwater , these new
homes will primarily be provided by bringing forward land in the Council’s ownership for redevelopment. 
The Council will seek to redress the current tenure imbalance in Maybury and Sheerwater by requiring new
affordable dwellings in the area to be family homes (2+ bedrooms) and giving priority to the intermediate rentand shared ownership tenures.
Employment The Council will safeguard land within the existing employment areas in Maybury and Sheerwater
for B uses and encourage proposals that create new opportunities for local employment within them. In theForsyth Road employment area redevelopment of vacant sites will be encouraged for B uses, unlessredevelopment is for an alternative employment generating use which contributes to the aims of this policy andwould not jeopardise the B use led nature of the employment area. 
The Council will promote local labour agreements with developers to enable local people in the Priority Places
to secure employment and skills development.
RetailThe Council will seek to increase the choice of retail offer in Sheerwater and will support in principle the
development of a convenience retail outlet in Sheerwater , subject to an assessment of the full impacts of sucha proposal on the vitality and viability of Sheerwater local centre and other centres within the catchment of theproposed development.
It will work with partners to achieve this, making use of Compulsory Purchase Order powers if necessary .
The vitality of Sheerwater local centre will be protected and enhanced to ensure that the community has agenuine choice of shopping and services. The loss of existing retail units will be resisted in both Maybury and Sheerwater . 
Accessibility 
In order to improve accessibility into and out of the Maybury and Sheerwater area, the Council will work with
Surrey County Council to bring forward proposals for a new access road through Monument Way East andMonument Way West. This is expected to be delivered within the period of the Core Strategy .
The Council will work with Surrey County Council and public transport providers to:
Woking Borough Core Strategy6Woking Borough Council Priority Places Action Plan includes objectives for
Maybury and Sheerwater and the forthcoming Lakeview Action Plan, writtenby Lakeview Community Action will include the objectives for Lakeview.
7 On sites outside the employment areas.seek improvements to bus services from Sheerwater
improve the existing cycle network through Maybury and Sheerwater including the provision of secure
cycle parking facilities in key locations
assess the role of parking provision around the shopping parade in Sheerwater to increase trade and
protect local businesses
promote investment in a local community transport scheme to increase access to services e.g. doctor ,
dentist and community centre. 
InfrastructureThe Council will channel developer contributions to deliver infrastructure in Maybury and Sheerwater in line
with policy CS16: Infrastructure delivery . Priority infrastructure items are detailed in the Infrastructure DeliveryPlan.
Public realm and designThe Council will seek to improve the image of Maybury and Sheerwater by promoting high quality design,
the enhancement of open spaces and other public amenity areas. Development proposals will be expectedto have built-in natural surveillance that designs out crime and fear of crime, creates direct, safe routes toneighbouring communities and nearby retail and commercial facilities, and provides a safe environment.
Lakeview
No significant development is planned for the Lakeview Estate over the plan period. The key partnershipinterventions in the area are based on skills, training and education provision and improving access tohealth services. The Council will therefore seek to assist in the delivery of the objectives for the area bychannelling developer contributions to deliver infrastructure in the Lakeview Estate and its local vicinity, inline with policy CS16: Infrastructure delivery . Priority infrastructure items are detailed in the InfrastructureDelivery Plan.
The Council will resist the loss of existing retail convenience stores in the vicinity .Existing community facilities will be protected and the provision of additional social and community
infrastructure will be encouraged. 
The Council will continue to work with Surrey County Council to improve the existing cycle network through
Lakeview including the provision of secure cycle parking at key locations. 
Details of the interventions for both Priority Places are set out in the Priority Places Action Plan.
45
 Woking Borough Core StrategyReasoned justification 
Spatial planning has a key role to play in the creation of sustainable communities, and in this
instance, the reduction of both relative and absolute deprivation in our Priority Places. However , thisCore Strategy is just one element of a wide range of positive interventions by partner organisationsrequired to deliver the objectives of our Priority Places. The Council is committed to working with keypartners and the local community to realise aspirations.4.35
46
4.0 Planning for places
Maybury and Sheerwater
Housing
Housing issues in Maybury and Sheerwater are complex. There is a high level of one bedroom social
rented accommodation in the Dartmouth Avenue and Devonshire Avenue area of Sheerwater . In Maybury,the issues are slightly different with an ageing housing stock and a large number of socially renteddwellings. 
The Council’s SHLAA has identified developable land to provide around an additional 250 new homes in
the area by 2027. The Council will therefore seek to bring these sites forward in order to increasehousing choice and also to redress the existing tenure imbalance. In Maybury, these homes will primarilybe provided through the redevelopment of poor quality housing stock and outmoded and outdatedemployment floorspace outside of the designated employment areas. In Sheerwater , these new homeswill primarily be provided by bringing forward land in the Council’s ownership for redevelopment. 
The Council will seek to redress the existing tenure and housing mix imbalance in Maybury and Sheerwater
by requiring new affordable dwellings in the area to be family homes (2+ bedrooms) and secured in theintermediate rent and shared ownership tenures. In addition to this, the Council has recently reviewed itsHousing Allocations policy and introduced a new Local Lettings Policy in 2011.
Employment
A significant proportion of the population within Maybury and Sheerwater suffers from low skill levels and
below average educational attainment as well as high levels of income and employment deprivation. ThePriority Places Action Plan identifies a number of positive interventions to:
improve educational attainment of local school children
increase the numbers of  children staying on at school after 16 and entering higher education
increase access to and uptake of adult education, particularly basic literacy, numeracy and ICTreduce unemployment and numbers of people claiming long-term illness/disability benefits.
Examples of planned/ongoing interventions include working with local schools to improve take up of
higher education through the national Aim Higher programme; working with the Youth Support Service topromote and increase uptake of services for people not in employment, education or training; increaseprovision and take-up of English language courses, literacy and numeracy for adults; setting up ajob/skills club in Sheerwater to help local people secure employment opportunities; and provision ofwork experience and apprenticeship opportunities for vulnerable young people.
In order to address income and employment deprivation in these areas through spatial planning, the
Council will seek to provide opportunities for local employment. In particular , the redevelopment of officeaccommodation to provide more flexible mixed B class uses will be encouraged. A considerable amountof office development was constructed at the western end of the Forsyth Road Industrial Estate in thelate 1980s/early 1990s. These developments have been suffering from high vacancy rates for some timewith a rate of 61% recorded in 2009. The market appraisal of employment sites undertaken by LambertSmith Hampton identified a number of weaknesses in this area’s suitability as an office location andrecommended that consideration should be given to the re-use/redevelopment of these offices for moreappropriate mixed B class uses. This would enable both the employment potential of the area to bemaximised, as well as creating job opportunities more aligned to local skills.4.36
4.37
4.38
4.39
4.40
4.41
Woking Borough Core StrategyThe Council will work with its partners to promote local labour agreements with developers which
enable local people in the Priority Places to secure employment and skills development.Agreements should link where possible to existing skills/employment initiatives already planned orin place in the area.
Retail 
The Council acknowledges the limited retail choice in Sheerwater and Maybury and, in accordance
with the NPPF the Council recognises that weight should be given to meeting deficiencies indeprived areas. The NPPF encourages the provision of shopping, leisure and local services whichprovide a genuine choice to meet the needs of the whole community . Car ownership in this area islow and public transport is limited so not all members of the community can easily access the retailoffer in the town centre and in West Byfleet, despite their relatively close proximity . An additional retailconvenience store would enhance consumer choice for those living in Sheerwater and Maybury .However , the existing retail and service provision also needs to be protected.
Accessibility
With low levels of car ownership and limited public transport, the Maybury and Sheerwater area
suffers from poor access to a wide range of retail, employment, healthcare and communityfacilities. To address the issue of isolation, the Council will work with key stakeholders, throughTransport for Woking, to improve accessibility into and out of the area, using a variety of transportmodes.
One of the main accessibility issues is the road access into Sheerwater . At present the one
way system running east and west from Monument Road restricts access to and fromWoking Town Centre and creates congestion, particularly at peak times. Theproposed new access road through Monument Way East would be subject to afeasibility study and an assessment of the traffic impacts on the surroundingroad network and signal points. The Council will liaise with Surrey Countyand the Highways Authority to advance this proposal.
Maybury and Sheerwater are within easy cycling distance to the town
centre if the necessary infrastructure is provided. As part of theCycle Woking programme, the Council will look to increase theconnectivity of the Borough’s cycle network by extendingexisting cycle routes and providing additional secure cycleparking facilities at key locations in Maybury and Sheerwater toencourage cycle use. This approach would offer an alternativeand more sustainable mode of transport to the car andincrease accessibility to key local services. The Council willalso work with Surrey County Council and bus providers toimprove bus services.
There is scope to increase parking provision around the
shopping parade in Sheerwater to increase trade, protect localbusinesses and enhance the vitality of the parade. This will beinvestigated to assess the impact on highway safety and existingland uses, and highway orders will be reviewed to enable this tobe achieved. 4.434.42
4.44
4.45
4.46
4.47
47
 Woking Borough Core Strategy48
4.0 Planning for places
Improvements to transport infrastructure, in combination with new retail development and the creation of
new employment opportunities in the employment areas, will have the additional benefit of increasingpassing trade to the Sheerwater Parade (and shops in Walton Road), leading to an increase in the vitalityand viability of the area. 
Infrastructure
The Council will channel developer contributions raised through the Community Infrastructure Levy to
deliver infrastructure in Maybury and Sheerwater in line with policy CS16: Infrastructure delivery . Priorityinfrastructure items are described in detail in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Public realm and design
It is widely accepted that the quality of the environment in a neighbourhood affects the standard of living
and the health and well-being of local people. The Council will therefore seek to improve the builtenvironment in Maybury and Sheerwater by promoting high quality new development, with safe andattractive streets and public spaces. The quality of public open space in the area is generally poor , asspaces are unattractive, lack play facilities and feel unsafe due to limited opportunities for passingsurveillance. 
The Council will work with partners to seek to improve the built environment of Maybury and Sheerwater .
Promoting the highest quality of design of new development and maximising the potential and setting
of historic assets in Maybury .
Explore establishing a safe network of paths, parks and avenues to reduce barriers to movement,
both real and perceived, to promote access to shopping parades.
Enhancement of public open space in each neighbourhood, continue to improve security and access
through lighting, new planting, realigning footpaths, local policing and Neighbourhood Watch.
Maximise the potential of green space. Continue to improve the facilities on offer through replacing
play equipment, providing activities for teenagers and creating new facilities.
New development proposals should strive to promote a sense of place and help transform the image
and identity of Sheerwater and Maybury .
Reducing barriers to pedestrian and cycle movement.Refurbishment of the shopping parade on Dartmouth Avenue.New developments should be designed so there is natural surveillance to reduce crime and fear 
of crime.4.48
4.49
4.50
4.51
Woking Borough Core Strategy49Lakeview
Infrastructure
The Council will target developer contributions raised through a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
to deliver infrastructure in Lakeview in line with policy CS16: Infrastructure delivery . Priorityinfrastructure items are described in detail in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Lakeview is within easy cycling distance of the town centre if the necessary infrastructure is
provided. The Local Sustainable Transport Fund package Cycle Woking programme will enable theCouncil to increase the connectivity of the borough’s cycle network by extending existing cycleroutes and providing additional secure parking at key locations in Lakeview to encourage cycle use.This will offer an alternative and more sustainable mode of transport to the car and increaseaccessibility to key local services, building on the success of the Cycle Woking programme.
Delivery strategy
The successful delivery of the above measures will depend on effective partnership working and
strong governance arrangements. Woking Borough Council, the Woking Partnership and SurreyStrategic Partnership are all committed to providing the necessary support to deliver these priorities. 
Overall governance for the delivery of the Priority Places Action Plan will be provided by the Priority
Places sub group of the Woking Partnership, which in turn reports to the Surrey Strategic Partnership.In addition, the Delivery Management Group of the Surrey Strategic Partnership is responsible forensuring that the resources of the key partners are aligned in order to achieve the objectives of thePartnership. 
The Council will ensure that, through the annual service planning process, the resources of the
Council are aligned to enable the direction of resources to the Priority Places.
In accordance with the Implementation and Delivery Plan, the Council will use its CPO powers and
other means to assist with site assembly where it is necessary to do so.  
Monitoring and review 
The effectiveness of Policy CS5: Priority Places will be measured by the following indicators and
targets. 
Number of net additional dwellings permitted and completed within the Priority Places and
number of bedrooms in each additional dwelling.
Tenure split baseline will be taken from 2011 Census data (when published) and from information
held by the Council’s housing team. Changes in the tenure split will be updated annually based ondwelling completions in the two areas and with data from the Housing team and any RSLs workingin the two areas.
The implementation of the Local Lettings Policy in Sheerwater will be monitored by the Housing
Team.
Net change in employment floorspace (sq m) (B uses) permitted and completed in Monument
Way East & West/Woking Business Park/Forsyth Road employment areas.  
Change in vacancy rates in Monument Way East & West/Woking Business Park/Forsyth Road
employment areas.4.52
4.53
4.54
4.55
4.56
4.57
4.58
Woking Borough Core Strategy
50
4.0 Planning for places
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in Sheerwater
Local Centre and on edge of centre sites.
The number of A1 (convenience and comparison) units delivered. This will be monitored through the
Retail Monitoring Report.
Net change in A1 floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in the vicinity of Lakeview and
Sheerwater .
Amount of D use floorspace (sq m) lost and gained through permissions and completed in the
vicinityof Lakeview and Sheerwater . 
Delivery of the new road in accordance with the project plan.Number of additional bus services provided (monitored by Surrey CC).Number of cycle parking spaces provided (monitored by Surrey CC).Number of cycle journeys made (monitored by Surrey CC).Annual progress report on delivery of identified transport schemes.Delivery of infrastructure items listed in the infrastructure schedule. This will be updated on a 
biennial basis. 
The AMR will annually monitor the delivery of the items set out in the schedule. Amount of developer contributions secured and how this has been allocated/ spent. This will include
matters such as public art and open space.
Achievement of targets set out in the Woking Partnerships Priority Places Action Plan.Periodic evaluations of infrastructure projects through the AMR and the updating of the Infrastructure
Delivery Plan. 
Regular monitoring of corporate strategies, including the play strategy and housing strategy to
monitor progress against wider corporate objectives. 
The Council, with the Surrey Strategic Partnership and the Woking Partnership, will keep under review
the outcomes of future publications of the Indices of Multiple Deprivation in order to ensure that theBorough’s priority communities are identified. 
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey evidence base
Surrey Strategic Partnership Plan, 2010.
Woking Community Strategy, 2006.Priority Places Action Plan, 2010.Draft Maybury Local Community Action Plan, 2008.Sheerwater Local Community Action Plan, 2008.Indices of Multiple Deprivation 2007 (CLG).51
5.0 Borough wide policies
Woking Borough Core StrategyGreen Belt
The Metropolitan Green Belt covers approximately 60% of the area of the Borough. The extent of the
Green Belt is shown on the Proposals Map. Government policy sets the following relevant objectives forthe Green Belt – to check the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent neighbouring townsfrom merging into one another and to assist in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment. It is asignificant spatial factor in defining the extent of the built-up area and in constraining patterns ofharmful development in the Borough. The Green Belt plays a key role in providing recreationalopportunity, securing the quality of the Borough’s landscape setting, and in contributing to the specialidentity of the area.5.1
CS6: Green Belt
To ensure the Green Belt continues to serve its fundamental aim and purpose, and maintains its essentialcharacteristics, it will be protected from harmful development. Within its boundaries strict control willcontinue to apply over inappropriate development, as defined by Government policy currently outlined inthe NPPF .
Broadoaks, Parvis Road, West Byfleet and the Thames Water Sewage Treatment Works, Carters Lane, Old
Woking are designated as Major Developed Sites in the Green Belt. This designation will allow limitedinfilling and redevelopment of the sites, without compromising the integrity of the Green Belt. The suitabilityof any scheme will be measured against the requirements of the NPPF and other Core Strategy policies.The policy is not intended to change the existing use of the sites.
Mayford Village is designated as an infill only settlement within the Green Belt on the Proposals Map. Within
the village infill development will be permitted where:
(i) it is for a purpose acceptable in the NPPF(ii) it is on land which is substantially surrounded by existing development and which forms a
gap within a built up frontage
(iii) the proposed buildings would be used either for residential purposes or for another use which
would not be harmful to residential amenity
(iv) for residential development, proposals are in accordance with the policies applied to new and
replacement houses in the urban area.
The Green Belt has been identified as a potential future direction of growth to meet housing need, in
particular , the need for family homes between 2022 and 2027. A Green Belt boundary review will be carriedout with the specific objective to identify land to meet the development requirements of the Core Strategy .The Council will ensure that any release of Green Belt land for development will not undermine its overallpurpose and integrity . It will also ensure that it will not have any significant adverse effects on the SPA, SACand Ramsar sites. A Habitats Regulations Assessment will be carried out as part of the review to determinewhether there is a need for an Appropriate Assessment.
52
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Reasoned justification
The NPPF defines the fundamental aim, purpose and the essential characteristics of the Green Belt,
which will be protected and/ or enhanced when considering the appropriateness of development withinthe Green Belt, or which will impact on its setting. New development is inappropriate in the Green Beltunless it is essential for:
agriculture and forestrycemeteriesoutdoor recreation and outdoor sportextensions or alterations to buildings that would not result in disproportionate additions to 
the original building
the replacement of a building, provided that the new building is for the same use, is not materially
larger than the one that it replaces, and will have no greater impact on the openness of the GreenBelt.
The relevant criteria for judging the suitability of development are set out in the NPPF . It is not intended to
repeat the requirements of the NPPF because they are material considerations when determiningplanning applications.
Major Developed Sites in the Green Belt are existing large developed sites within the Green Belt, where
infilling and/or redevelopment may not be inappropriate development in principle. Two sites are designatedas Major Developed Sites in the Green Belt at Broadoaks, Parvis Road, West Byfleet and the Thames WaterSewage Treatment Works, Carters Lane, Old Woking. The definition of a Major Developed Site in the GreenBelt is provided in the Glossary . The geographical boundaries of both sites are defined on the ProposalsMap. 
Land at Broadoaks, Parvis Road, West Byfleet was designated as a Major Developed Site in the Woking
Local Plan (1999), and it is given the same status in the Core Strategy . The retention of this site for qualityoffice premises is important to the employment stra tegy of the Core Strategy as no other similar sites are
available within the Borough. 
The Thames Water Sewage Treatment Works, Carters Lane, Old Woking is a new Major Developed Site. It
has a substantial footprint of development; containing some buildings and the infrastructure required for asewage treatment works. Any redevelopment proposal for the site should not be significantly larger than theexisting structures’ footprint. It has been designated for the purposes of a sewage treatment works and notfor anyother use. 
Whilst infilling and/or redevelopment is acceptable in principle at these sites, any such development
must be contained within the defined boundaries and their impacts fully assessed.
Mayford Village is a small and compact community where limited development within the village
boundaries would not have an adverse effect on the character of the Green Belt. Within the village, onlyinfill residential development will normally be acceptable. New build business or industrial developmentswill not be allowed as they are likely to result in an unacceptable effect on the primarily residentialcharacter of the village and Green Belt.5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.6
5.7The latest Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (November 2011) identifies sufficient sites to
meet ten years housing land supply . The Green Belt and Woking Town Centre have been identified asfuture directions of growth to meet housing land supply between 2022 and 2027. This is necessary toensure that the Core Strategy is meeting the requirements of national guidance set out in the NPPFwhich requires the Core Strategy to identify sufficient sites to meet fifteen years housing land supply .
A review of the Green Belt boundary will be carried out to inform the Site Allocations DPD and in any
event before 2016, to evaluate where it is appropriate to release any land in the Green Belt forhousing purposes and the size and scale of the release. The Council is committed to ensuring thatthe release of Green Belt land for development will not undermine its purpose. It is expected that thereview will include an assessment of the landscape, transport and ecological impacts ofdevelopment of the identified sites. The Green Belt boundary review will be carried out as an integralpart of the Site Allocations DPD.
Delivery strategy
The policy will be delivered through development management decisions. The Core Strategy policies
and national planning policy will provide the framework against which planning applications will be determined.
Monitoring and review
Amount of development (by type) granted consent in the Green Belt.
Major Developed Sites – the amount, nature, type and percentage of 
development which has taken place within the defined boundaries. 
Number of sites/ hectares released from the Green Belt for 
residential development. 5.9
5.10
5.11
Key evidence base
Housing Land Supply Position Statement (2010).
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009 and 2010).
Woking Borough Core Strategy 5354
 Woking Borough Core StrategyBiodiversity and nature conservation 
For the purpose of the Core Strategy, biodiversity describes the entire living natural environment of plant
and animal life. It encompasses the whole variety of habitats, species, and their ecosystems.
The Government’s vision for conserving and enhancing biodiversity is set out in ‘Working with the Grain
of Nature: A Biodiversity Strategy for England.’ It has a broad aim that planning, conservation,regeneration and development should have minimal impacts on biodiversity and enhance it whereverpossible. The document sets out a number of key principles to be considered in development planpolicies, including:
use of up-to-date information to underpin plan policies
plan policies should aim to maintain, restore and enhance or add to biodiversity and geological
conservation interest
spatial distribution of development should take a strategic approach to the conservation,
enhancement, and restoration of biodiversity and geology
policies should promote a design approach that incorporates beneficial biodiversity and geological
features within development
schemes where the principal objective is to conserve or enhance biodiversity and geological interest
should be permitted
where opportunities arise designated sites should be linked to other open spaces as part of the
green infrastructure for the area.
The Core Strategy will apply these principles in local planning decisions.In Woking Borough, the following key environmental designations of either international, national,
regional or local significance exist that need to be maintained, conserved and/or enhanced because oftheir biodiversity or geodiversity interest.
Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area (SPA) and Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham
Special Area of Conservation (SAC).
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI).Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI).Local Nature Reserves (LNR).Ancient Woodlands.
The designations listed above are illustrated on the Proposals Map. The designated areas provide
important habitats to a variety of important species. The habitats and the species within them, both floraand fauna comprise the biodiversity of the area.5.12
5.13
5.14
5.15
5.165.0 Borough wide policies55 Woking Borough Core StrategyReasoned justification
Thursley, Ash, Pirbright and Chobham Special Area of Conservation
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) are protected by the EU Habitats Directive. The designations
provide increased protection to a variety of wild animals, plants and habitats and are a vital part of globalefforts to conserve the world’s bio-diversity . The key conservation objective of the Thursley, Ash, Pirbrightand Chobham SAC is to protect and enhance wet heath, depressions on peat substrates and dry heath.The designation of SAC is also part of a range of measures aimed at conserving important or threatenedhabitats and species. These internationally important sites of nature conservation value are to be giventhe highest degree of protection. There will be a presumption against any new development that willdamage a SAC.
Potential damage to the SAC and the SPA arising from applications for development within the
SAC/SPA or located outside their boundaries but with the potential to affect features within them willbe evaluated on a case-by-case basis, taking account of local circumstances, including the natureand scale of the application. Issues to be considered include whether the development would:5.17
5.18CS7: Biodiversity and nature conservation 
The Council is committed to conserving and protecting existing biodiversity assets within the Borough. It
will require development proposals to contribute to the enhancement of existing biodiversity andgeodiversity features and also explore opportunities to create and manage new ones where it isappropriate. This will include those habitats and species listed in the Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP).Any development that will be anticipated to have a potentially harmful effect or lead to a loss of features ofinterest for biodiversity will be refused.
The Council will pay particular consideration to the following hierarchy of important sites and habitats in the
Borough.
1.Special Protection Areas (SPA) and Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) (European).
2.Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and National Nature Reserves (National).
3.Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI), Local Nature Reserves (LNR), and other Ancient
Woodland not identified in 1 and 2 above (Local).
These sites are identified on the Proposals Map.Within locally designated sites development will not be permitted unless it is necessary for appropriate on-site
management measures and can demonstrate no adverse impacts to the integrity of the nature conservationinterest. 
Development adjacent to locally designated sites will not be permitted where it has an adverse impact on
the integrity of the nature conservation interest that cannot be mitigated.
The Council will encourage new development to make positive contribution to biodiversity through the
creation of green spaces, where appropriate, and the creation of linkages between sites to create a localand regional biodiversity network of wildlife corridors and green infrastructure. It will seek to retain andencourage the enhancement of significant features of nature conservation value on development sites.
Any development with potential impact on the SPA or the SAC will be subject to a Habitats Regulations
Assessment to determine the need for Appropriate Assessment.
cause changes to the coherence of the SAC/SPA such as presenting a barrier between isolated
fragments
cause reduction in the area of the protected habitatcause change to the physical quality of the environment or habitatcause ongoing disturbance to qualifying species or habitatalter species composition.
The effective avoidance and/or mitigation of any adverse effects must be demonstrated and secured
prior to approval of the development.
Judgements will often be based on existing information. However , where this is unavailable or
inadequate, further work will be necessary to confirm whether an application will have a significantimpact.
National, regional and local designations
The majority of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Sites of Nature Conservation Importance
(SNCI), and Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) are within the Metropolitan Green Belt. There is no conflictbetween protecting them and implementing the Core Strategy, because they are not the preferredlocations for development. 
SSSIs are sites of national importance because they support distinctive flora and fauna creating a
distinctive landscape of value in the Borough. SNCIs are of county importance and are a non-statutory designation but are afforded protection in the planning process. There is a programme ofreviewing SNCIs to provide up-to-date information on their current state. LNRs are a statutorydesignation, allocated because of their local nature conservation and educational importance. All ofthese designations are illustrated on the Proposals Map. 
It is important that the landscape of the Borough is conserved and enhanced, but this must be
integrated with the need to accommodate change, to address social or economic objectives and meetthe needs of the communities. Harm to these environmental designations should be minimised, andopportunities should be taken to bring about improvements where possible. 
Biodiversity
The important habitats and species within the Borough form the biodiversity of the area. In the
Woking area the most common examples of protected species are bats, badgers and Great CrestedNewts. The aim of the Core Strategy is to protect, enhance and ensure effective management ofbiodiversity . 
Where development is proposed that would affect sites or features of nature conservation
importance, appropriate mitigation and management measures will be taken to ensurethat this is prevented or minimised. 
New biodiversity proposals should be appropriate to the local landscape character .
Any creation, habitat restoration or enhancement schemes should be based uponexisting habitats and landscape features. The Council recognises the importanceof trees in providing habitat for a number of species and will seek to retainexisting trees and encourage planting of new ones where it is necessary andappropriate to do so. New development can promote biodiversity with sensitivedesign and landscaping. The Council will require the prior assessment of thedevelopment site by the developer to provide information on species, includingspecies and habitats surveys where necessary, and information on features ofthe landscape important to Woking’s Biodiversity . The Council will apply adesign approach that enhances biodiversity where it is possible to do so.5.19
5.20
5.21
5.22
5.23
5.24
5.25
56
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
57 Woking Borough Core StrategyThe Council is committed to protecting and enhancing green corridors, links and stepping stones for
wildlife, river valleys, waterways and open space networks because they provide important sources ofhabitat and biodiversity . Opportunities will be taken to link designated sites and other green spaces tocreate integrated wildlife corridors. The Council is committed to avoiding habitat fragmentation andincreasing connectivity . River corridors will be protected by the incorporation of undeveloped bufferzones. Policy CS17 Open Space, Green Infrastructure, Sport and Recreation deals with this matter .
Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs) are part of the South East Biodiversity Strategy (SEBS) which
aims to be a clear , coherent and inspiring vision and framework that guides and supports all thosewho can impact biodiversity in the region. BOAs identify the most important areas for wildlifeconservation in Surrey, where targeted conservation action will have the greatest benefit. The mainaim within BOAs is to restore biodiversity at a landscape scale through the maintenance, restorationand creation of BAP priority habitats.
Delivery strategy
The condition of SSSIs will be monitored to ensure they are not declining. 
The Council will support the Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan which provides specific habitat and
species targets and the Surrey Biodiversity Opportunity Areas (BOAs).
The Council will work with the Surrey Wildlife Trust to carry out a rolling programme of SNCI surveys.
Monitoring and review
Surrey CC produces annual statistics on the proportion of Local Biodiversity Sites where positive
conservation management has been or is being implemented (previously based on NI 197) withdetailed information for Woking Borough. 
The Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan will be monitored (by Surrey CC through the Habitat Action
Plan Working Group to ensure that the targets set are being achieved. Habitat and Species ActionPlans monitor and report progress on individual plans through the Biodiversity Action ReportingSystem (BARS). The progress of Action Plans are formally reviewed every 5 years. 
Natural England published data on the Condition of SSSIs. Condition is rated as Favourable,
Unfavourable but recovering, Unfavourable condition with no change or Unfavourable conditionand declining.
Surrey Wildlife Trust surveys of SNCIs in Woking Borough.Information on the progress of the countryside works programme, provided by the Cultural &
Community Development team.
Number of planning applications permitted against the advice of Natural England and/or Surrey
Wildlife Trust and reasons for this.
The percentage of major applications incorporating specific measures to protect and enhance
biodiversity .5.28
5.29
5.305.26
5.27
Key evidence base
Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan, 1999.
Biodiversity & Planning In Surrey, November 2010 (Surrey Wildlife Trust and Surrey Biodiversity
Partnership).
Habitats Regulation Assessment, June 2011.58
 Woking Borough Core StrategyThames Basin Heaths Special Protection Areas
In March 2005, the Government designated areas of heathland within the Thames Basin Heaths as
Special Protection Area (TBH SPA) under European Directive 79/409/EEC (transposed into the UKHabitats Regulations). The TBH SPA has been identified as an internationally important habitat for threerare species of ground nesting birds; the Dartford Warbler , Nightjar and Woodlark. It covers areas ofheathland which extend across 11 Local Authority areas in Surrey, Hampshire and Berkshire andcomprises a network of 13 sites. Three of the designated sites that make up the SPA are located, or partlocated in Woking Borough; part of Horsell Common, Sheets Heath (Brookwood) and part of BrookwoodHeath. In addition close to Woking Borough are Chobham Common, Ockham and Wisley Common andWhitmoor Common which are also designated as TBH SPA. The delivery of this policy is set out in theTBH Delivery Framework by the TBH Joint Strategic Partnership and its partners.
The designation provides increased protection to a variety of rare birds and habitats and is a vital part of
global efforts to conserve the world’s biodiversity . The designation of SPA is part of a range of measuresaimed at conserving important or threatened habitats and species. These internationally important sitesof nature conservation value are to be given the highest degree of protection.
The SPA is shown on the Proposals Map.5.31
CS8: Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Areas 
The Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area is a European designated site which is accorded priority
protection and conservation by Woking Borough Council.
New residential development which is likely to have significant effect on its purpose and integrity will be
required to demonstrate that adequate mitigation measures are put in place to avoid any potential adverseeffects. The measures will have to be agreed with Natural England who will help take a strategic approach tothe management of the SPA.
The Council will take a precautionary approach to the protection and conservation of the SPA and
development will only be permitted where the Council is satisfied that this will not give rise to a significantadverse effects upon the integrity of the SPA.
The Council will ensure that no sites are allocated or granted planning consent for (net) new residential
development within the 400 metres exclusion zone of the Thames Basin Heath SPA because the impacts ofsuch development on the SPA cannot be fully mitigated. New residential development beyond 400m thresholdbut within 5 kilometres of the SPA boundary (in a straight line) will be required to make an appropriatecontribution towards the provision of Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) and the StrategicAccess Management and Monitoring (SAMM). Details of how the contribution will apply are set out in theCouncil’s Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy 2010 – 2015. 
An applicant may wish to provide SANG as part of development. Where that is the case, all relevant standards
including standards recommended by Natural England should be met and a contribution will have to be madetowards SAMM.
A minimum of 8 hectares of SANG land (after discounting to account for current access and capacity) should
be provided per 1,000 new occupants.5.0 Borough wide policiesReasoned Justification
The TBH SPA contributes significantly to Woking’s landscape character and wildlife value. In
considering whether or not a development is likely to have an adverse effect on the SPA, the Councilwill adopt the precautionary principle and assume harm will occur until it is demonstrated to beotherwise.
Natural England, the Government’s Advisor on issues concerning the natural environment, consider
that the intensification of residential development up to a distance of 5 kilometres away from the SPAwould result in a range of pressures with potentially adverse effects on the protected habitat. As aconsequence, within 400 metres (linear) of the SPA it is not considered possible to avoid or mitigatethe impacts of new development, and as such there will be a presumption against new residentialdevelopment within this zone. Between 400 metres to 5 kilometres (linear) from the SPA, mitigation isrequired. Without mitigation, planning applications for new residential development within 5 kilometresof the SPA will be refused.
The mitigation is provided in the form of a financial contribution towards Suitable Alternative Natural
Greenspace (SANG). The purpose of SANG is to attract informal recreation users, such as walkersand dog walkers away from the SPA. SANGs will provide alternative open spaces for use by futureoccupants of development and existing residents to avoid the potential harm caused by more visitorsto the SPA. SANG land can be new open space, or the improvement of existing open space toincrease its capacity for informal recreation.
As part of the SPA mitigation, Natural England requested that all Local Authorities affected
by the SPA designation collect a contribution per dwelling, in addition to the aboveSANG financial contribution, towards the SAMM of the SPA. This SAMM contributionwill be used to implement an identified programme of works to mitigate the impactsof the proposed developments.
The policy does not cover commercial and industrial development and, in
cases where it is considered that such proposals could impact on the SPA,advice will be sought from Natural England. 
Information about SANG land and financial contributions is set out in greater
detail in the Thames Basin Heaths SPA Avoidance Strategy 2010-15 (knownas the Avoidance Strategy). This document explains how avoidance may beachieved, the standards required and funding arrangements. The AvoidanceStrategy is a living document which will be updated as new avoidance andmitigation measures are identified. This document will eventually beincorporated into a Supplementary Planning Document.5.35
5.36
5.37
5.38
5.395.34Development of fewer than 10 dwellings should not be required to be within a specified distance of SANG
land provided it is ensured that a sufficient quantity of SANG land is in place to cater for the consequentincrease in residents prior to occupation of the dwellings.
Mitigation/ avoidance measures shall be delivered prior to occupation of new residential development and
secured and maintained in perpetuity .
Where further evidence demonstrates that the SPA can be protected using different linear thresholds or
with alternative mitigation measures, these must be evidence based and subject to AppropriateAssessment and also agreed with Natural England.
Any proposal with potential significant impacts (alone or in combination with other relevant developments)
on the Thames Basin Heaths SPA will be subject to Habitats Regulations Assessment to determine the needfor an Appropriate Assessment. 
59 Woking Borough Core Strategy The effective avoidance and/or mitigation of any adverse effects must be demonstrated and secured
prior to approval of the development.
Judgments will often be based on existing information. However , where this is unavailable or inadequate,
further work will be necessary to confirm whether an application will have a significant impact. 
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered by the Borough Council working with Natural England and other Local
Authorities which share the Thames Basin Heaths SPA, to maintain an up to date Avoidance Strategy andensure a consistent and coherent approach to mitigation.
Woking Borough Council will continue to be a member of and contribute to the Joint Strategic
Partnership Board (a forum of Local Authorities affected by the TBH SPA and other interested groups, todevelop a joint agreed approach to avoidance and mitigation measures).
Monitoring and review
Area (ha) designated as being of international importance
Status of the three protected bird species in the SPA.The amount and type of SANG land available.Net additional residential development within the 400m exclusion zone.The total amount of developer contributions secured towards SAMM and SANG.Number of permissions that use a different linear threshold or alternative mitigation measures.The number of permissions that required an Appropriate Assessment.Condition of SPA land, monitored by Natural England (published data on Condition of SSSI).
Condition is rated as Favourable, Unfavourable but recovering, Unfavourable condition with no changeor Unfavourable condition and declining.5.40
5.41
5.42
5.43
60
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy 2010-15.
Habitats Regulation Assessment, June 2011.PPG17: Open space, Sport and Recreation Audit (2008).Woking Borough Core Strategy
Flooding and water management
Flooding has implications for Woking Borough, not only in terms of the constraint it places on the
location of new development, but it is also an issue which relates to climate change. This threatensthe livelihood of residents and local businesses, the floods of 2000 being a reminder of that.
Flooding within the Borough originates from a number of sources. The most serious are river , surface
water flooding and sewer inundation. With advice from the Environment Agency, the Council hasundertaken a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA - available on the Council’s website) in order tohave a comprehensive understanding of the source and level of flood risk within the Borough andprovide a basis against which to apply the sequential risk based approach set out in the NPPF . Thisdocument will be used to inform the Site Allocations DPD. It has also been used to inform thepreparation of the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) and contains advice fordevelopers on undertaking Flood Risk Assessments. In addition, it takes on board other relevantplans and strategies relating to the management of flood risk.
All proposals must conform with the Water Framework Directive 2000 and the Flood and Water
Management Act 2010. Water quality impacts on wildlife in and around water , public health and theappearance and amenity of watercourses. River Basin Management plans are a requirement of theWater Framework Directive. The Council supports the Thames River Basin Management Planobjectives for improving the status of the borough’s rivers. The impact of development on water qualitywill be taken into account when determining planning applications with implications for flooding and/orwater management5.44
5.45
5.46
CS9: Flooding and water management 
The Council will determine planning applications in accordance with the guidance contained within the
NPPF . The SFRA will inform the application of the Sequential and Exceptional Test set out in the NPPF .
The Council expects development to be in Flood Zone 1 as defined in the SFRA. Applications or allocations
within Flood Zone 2 will only be considered if it can be demonstrated that there are no suitable alternativesin areas at lower risk. 
The Council will not encourage development in Flood Zones 3a and 3b however , it accepts that this is
possible in exceptional circumstances. Development proposals in Flood Zones 3a and 3b will be requiredto be accompanied by a comprehensive Flood Risk Assessment to demonstrate that the development willnot increase flood risk elsewhere or exacerbate the existing situation. A sequential approach will apply to alldevelopments in Flood Zone 3 and areas at risk of flooding from sources other than river . Any developmentin Flood Zone 3b will only be acceptable when it is either water compatible, essential infrastructure, or ifbrownfield land, does not increase the net number of residential units or businessfloorspace and improveslocal flood risk.
The Council will require all significant forms of development to incorporate appropriate sustainable
drainage systems (SUDS) as part of any development proposals. If this is not feasible, the Council willrequire evidence illustrating this. 
A Flood Risk Assessment will be required for development proposals within or adjacent to areas at risk of
surface water flooding as identified in the SFRA. To further reduce the risk from surface water flooding, allnew development should work towards mimicking greenfield run-off situations. Proposals which relatespecifically to reducing the risk of flooding (e.g. defence/ alleviation work) will be supported so long as theydo not conflict with other objectives of the Core Strategy for example, those relating to landscape andtownscape character .
In areas at risk of flooding, proposals (including flood compensation proposals) with implications for
biodiversity will be carefully considered for all levels of ecological designation. Where the developmentproposals are demonstrated to adversely affect an SPA, SAC or RAMSAR site, permission will not begranted.
All development, particularly on brownfield land, should seek to remediate contaminated land to ensure
that risk to water quality as a result of development is minimised.
61Reasoned justification
The Council has undertaken a Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment in order to identify sufficient
land with housing potential to meet its development requirements. The current assessment highlights that thereis sufficient land outside of Flood Zone 3a or 3b to meet the Borough’s housing requirements. In addition, andin accordance with the sequential approach, Flood Zone 2 will only be considered if sufficient housing landsupply cannot be identified in Flood Zone 1 to meet the housing target and all suitable alternatives have beenconsidered. It will not be necessary to permit development in Flood Zone 3a or 3b. However , applications forreplacement properties in these locations will be considered providing that there is a similar or reduced builtfootprint and measures to reduce flood risk will be expected. The aim of the policy is not to prejudiceredevelopment of existing buildings if it will not lead to an intensification of development which will adverselyimpact on flooding. Consequently, a like for like redevelopment of existing buildings will not be resisted.However , the Council will take the opportunity to encourage redevelopment schemes to improve flood risk.
National policy on flooding requires Flood Risk Assesment for all development proposals in Flood Zones 3a,
3b, and 2 as well as all development proposals of one hectare or above in Flood Zone 1. Applicants will alsobe required to undertake a Flood Risk Assesment for development proposals within or adjacent to areas atrisk from other forms of flooding. The SFRA and the forthcoming surface water management plan identifyareas of potential risk, although circumstantial evidence will be considered on a case by case basis. Wherethere is potential for other sources of flooding, a Flood Risk Assesment should be evaluated to investigate thelevel of impact of the risk and propose mitigation measures in accordance with national guidance, theCouncil’s SFRA and advice of the Environment Agency . Applicants will be encouraged to recognise thebenefits that undertaking a Flood Risk Assesment can bring to a development, even if not required. It isimportant for applicants to note that incorporating SUDs in new development will also help reduce the risk ofdiffuse pollution from run-off, improve amenity and biodiversity .  
A sequential approach to development will be applied for Flood Zones 3a and 3b.In managing surface water run-off from development sites, applicants should work towards replicating
greenfield run-off situations. In order to achieve this, priority should be given to prevention of surface waterrun-off (e.g. through minimising paved areas, keeping drains clear , general maintenance), followed bysource control measures. On-site solutions such as infiltration devices, filter strips should then be sought andonly if these will not satisfactorily deal with the run-off should off-site solutions be considered (such asdischarge into water courses). These requirements are complemented by Building Regulations andconsiderable guidance is also available via CIRIA (Construction Industry Research and InformationAssociation). All development should seek to incorporate pollution prevention control measures andSustainable Drainage Systems to ensure that impacts on water quality by development are minimised and inthe long term are improved. Applying this policy will help to achieve the objectives and deliver the relevantactions of the Thames River Basis Management Plan.
Delivery strategy
The policy will be delivered in the following ways:
Working with the Environment Agency, Surrey County Council, and the water authorities to keep the SFRA
updated, showing the latest known position on flooding and areas at risk.
The Council will continue to collect information on flooding incidents affecting properties, business
premises and the transport network, which will be fed into updates of the SFRA.
A Surface Water Management Plan is being prepared with Surrey County Council. The plan aims to
identify viable options to manage the risk of surface water flooding, for the benefit of Woking and Byfleetand its people, both now and in the future.
Monitoring and review 
Number and type of planning permissions granted contrary to Environment Agency / Water Authority
advice and for what reasons.
Number of new properties in Flood Zones 2, 3a and 3b.Number and percent of new developments incorporating sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDs).Number and nature of applications that seek to reduce the risk of flooding.The status of the water environment is monitored as part of the Thames Basin Management Plan. The result
of the monitoring from the Environment Agency will be reported through the Council’s Annual Monitoringreport.5.47
5.48
5.49
5.50
5.51
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2009, produced by Capita Symonds.
Water Framework Directive 2000;Flood and Water Management Act 2010
6263 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Housing provision and distribution
Housing provision is integral to the creation of a sustainable community in Woking. To achieve this
aim, the Council will ensure that there are sufficient homes built in sustainable locations that peoplecan afford and which meet the needs of the community . The main urban areas will therefore be thefocus for new housing development.
The Council will make provision for the delivery of at least 4,964 net additional dwellings in the
Borough between 2010 and 2027 (an annual average of at least 292 per annum). 
The Council has undertaken a Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)
8which
identifies land that has potential for residential development in the Borough. The results of the SHLAAare used to demonstrate a rolling five-year housing land supply and to identify sites that are likely tocome forward for residential development over the lifetime of the Core Strategy . 5.52
5.53
5.54
CS10: Housing provision and distribution
The Council will make provision for at least 4,964 net additional dwellings in the Borough between 2010 and
2027 in accordance with the distribution set out in the table below.
In areas at risk of flooding, proposals (including flood compensation proposals) with implications for
biodiversity will be carefully considered for all levels of ecological designation. Where the developmentproposals, either alone or in combination with other developments, are demonstrated to adversely affect anSPA, SAC or RAMSAR site, permission will not be granted.
* rounded.
** densities are pro rata where part of a mixed use scheme.Indicative number of
dwellings*Indicative density range**
1,980 In excess of 200dph Woking Town Centre
170 50 – 100dph West Byfleet District Centre
250 30 – 60dph Infill development in the Local Centres
8 http://www.woking.gov .uk/council/planningservice/ldf/ldfresearch/shlaa320 In excess of 200dph Poole Road / Butts Road employment area
Infill development in the rest of urban area
Moor Lane site, Westfield
Brookwood Farm, Brookwood
Green Belt (site(s) to be released after 2021/22)
Woking Town Centre – as a broad location 
Total750 30 – 40dph
440 30 – 50dph
300 30 – 50dph
550 30 – 50dph
200 In excess of 200dph
4,96464
 Woking Borough Core StrategyReasoned justification 
Through the SHLAA, the Council has been able to identify sufficient specific deliverable and developable
sites in the urban area to meet the housing target for around the first 13 years of the Plan. In this regard,the Council can demonstrate that it has satisfied the Government’s requirement to identify specificdeliverable sites sufficient to provide five years worth of housing supply and specific developable sitesfor housing provision in years 6 – 10. It also provides some degree of certainty in the delivery of thehousing requirement against any risk of certain sites not coming forward as expected in the first 10years of the plan period. Where possible, the Council is required to identify developable sites or broadlocations for growth for years 11 – 15. It is considered that there is additional housing potential in WokingTown Centre that will arise in the latter part of the Plan period from sites that have not yet beenspecifically identified. This can contribute to the housing land supply in the last 5 years of the planperiod. Woking Town Centre is therefore identified as one of the broad locations for long-term residentialdevelopment. This is in accordance with the overall spatial approach, helping to minimise the impact onimportant biodiversity and landscape features and offers the greatest scope to reduce the need to travelby private vehicle because of the proximity to existing services, jobs and public transport. Furthermore,it will help minimise the amount of land that will be needed to be released from the Green Belt to meethousing need.
In addition to the sites that will come forward in the Town Centre, there will still be the need to identify
further sites in the Green Belt to meet both the national requirement for housing land supply and thenature of housing that is needed. The nature of the sites that are considered to be developable in themedium - long term are primarily in town centre locations that are likely only to be suitable for highdensity flatted developments. The implication of this is that the Council would not be able to achieve anappropriate mix of housing types and tenures to meet all types of local need and demand. To satisfy theabove requirements, the Green Belt is also identified as a broad location for long term residentialdevelopment. The specific sites that will be released will be informed by a Green Belt boundary reviewand confirmed through the Site Allocations DPD. 
The locations and proportions of new dwellings listed in the policy are intended to be broad proportions
that can be varied in relation to the availability of suitable land for development, so long as the basicrelationships in the settlement hierarchy are not undermined.
New residential development within the urban area will be provided through redevelopment, change of
use, conversion and refurbishment of existing properties or through infilling.
For the purpose of this policy 'infill' development is defined as the development of a small gap in an
otherwise continuous built-up frontage, or the small scale redevelopment of existing properties withinsuch a frontage. Infill development will be permitted provided the proposed development is at anappropriate scale in relation to the character of the surrounding area. 5.55
5.56
5.57
5.58
5.595.0 Borough wide policies
The density ranges set out are indicative and will depend on the nature of the site. Density levels will beinfluenced by design with the aim to achieve the most efficient use of land. Wherever possible, density shouldexceed 40 dwellings per hectare and will not be justified at less than 30 dwellings per hectare, unless thereare significant constraints on the site or where higher densities cannot be integrated into the existing urbanform. Higher densities than these guidelines will be permitted in principle where they can be justified in termsof the sustainability of the location and where the character of an area would not be compromised.
Limited infill development will be permitted in the Mayford Settlement Area (as defined on the Proposals Map),
in line with national policy set out in policy CS6: Green Belt. 65 Woking Borough Core Strategy
National policy states that there is no presumption that land which is previously developed is
necessarily suitable for residential development, and defines back garden land as ‘greenfield’. Inmaking decisions on the appropriateness of development on back garden land, the Council will bemindful of this advice and will permit development where it meets the requirements of other policiesin the Local Development Documents and the Development Plan for the area. 
Development proposals in the High Density Residential Areas, as defined on the Proposals Map, will
be permitted at densities generally in excess of 70dph in order to make the most efficient use ofland. 
In accordance with the housing and previously developed land trajectory, as evidenced through the
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment, the Council will expect that between 2010 and 202770% of new residential development will be on previously developed land. 
In order to make efficient use of land for housing, the Council will encourage new residential
development to be at appropriate densities.  The density ranges set out in the policy are not intendedto be prescriptive, but a guide to inform development proposals. 
Over recent years, the density of new residential development has significantly increased in Woking
Borough.  Whilst this has helped to make efficient use of land, it has led to growth in some types ofhousing, particularly apartments.  It is therefore important to ensure that a balance is achievedbetween making efficient use of land and delivering the right type of housing to meet the needs ofthe whole community . The design of new housing is therefore of great importance to the delivery ofhousing. It is important that the densities sought do not affect the quality and character of an areaand the general well-being of residents. 
The Borough’s Local and Neighbourhood Centres offer community facilities and local services and
are within a reasonable distance of the town and district centres via public transport. Infill and otherforms of residential development within these centres will be permitted within the boundaries asshown on the Proposals Map. These boundaries may be reviewed as part of the Site Allocations DPD.
Land at Brookwood Farm, Knaphill has been reserved for meeting the long-term housing needs of
the Borough since the adoption of the previous Woking Borough Local Plan in 1993. Local evidencein the SHMA, SHLAA and housing trajectory now highlight the need to bring this site forward,particularly to meet the need for affordable housing. Land at Brookwood Farm is identified forresidential development in this Core Strategy . The site will deliver around 300 new dwellings in total,50% of which will be affordable family housing. Generally, the Council’s preference will be to provideall the 50% affordable housing in situ as part of the development. However , the Council will beprepared to negotiate for a percentage of the 50% target to be provided off-site if that will ensure amore effective distribution of affordable housing across the Borough. A Development Brief will beprepared which will set out the detailed development requirements for the site. Land at Moor Lane,Westfield has also been identified to meet the medium to long-term housing needs of the CoreStrategy . There is a resolution to grant planning permission for a scheme on the site for 440 newdwellings, 60% of which will be affordable. This is subject to a Section 106 Agreement being signed.The boundaries for both sites are shown on the Proposals Map. 
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered through working in partnership with developers and landowners through
decisions on planning applications, bringing forward land allocations (designated in a Site AllocationsDPD), supporting changes of use, redeveloping unsuitable employment sites and permitting tallerbuildings in appropriate locations. 5.60
5.61
5.62
5.63
5.64
5.65
5.66
5.6766
 Woking Borough Core StrategyThe Council will monitor the supply of housing land to ensure that a five year supply of deliverable sites
is maintained. Annual monitoring and updating of the SHLAA, housing and previously developed landtrajectory through the Annual Monitoring Report will enable the Council to keep under review the supplyof housing, and provide an early opportunity to consider options to ensure delivery, which may includethe allocation of additional land for development or the use of Compulsory Purchase powers.
Supplementary guidance on density and design will be set out in the Design Standards SPD.
Monitoring and review 
Net additional dwelling completions – against an annual average target of 292 .
Annual five year housing land supply position statement.Percent of dwellings built on previously developed land against a target of 70% over the plan period.Average densities (dph) achieved on site by location, assessed against indicative densities.  Net additional number of dwellings permitted and completed in Mayford Village.5.69
5.705.685.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009 and 2010 update.
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 2009 produced by Fordhams Research.Economic Viability Assessment 2010, produced by Adams Integra.Figure 4: Housing and previously developed land trajectory .
50099%
436
286362
263
146 174175
1668859.859.8
59.8
59.8
59.84242
42
42
42 99
99 99
147 147 147
90207 207 207 207 207
90 90 90 90172 172 172 172 17299% 99% 99%100% 99%
96% 96% 96% 96% 96%
2067
6766% 66% 66% 66% 66% 450
400350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
02006/7
2007/8
2008/9
2009/102010/112011/122012/13
2013/14
2014/152015/162016/172017/18
2018/19
2019/202020/212021/22
2022/23
2023/242024/252025/262026/27Developable Sites 
Identified i n the SHLAA
Other Sites with Existi ng Permission
Gateway (esti mate site 
does not have pe rmission)
Hoe Valley
Brookwood Fa rm
Moor Lane
Martins Press
New Ce ntral
Projected Net A nnual 
Completio ns 2010/11 - 2011/12
Net Additio nal Dwelli ngs
Housing target 292 p.a
% of develop ment 
on previously developed la ndSmall sites esti mate
42 42 42 42 4291%
20%69%
27%
67 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Fig 4: Housing and previously developed land trajectory68
 Woking Borough Core StrategyHousing mix
Different households require different types and sizes of housing. It is important that the Council provide
an appropriate choice and mix of housing across the Borough in order to create balanced andsustainable communities. Widening housing choice broadens the appeal of an area and assists inmeeting the needs of existing residents as well as attracting new residents to the Borough. Ensuring thatnew housing takes account of local need and existing provision to create neighbourhoods where there isa genuine choice of the right housing to meet local need, both at neighbourhood and Borough widelevel, is essential. The Council will therefore plan for a mix of housing that will be appropriate to theneeds of the community, providing a range of types, sizes and tenures including housing for the elderly,lifetime homes and other specialist housing needs.
Reasoned justification 
The Council will seek to achieve a mix of dwelling sizes to meet local need and demand. Research
(SHMA, May 2009) has found that the overall need and demand for new homes in the Borough is:
19% 1 bed28% 2 bed39% 3 bed14% 4+ bed. 
The Council will expect new residential schemes to reflect the latest evidence of need, subject to density
and character considerations. 
Lower proportions of family accommodation (2+ bedroom units which may be houses or flats) will be
acceptable in locations in the Borough such as the town and district centres that are suitable for higherdensity developments. Equally, lower proportions of smaller units will be acceptable in areas of existinglow residential density where the character of the area will not be compromised. 5.71
5.72
5.735.0 Borough wide policies
CS11: Housing mix
All residential proposals will be expected to provide a mix of dwelling types and sizes to address the nature of
local needs as evidenced in the latest Strategic Housing Market Assessment in order to create sustainable andbalanced communities.
The appropriate percentage of different housing types and sizes for each site will depend upon the
established character and density of the neighbourhood and the viability of the scheme.
The Council will not permit the loss of family homes on sites capable of accommodating a mix of residential
units unless there are overriding policy considerations justifying this loss. 69 Woking Borough Core StrategyDelivery strategy
The Council will work with developers to ensure that an appropriate mix of units is delivered on sites
through the planning application process. 
The Council will also prepare a Site Allocations DPD that will specify the mix of dwellings that will be
expected to be provided on specific sites. 
Through the Annual Monitoring Report, the Council will monitor the effectiveness of the policy with
reference to any changes in need as evidenced through updates to the SHMA. The Council willconsider reviewing the mix set out in this policy should the monitoring process highlight any issuesconcerning delivery or any changes in local evidence. 
The Council will provide more details on the application of this policy on housing mix in the Design
Standards SPD.
Monitoring and review 
The policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR to
enable the Council to effectively manage the mix of new residential developments:
Size and type of new dwellings delivered by location. Overall dwelling mix achieved in comparison to needs identified through SHMA.Net loss of 2+ bedroom homes.5.74
5.75
5.76
5.77
5.78
Key evidence base
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 2009 produced by Fordhams Research.Economic Viability Assessment 2010, produced by Adams Integra.
CS12: Affordable housing
Between 2010 and 2027 the overall target for affordable housing is 35% of all new homes, equivalent to 1,737
new affordable homes. 
All new residential development on previously developed (brownfield) land will be expected to contribute
towards the provision of affordable housing in accordance with the following criteria.
On sites providing 15 or more dwellings, or on sites of over 0.5ha (irrespective of the number of dwellings
proposed), the Council will require 40% of dwellings to be affordable. 
On sites providing between 10 and 14 new dwellings, the Council will require 30% of dwellings to be
affordable. 
On sites providing between five and nine new dwellings, the Council will require 20% of dwellings to be
affordable or a financial contribution equivalent to the cost to the developer of providing 20% of the numberof dwellings to be affordable on site, which will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis. 
On sites providing fewer than five new dwellings, the Council will require a financial contribution equivalent
to the cost to the developer of providing 10% of the number of the dwellings to be affordable on site. 
The mechanisms for calculating financial contributions in lieu of on site provision will be set out in the
Affordable Housing Delivery SPD. 
The affordable housing threshold and targets will apply to all new homes that are being proposed.All new residential development on Greenfield land and land in public ownership will be required to provide
50% of the dwellings as affordable housing, irrespective of the site size or number of dwellings proposed.
70
5.0 Borough wide policies
Woking Borough Core StrategyAffordable housing
Woking is a relatively affluent Borough and is placed within the top 20% of wealthiest local authorities
nationally . However , affordability – or the ability for people to get on the property ladder - is a key issue. Highaverage incomes and high employment rates conceal inequalities in the distribution of wealth within theBorough. There are small pockets of relative deprivation with Maybury and Sheerwater being the mostdeprived ward in Surrey and Goldsworth East recorded as the fifth most deprived area in Surrey .
Affordability is a measure of whether housing can be afforded by certain groups of households and is
defined by the relationship between local incomes and the local general housing market. Therefore, theability of a household to satisfy its own housing requirement is fundamentally a factor of the relationshipbetween local house prices and household income. The high cost of home ownership in Woking hasalways presented an issue of affordability for many of the Borough’s residents and leaves many peopleunable to afford market housing. In addition the high cost of renting on the open market leaves manylocal people unable to afford this tenure without dependency on benefits. This increases the demand forthe provision of affordable housing. Indeed, the current SHMA shows that there is a need for anadditional 499 new affordable homes in the Borough every year and in February 2012 there were 2,273households with active applications on the Council’s housing register . 5.79
5.8071
 Woking Borough Core StrategyOn sites where the Council is seeking a 50% affordable housing contribution, generally, the Council’s
preference will be to provide all the 50% affordable housing in-situ as part of the development. However ,one of its over-riding objectives is to ensure an effective distribution of affordable housing across theBorough. In this regard, it is prepared to negotiate for a percentage of the 50% target to be provided off-site if that will ensure a more effective distribution of affordable housing across the Borough. The actuallevel of off-site provision will be determined on the merits of individual schemes that will come forward. Asa guide, the Council will seek to ensure that 40% of the provision is secured in-situ. 
The proportion of affordable housing to be provided by a particular site will take into account the following
factors.
The need to provide an appropriate tenure mix that meets the needs of local residents, as evidenced by
the latest SHMA, and that is considered affordable based on local income levels.
The requirement for significant provision of new affordable family homes. Constraints on the development of the site imposed by other planning objectives.The need to achieve a successful housing development in terms of the location and mix of affordable
homes.
The costs relating to the development; in particular the financial viability of developing the site (using an
approved viability model).
If a site allocated or identified for housing is sub-divided so as to create two or more separate development
schemes one or more of which falls below the relevant threshold, the Council will seek an appropriate levelof affordable housing to reflect the provision that would have been achieved on the site as a whole had itcome forward as a single scheme for the allocated or identified site.
The delivery of affordable housing will be provided in accordance with the following order of priority .
On-site as part of the development and distributed across the development as much as is reasonable
and practical to create a sustainable, balanced community .
On an alternative site, only if provision would result in a more effective use of available resources or
would meet an identified housing need, such as providing a better social mix and wider housing choice.
A financial payment to be utilised in providing affordable housing on an alternative site.
Non residential developments which generate a need for housing will be required to provide a financial
contribution towards the provision of new affordable housing which will be appropriate to the scale andkind of the development and subject to an assessment of financial viability .
Planning conditions and/or obligations will be used to ensure that the affordable housing will remain at an
affordable price for future eligible households, or for the subsidy to be recycled to alternative affordablehousing provision.
Full details of how this policy will be implemented will be set out in an Affordable Housing Delivery SPD.
72
5.0 Borough wide policies
Reasoned justification 
The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) has found that 58% of households are likely to
require market housing and 42% are likely to require affordable housing over the Plan period. Table 3below shows the likely profile of households requiring market and affordable housing over the Planperiod. 
Table 3: Likely profile of households requiring market and affordable housing
The Council will seek to make provision for a target of 1,737 new affordable units secured on the back of
new developments (equivalent to a headline target of 35%). The Council recognises that the level ofprovision set out above is insufficient in the context of local need which is estimated at around 499 newaffordable homes a year , however , this is what can realistically be achieved without constraining theoverall delivery of housing in the Borough. 
This policy applies to all sites where new residential development is proposed, including mixed use
schemes and proposals where there is a net increase in the number of units on a site. This will includesheltered and extra care accommodation and other forms of residential accommodation where relevant.  
Hierarchy of provision – alternative sites
The Council will expect new affordable housing to be provided on site in the first instance. If, in
accordance with the policy, a case is advanced justifying provision on an alternative site, it will be theresponsibility of the applicant to identify a suitable alternative site. To ensure no overall loss of affordableunits, the alternative site will be expected to deliver those units foregone on the original site plus anyaffordable units that would be required should the alternative site in itself also trigger the requirement toprovide affordable housing. In such circumstances the Council will require an amount of affordablehousing commensurate with that which could have been secured had the site come forward in its ownright in addition to the quantum of affordable housing to be provided to secure compliance withobligations for the original site. 
Contributions from non-residential developments
Commercial development can put added pressure on the housing market as new employees move to the
Borough for work who may otherwise not have done so. Many commercial developments employ a widerange of employees and inevitably some of these will be on low incomes and in housing need. TheCouncil will require proposals for non-residential development which generates needs for additionalhousing to make an appropriate contribution to affordable provision, where market pressures areespecially strong and the need for affordable housing is acute. Over the Plan period, there will besignificant new commercial 5.81
5.82
5.83
5.84
5.85
Woking Borough Core StrategyMarket housing Affordable housing
25%
26%
49%55%
30%
15%Multi-person households (including families 
with children)
Couples
Single persons73development in the Borough, particularly in the town centre, which will put added pressure on the local
housing market and the need for affordable housing. Where a need for affordable housing is directlyrelated to a commercial development, the Council will seek a financial or other contribution appropriate tothe scale and kind of the development. Full details will be set out in the Affordable Housing Delivery SPD. 
Tenure split
The Council will expect that new affordable dwellings should be delivered in accordance with the
tenure split as evidenced in the latest SHMA. The SHMA (2009) identifies that there is a need for 70%of new affordable dwellings to be in the rented tenure (social and affordable) and 30% atintermediate level (including shared ownership). 
Affordable housing mix
Policy CS11: Housing mix seeks to secure a sustainable range of dwellings in order to create
balanced communities in the Borough. The dwelling mix required by the policy is based on theevidence provided by the current SHMA for all new housing. The SHMA also identifies, however , thatthere is a significant need for new affordable family (2+ bedroom) homes (92% of need is for 2+bedroom social rented units and 54% of need is for 2+ bedroom intermediate units). The Council will
therefore require that a higher proportion of new affordable homes should be family homes. 
Viability
In exceptional circumstances, where the provision of affordable housing in accordance with this
policy is not economically viable, the Council will expect the submission of financial appraisalinformation alongside the planning application. Applicants will be expected to pay for an independentreview of the information submitted. If the Council is satisfied that affordable housing cannot beprovided in accordance with this policy, it will seek to negotiate alternative provision. Further detailson this matter will be set out in the Affordable Housing Delivery SPD. 
Exceptional circumstances
On the basis of the results of the SHMA and the SHLAA, it is clear that the Council will not be able to
deliver sufficient affordable housing to meet the level of identified need. The Council will thereforeexplore opportunities to deliver affordable housing from other sources of sites. On a limited number ofoccasions, the Council has approved applications for residential development which are exceptionsto  adopted policy . On any future exception sites the Council will expect a substantially higherpercentage of affordable housing as the primary benefit to balance the policy objection. The detailswill be determined on a site-by-site basis through negotiation. The proportion of affordable housingshould not prejudice the provision of other planning elements necessary and reasonably related tothe scheme. This will not override the objective of achieving sustainable development in the Borough. 
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered through working in partnership with developers, landowners, Registered
Social Landlords and the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA) to bring sites forward to ensuremaximum affordable housing provision. 
Through the Annual Monitoring Report the Council will keep under review the affordable housing
trajectory, and monitor delivery against target provision. Monitoring provision in this way will enablethe Council to react at an early stage to any problems with delivery and the consideration of actionswhich may include the allocation of additional land to meet affordable housing needs or the use ofCompulsory Purchase Order powers, in accordance with the Implementation and Delivery Plan. 5.86
5.87
5.88
5.89
5.90
5.91
Woking Borough Core Strategy
74
Financial contributions collected by the Council in lieu of on site provision will be used to fund new
affordable homes through the following mechanisms.
Thameswey Housing LimitedThe provision of grant funding to Registered Social Landlords.The provision of grant funding directly to a developer . 
The Council will prepare and keep under review an Affordable Housing Delivery SPD which will provide
detailed information regarding the implementation and delivery of this policy . Specifically, the SPD willinclude:
a formula for calculating financial contributions in lieu of on site provisiondetails of the size and type of units that the Council will expect to be delivered on sitedetails of the distribution of affordable housing across developments (e.g. approach to ‘pepper
potting’ and ‘clustering’)
the Council’s approach to roundingdetails of any exceptional circumstancesadvice on the open book approach to viability assessmentsdetails on the requirement for affordable units to be secured in affordable tenure in perpetuity through
the use of section 106 agreements
details of the Council’s preferred RSL partnersdetails of design standards for new affordable homes. 
The Council will keep under review the SHMA to ensure that provision meets local needs. Should local
evidence of need and demand through the SHMA change, the Council will consider the review of thispolicy and/ or the Affordable Housing Delivery SPD as appropriate. 
Monitoring and review 
The policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR to
enable the Council to effectively manage affordable housing delivery .
Number of net additional affordable dwellings permitted and completed, by location. Size, type and tenure of net additional affordable dwellings provided. Level of commuted payments collected by the Council. Amount of commuted sums collected towards affordable housing provision. Percent of schemes providing affordable units on-site, off-site or via a financial payment in lieu.5.93
5.94
5.955.92
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 2009 produced by Fordhams Research.
Economic Viability Assessment 2010, produced by Adams Integra.75Older people and vulnerable groups
National policy requires local authorities to meet the specific accommodation needs of older people
and other vulnerable groups. Following the national trend, the Borough is forecast to see growth in theproportion of older people and older person households (around 5,000 more people aged 65+ areforecast to live in Woking Borough by 2026). It is important that the Council provides increasedhousing choices in terms of specialist accommodation, and appropriate dwellings that are suitablylocated close to public transport and other key local services. In addition, offering attractivealternative housing choices for older people and other vulnerable groups will assist the Council infreeing-up family sized homes that are currently under occupied. 
The ‘Supporting People’ programme is a Government scheme that aims to support people in their own
homes so that they can lead more independent lives. In terms of vulnerable groups, the programmecovers a number of groups including people who are older , ex-offenders, at risk from domesticviolence, homeless, mentally and physically disabled, have alcohol and drug problems, or are youngpeople at risk.  The main objective of this programme is to give people the opportunity to improve theirquality of life by providing a stable environment which enables greater independence.  This includesproviding high quality, cost effective, accessible housing and related support services that meetidentified need. This is likely to result in the need to develop specific types of accommodation, andaddress the requirements of wheelchair users, for example. 5.96
5.97
Woking Borough Core StrategyCS13: Older people and vulnerable groups 
The Council will support the development of specialist accommodation for older people and vulnerable
groups in suitable locations. The level of need will be that reflected in the latest Strategic Housing MarketAssessment. This will include the provision of new schemes and remodelling of older , poorer qualitysheltered housing which is no longer fit for purpose. 
Existing specialist accommodation will be protected unless it can be demonstrated that there is insufficient
need/ demand for that type of accommodation. 
New specialist accommodation should be of high quality design, including generous space standards and
generous amenity space. At least 50% of schemes should have two bedrooms (unless the development isentirely for affordable units when a smaller percentage may be more appropriate). Bed-sit development willbe discouraged. 
The Council will allocate specific sites through the Site Allocations DPD to assist in bringing suitable sites
forward to meet need.
New specialist accommodation should incorporate “Lifetime Homes” standards and be capable of being
readily adapted to meet the needs of those with disabilities and the elderly . A percentage of new specialistaccommodation will be required to be fully wheelchair accessible. 
The Council will work with partners in consultation with the community to ensure access to key local
services such as public transport and community facilities. 
The Council will work with partners to seek to provide the necessary infrastructure to support specialist
accommodation, including homes for the elderly . The Council will seek to develop the role of the communitycentres and where feasible seek to provide new schemes such as community hubs which provide leisure,recreation, and education and community activities for older people and vulnerable groups. 
76
Reasoned justification 
There are certain types of residential accommodation which cater for sectors of the community with
specific needs. These are often related to the more vulnerable members of society, or those who wouldbenefit from a higher level of on-site support. This need can be divided into two broad groupings - thegrowing elderly population, and those who may need specialist social support. The isolation of suchgroups is not conducive to social inclusion, balanced communities and sustainable development. It istherefore important for these types of development to be located in accessible areas, close to mainfacilities and public transport routes to best cater for residents, staff and visitors, and promote socialinclusion. The Council acknowledges that land values within the urban area can make securing sites forsuch developments difficult in terms of viability and availability . The Council will allocate specific sitesthrough the Site Allocations DPD to assist in bringing suitable sites forward to meet need.
Evidence from the SHMA shows that over three-quarters of older person only households are owner-
occupiers and just over 70% of these households do not have a mortgage. This evidence suggests thatthere is significant potential for equity release schemes or leasehold accommodation that would meetthe needs of older people and would free up larger units for younger families. 
A proportion of two bedroomed units for older people will be required as this takes into account residents’
future needs. By ensuring there are a number of larger properties it will take into account the ongoingneeds of older people who may require an additional bedroom for a live-in carer or for a family member tostay . This will ensure that older people are able to remain living independently for longer with additionalsupport as a positive alternative to residential care. In providing two bedroomed units, it will also provide anadditional incentive to encourage older people who are under-occupying family sized social housing units.The Government is changing the regulations regarding housing benefit through the Welfare Reform Act2012. Flexibility will be required for determining applications which include affordable sheltered andsupported units to reflect those changes.
These specialist types of accommodation have specific design requirements, and must for example
include generous amenity and space standards. The Council will therefore encourage all new homes tobe designed to ensure that they can be easily modified to meet future housing needs, and will requireapplicants to demonstrate in their design and access statements how design has taken theseconsiderations into account. The Council will therefore encourage new developments to incorporate theprinciples of “Lifetime Homes”. Further guidance on design which takes into account “Lifetime Homes”standards and wheelchair accessibility standards will be set out in the Design SPD. The Council hasdemonstrated through a real example at Brookwood Farm that high standards of sustainableconstruction can be achieved.
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered through partnership working, particularly through the Woking Partnership
and with Registered Social Landlords, to consider options to address the needs of the elderly populationand other vulnerable groups. This will include consideration of the potential allocation of sites in the SiteAllocations DPD and exploring opportunities for shared facilities, such as community hubs. 
The needs of the elderly population and vulnerable groups will be kept under review through updates to
the Strategic Housing Market Assessment and the Housing Strategy . 5.99
5.1005.98
5.101
5.102
5.103
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies77Should the monitoring indicators (overleaf) identify that demand outstrips supply; the Council may
review the policy and seek to allocate additional sites to meet need. 
Details of design considerations for specialist accommodation will be set out in the Design Standards
SPD.
Monitoring and review 
This policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR to
enable the Council to effectively manage the availability of sites in order to ensure that demand doesnot outstrip supply .
The number of additional nursing home bed spaces provided. The number of private sheltered housing for units or dwellings permitted and completed.The number of affordable sheltered housing units for social rent.The number of extra care housing spaces against need. Number of net additional private sheltered dwellings.   Number of net additional affordable sheltered housing units for social rent against need.Number of specialist accommodation beds/dwellings lost.Number of bedrooms of new specialist accommodation dwellings.Number of net additional bed-sits provided.Percentage of specialist accommodation dwellings which incorporate Lifetime Homes standards
(or future national equivalent).
Percentage of specialist accommodation dwellings which are wheelchair accessible.5.105
5.1065.104
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey evidence base
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 2009 produced by Fordhams Research.
78
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
The Council is committed to providing appropriate housing to meet the needs of the whole community .
This includes the provision of sufficient suitable sites for the Gypsy and Traveller and TravellingShowpeople community which is at an affordable price. 
Woking currently has one publicly owned Gypsy and Traveller site at the Hatchingtan, Worplesdon which
has 16 pitches. There are also two privately owned sites in the Borough (Five Acres, Brookwood – tenpitches and Ten Acre Farm, Mayford – three pitches). There are currently no pitches for TravellingShowpeople in the Borough. 
The North Surrey Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) identified that there is a
need to provide an additional 10 pitches in the Borough between 2006 and 2016. By September 2010,seven of these pitches had already been provided through an extension of the Brookwood site, andthere is a recent unimplemented permission for an additional three pitches on that site, meaning that theCouncil has been successful in meeting the short-term need for additional pitches in the Borough. 
In addition, there is a need for one pitch to meet the needs of Travelling Showpeople over the Plan period. It is recognised that mobile homes are particularly vulnerable to flooding (as classified in the NPPF
Technical Guidance). As set out in policy CS9, flood risk is a major determining factor when consideringall site allocations and the determination of all planning applications, including those for Gypsy andTraveller pitches. The Council will not allocate sites or grant planning permission for additional pitches forGypsies and Travellers or sites for Travelling Showpeople in the functional floodplain for Flood Zone 3a.5.107
5.108
5.109
5.110
5.111
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
CS14: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 
The Council will make provision for necessary additional pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling
Showpeople in the Borough between 2017 and 2027 over the plan period.
Sites to meet the need will be identified in the Site Allocations DPD. A sequential approach will be taken in
identifying suitable sites for allocation, with sites in the urban area being considered before those in the GreenBelt. Where no sites are available in the urban area, priority will be given to sites on the edge of the urban areathat benefit from good access to jobs, shops and other infrastructure and services. A demonstrated lack ofany deliverable sites in the urban area would provide very special circumstances necessary to allocate sites inthe Green Belt. Any site to be released from the Green Belt will be informed by the Green Belt boundary reviewto be carried out in 2016. Any proposal that will have an adverse impact on environmentally sensitive sites thatcannot be adequately mitigated will be refused. A Habitats Regulations Assessment will be carried out of anysite that is allocated in the Green Belt to determine whether there is a need for an Appropriate Assessment.Any site considered for allocation must be deliverable (including affordable to its intended occupiers) so as toensure that needs are met. 
The following criteria will be taken into consideration when determining the allocation of land for Gypsies,
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople and any planning applications for non allocated sites.79Reasoned justification 
In accordance with the NPPF and national planning policy for Traveller sites, the Council will take a
sequential approach to the identification of sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeoplethrough the Site Allocations DPD and when assessing individual planning applications. Sites within theurban area will therefore be explored before sites within the Green Belt are considered. Any site to bereleased from the Green Belt will be informed by the Green Belt boundary review that is scheduled tobe carried out in 2016. Where no sites within the urban area can be identified, priority will be given tosites located on the edge of the urban area where there is good accessibility to key local services.Whilst the Council recognises that Gypsy and Traveller accommodation should be provided first withinsettlements, it recognises that in reality this is very difficult to achieve. There are unlikely to beappropriate sites within the built-up areas, and individuals and groups will not normally be able tocompete in the market for sites where residential development would be acceptable. As such, anexceptions approach to provision for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople is adopted, bothfor considering planning applications and for any necessary site allocations. The policy approachapplies to transit sites, permanent sites and sites for Travelling Showpeople.
Based on evidence contained in the GTAA, the Council have already met the need identified for
Gypsies and Travellers up to 2016. The GTAA will be updated in 2012 and the Council will providenecessary additional pitches to reflect the outcome of the updated asessment.
Due to the nature of their work, pitches for Travelling Showpeople are likely to include some land for
the storage and maintenance of equipment. The Council will consider imposing conditions limitingthe proportion of a pitch which may be covered by equipment or the hours during which equipmentmay be tested.5.112
5.113
5.114
Woking Borough Core StrategyThe site should have safe vehicular access from the highway and have adequate parking provision and
turning areas.
The site should have adequate amenity for its intended occupiers, including space for related business
activities. 
The site should not have unacceptable adverse impacts on the visual amenity and character of the area.The site should have adequate infrastructure and on-site utilities to service the number of pitches
proposed.
The site should have safe and reasonable access to schools and other local facilities. 
Existing authorised sites for Gypsies and Travellers will be safeguarded from development that would
preclude the continued occupation by these groups, unless the site is no longer required to meet identifiedneed. 
*Note that there is an existing unimplemented permission for 3 pitches. The Council is confident that this
permission will be implemented before 2016. The Council will monitor progress on implementation. Theneed up to 2016 would have been met when this extant planning permission is implemented.
80
The layout of proposed Gypsy and Travellers sites/ pitches should comply with the design principles set
out by Government practice guidance which is currently in the form of ‘Designing Gypsy and Travellersites’ (May 2008). The layout of sites for Travelling Showpeople should comply with the latestGovernment Guidance available, and also take into consideration the design recommendations from theShowmen’s Guild.
The tenure of sites (i.e. whether they will be private or public sites) will be considered through the Site
Allocations DPD, taking into consideration the information within the North Surrey GTAA and any futureupdates to that study, the wishes expressed by the Travelling community within the Borough, and thesources of finance available.
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered through working in partnership with the Travelling community to allocate sites
in the Site Allocations DPD, to progress applications through the planning system and to exploreavailable Government grants to assist in the delivery of sites. 
The needs of the Gypsy and Traveller community will be kept under review through a refresh of the
GTAA. 
Should the monitoring indicators (below) indicate that demand outstrips supply; the Council may review
the policy and seek to allocate additional sites to meet need. 
Monitoring and review 
This policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR to
enable the Council to effectively manage the availability of sites in order to ensure that demand does notsignificantly outstrip supply .
The delivery of additional pitches for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation between 2017 and 2027. The level of supply (pitch numbers) measured against need identified in the GTAA.The number of unauthorised or illegal encampments or developments and enforcement actions 
carried out.  
Number of pitches granted planning permission/ delivered (6 monthly canvass).Provision of a site for Travelling Showpeople in the Site Allocations DPD.5.116
5.117
5.118
5.1195.115
5.120
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009 and 2010 update.Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA), 2006, produced by Anglia Ruskin University .Sustainable economic development
It is important to ensure that there is an appropriate quantity and range of employment land in the
Borough to enable the local economy to function efficiently and contribute to the region’s long-termcompetitiveness.
The NPPF requires councils to plan positively to support the needs of businesses and encourage a
flexible approach to economic development capable of accommodating growth in new sectors andchanges in economic circumstances. 
The majority of existing employment floorspace in the Borough is provided in Woking Town Centre,
West Byfleet District Centre and the employment areas
9. Smaller scale office and industrial space is
provided in the local centres, and a number of employment sites exist within the Green Belt, mainlycatering for industrial uses. In addition to these sites, there is a scattering of small employment siteslocated within the urban area.5.121
5.122
5.123
81
 Woking Borough Core Strategy9A list of employment areas is provided in the reasoned justification and
employment areas are shown on the Proposals Map.
10As defined in the Glossary .
11Except town centre office space.CS15: Sustainable economic development
To accommodate the predicted future growth in economic development10required for Woking’s economy to
grow, ensure sustainable employment development patterns, promote smart growth and businesscompetitiveness, and allow for flexibility to cater for the changing needs of the economy the Council will:
permit redevelopment of outmoded employment floorspace to cater for modern business needssupport small and medium sized enterprise (SME) formation and development by encouraging a range
of types and sizes of premises including provision for incubator units, managed workspace andserviced office accommodation
encourage improved ICT infrastructure in refurbished and redeveloped sitesencourage workspace and ICT infrastructure as an integral part of residential development, where
appropriate to support home working
support childcare facilities close to places of employment
The Council’s policy with respect to specific types of employment use is as follows:
B Class Uses11
1. Safeguard land within the employment areas for B uses, except in:
The Butts Road/Poole Road employment area where redevelopment for mixed office and residential use
will be supported if it does not result in an overall loss of employment floorspace.
The Forsyth Road employment area where redevelopment of vacant sites will be encouraged for B uses,
unless redevelopment is for an alternative employment generating use which contributes to the aims ofpolicy CS5 (priority places) and would not jeopardise the B use led nature of the employment area.
82
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
2. Retain the Broadoaks site in West Byfleet as a high quality business park. This site is designated as a Major
Developed Site in the Green Belt.
3. Permit the redevelopment of B use sites elsewhere in the Borough for alternative uses that accord with other
policies in the Core Strategy where (i) the existing use of the site causes harm to amenity and/or (ii) it canbe demonstrated that the location is unsuitable for the needs of modern business.
Town Centre uses
The nature, scope and scale of town centre uses being promoted is set out in the relevant place policies CS2,CS3 and CS4.
Public and community uses
Public and community uses will be considered as set out in policy CS19.
Reasoned justification
The Town, District and Local Centres Study assessed the likely demand for retail floorspace over the plan
period, identifying need for 93,900 sq.m of additional retail floor space. To assist in understanding thefuture requirements for B-use class employment land over the plan period, a forecast range for labourdemand in B-use class employment was calculated. Projected floorspace requirements were derivedfrom the projected employment numbers using established employment density ratios. The EmploymentLand Review (ELR) identifies a residual requirement for approximately 28,000 sq.m of offices and 20,000sq.m of warehousing and a loss of 31,000 sq.m of industrial space. A five-yearly review of the ELR willenable any unforeseen changes in the local economy to be monitored so that policies can be reviewedwhere necessary to reflect changing circumstances. 
The need for further economic development floorspace will not necessitate the allocation of additional
greenfield land for employment use. Future retail development can be accommodated within Woking TownCentre, West Byfleet District Centre and to a limited degree the local centres. Future office developmentcan be accommodated within Woking Town Centre and to a limited degree West Byfleet District Centre.Office floorspace will also be encouraged in the Butts Road/Poole Road employment area as part of higherdensity mixed use development, as the area lies adjacent to the town centre boundary . The existingemployment areas require safeguarding to meet projected need and are capable of accommodatingfuture requirements for industrial/warehousing space. Sufficient land also exists in the Borough toaccommodate potential spin off growth in high technology manufacturing.
The need to renew and refurbish employment floorspace, especially office space in Woking Town
Centre, is imperative if the Borough is to retain existing occupiers and compete effectively for newoccupiers looking to locate in the area. The overall vacancy rate of employment floorspace recorded inthe Borough in 2009 was 19%. However , this figure masks variations in vacancy between differentemployment uses and locations. Vacancy rates are highest for office accommodation and particularlyhigh in a limited number of office developments located in certain employment areas, whereredevelopment to provide alternative B uses or mixed B uses will be encouraged.5.124
5.125
5.126Part of the Forsyth Road employment area, a traditional industrial estate, was redeveloped to provide
offices in the 1980’s. The Market Appraisal identified high vacancy rates in these office developments,despite vacancy rates for industrial/warehousing premises being relatively low and stated that officedevelopments could be considered for alternative employment use (B uses) or release. Given thearea’s location within the Sheerwater/Maybury priority place and the need to provide furtheremployment in the area, redevelopment of vacant sites will be encouraged for B uses, unlessredevelopment is for an alternative employment generating use which contributes to the aims ofpolicy CS5 (priority places) and would not jeopardise the B use led nature of the employment area.
The Broadoaks site in West Byfleet is identified as a Major Developed Site in the Green Belt. The site
has planning permission as a high quality office and research park set within landscaped grounds.The Council considers the retention of this site for quality office and/or research premises isimportant as no other similar sites are available within the Borough.  The Council will keep the siteunder review when updating its ELR and preparing the Site Allocations DPD.  The Council willconsider justified alternative proposals that contribute quantitatively and qualitatively to theemployment objectives of the Borough.
The employment areas include the following:
Byfleet Industrial EstateCamphill Industrial EstateForsyth Road Industrial EstateGoldsworth Road Industrial EstateGoldsworth Park Trading EstateMonument Way East Industrial Estate (includes Woking Business Park)Monument Way West Industrial EstateOld Woking Industrial EstatePoole Road/Butts Road
Robin Hood Works
The Lansbury Estate
The above are shown on the Proposals Map.
Delivery strategy
The Council will work with its Partners including the Enterprise M3
Local Enterprise Partnership and Local Business Organisations tosupport sustainable economic growth in the Borough.Implementation of this policy will be via the developmentmanagement process. Provision of employment space in WokingTown Centre will be guided by the Area Action Plan.5.127
5.128
5.129
5.130
83
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Monitoring and review12
Net change in permitted and completed B1 (a, b, c), B2 and B8 floorspace (sq m)
in the Borough by location.
Amount of employment floorspace (sq m) lost to non-employment uses (permitted, under
construction and completed) by location.
Number/ amount of permitted and completed new incubator units, managed workspace and
serviced office accommodation by location. 
VAT registrations/de-registrations by industry .Number of live/work units permitted and completed.Number of employee jobs (total and by industry) in the Borough.Job density in the Borough.Earnings by workplace.Number of net additional dwellings completed within the Butts Road/Poole Road employment area.Net change in B1a floorspace (sq m) permitted and completed in the Butts Road/Poole Road area 
84
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Employment Land Review (incorporates Employment Position Paper (January 2010), and Market Appraisal
(April 2010) produced by Lambert Smith Hampton.
12Monitoring requirements for town centre uses are set out in the relevant place policies85Infrastructure delivery
Fundamental to delivering the spatial strategy is ensuring that the necessary social, physical and
green infrastructure is put in place to support the level of growth proposed and, to serve the changesin the Borough’s demographic make-up that is expected to take place over the Plan period. PolicyCS16: Infrastructure Delivery sets out the Council’s approach to securing that necessaryinfrastructure and the mechanisms that will be put in place to ensure delivery . 
The definition of infrastructure is wide and includes a range of services and facilities provided by
both public and private bodies. For the purpose of the Core Strategy, the definition of infrastructure isthat set out in the box below.5.131
5.132
Woking Borough Core StrategyDefinition of infrastructure
Transport: road network, cycling and walking infrastructure, rail network, parking
Housing: affordable housing
Education: further and higher education, secondary and primary education, nursery schools and other
early years provision
Health: acute care and general hospitals, mental hospitals, health centres/primary care trusts, ambulance
services
Social and community infrastructure: supported accommodation, social and community facilities, sports
centres, open spaces, parks and play space
Public services: waste management and disposal, libraries, cemeteries, emergency services (police, fire,
ambulance), places of worship, prisons, drug treatment centres
Utility services: gas supply, electricity supply, heat supply, water supply, waste water treatment,
telecommunications infrastructure
Flood Alleviation measuresGreen infrastructure: parks and gardens, natural and semi-natural urban greenspaces, green corridors,
outdoor sports facilities, amenity greenspace, provision for children and young people, allotments, cemeteriesand churchyards, accessible countryside in urban fringe areas, river and canal corridors, green roofs and walls.
86
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
CS16: Infrastructure delivery
The Council will work in partnership with infrastructure service providers and developers to ensure that the
infrastructure needed to support development is provided in a timely manner to meet the needs of thecommunity . In some cases, it will be necessary for the infrastructure to be provided before developmentcommences. Development may be phased to ensure the timely delivery of the infrastructure that will benecessary to serve it. Each case will be determined on its individual merits during the developmentmanagement process. The Council will support in principle the development of infrastructure projects if theycan be justified to support the delivery of the Core Strategy and meet all other requirements of theDevelopment Plan for the area.
The Council will:
continue to work in partnership with the Infrastructure Sub-Group of the Woking Partnership to monitor and
co-ordinate infrastructure provision
annually review the infrastructure schedule which forms part of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan which will
be reported to the Woking Partnership
collect financial contributions from developers to support improvements to infrastructure services and
facilities that are required as a result of development
ensure that new developments provide the necessary infrastructure on site required for the development to
be acceptable
ensure that development contributes to the provision of SANG where appropriate in accordance with the
Thames Basin Heaths SPA Avoidance Strategy (2010 – 2015).
In order to ensure a co-ordinated and consistent approach to the collection of developer contributions, the
Council will introduce a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL). 
Before CIL is adopted by the Council, Planning Obligations will continue to be the basis to secure developer
contributions. The level of contributions will be determined on a case by case basis taking account of thestatutory tests set out in the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (and any amended Order). TheCouncil will consider a case made by an applicant subject to a requirement for a financial viability appraisal ifit is demonstrated that the contributions being sought will threaten the viability of the proposal.
The Council will resist the loss of existing infrastructure services and facilities unless a suitable alternative is
provided for or it can be demonstrated that they are no longer needed to meet the needs of the community .This will require the developer to provide evidence that consultation with an appropriate range of serviceproviders and the community has taken place. 
The Council will safeguard land for future infrastructure provision through the Site Allocations DPD if
necessary .87Reasoned justification 
Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning. It aims to create sustainable communities
by ensuring that development policies are integrated with other policies and programmes thatinfluence the nature and function of places. The provision of infrastructure is therefore central tosupporting the spatial vision and spatial strategy set out in this document. Spatial planning is notlimited to the activities of the Council. Fundamental to the delivery of the spatial strategy is theCouncil’s ability to work with partners to deliver the spatial vision and in particular , to secureinfrastructure provision. To assist this, the Woking Partnership has established an Infrastructure SubGroup (ISG); which is tasked with the role of oversight of the infrastructure planning process, andspecifically preparing and monitoring the progress of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
The Council will ensure an effective integration of proposed development and the infrastructure to
support it. In this regard, it will be necessary in some cases to require developers to put in place thenecessary infrastructure before development commences. Development could also be phased toenable the timely delivery of infrastructure to ensure that the infrastructure provision is not laggingbehind the development. Detailed decisions about this will be determined on the merits of individualschemes through the development management process. 
The Core Strategy is supported by an IDP that sets out the capacity of existing infrastructure, the
impact of development on that infrastructure, and the likely funding sources available to meet futureneeds. The IDP also gives an indication of where opportunities may be available to co-ordinateprovision through co-location of services, for example. The IDP includes a schedule of infrastructurethat is considered necessary to support the spatial strategy . 
The IDP forms the evidence base for the CIL which will ensure that all new development contributes to
the provision of new infrastructure. 
The Council’s strategy is to optimise use of existing infrastructure, to reduce demand (for example, by
managing travel demand) and to seek new infrastructure where required. The loss of existing facilitieswill therefore be resisted and land will be safeguarded for the provision of future infrastructurerequirements where necessary . The Council will ensure a co-ordinated approach to infrastructuremanagement and investment through partnership working with the Woking Partnership and keyinfrastructure service providers.
Delivery strategy
The Council will work with partners and key infrastructure service providers to ensure that there is a
co-ordinated approach to infrastructure provision in the Borough. Specifically, the Council willcontinue to play a central role in the activities of the ISG and the Surrey wide Key InfrastructureService Providers Group. 
The Council views the IDP as a ‘living’ document that will be updated bi-annually to ensure that it is as
robust and up-to-date as possible, taking into account changes in need, capacity and the availabilityof funding sources in order that the Council and partners can respond to any changes to priorities ina timely and co-ordinated manner . 
It is the Council’s intention to introduce a CIL in order to secure contributions from new development
to pay for essential infrastructure. 5.133
5.134
5.135
5.136
5.137
5.138
5.139
5.140
Woking Borough Core Strategy
88
The Council is mindful that development proposals need to be economically viable. The Council will
therefore negotiate with applicants who state that viability is the reason for non-compliance with therequirements for developer contributions until such time as a CIL is in place (guidance on developercontributions is provided in Section 6). Where this is the case, financial evidence must be submitted withthe planning application. 
In order to ensure that land is available for the provision of additional infrastructure, the Council may
consider safeguarding land through the Site Allocations DPD. In addition, the Council may considerusing its Compulsory Purchase Order powers as set out in the Implementation and Delivery Plan.
Monitoring and review 
Progress towards achieving the strategic objective through Policy CS16 will be measured against the
following indicators and targets.
Adoption of a CIL.Delivery of infrastructure items listed in the infrastructure schedule. Total amount of financial contributions (secured and spent) towards infrastructure provision. Amount of contributions secured towards particular forms of infrastructure (i.e. open space,
transport, public art). 5.141
5.142
5.143
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA), 2009 and 2010.
Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2011.Surrey Infrastructure Capacity Study, 2009.Infrastructure Requirements Study, 2006.Social and Community Facilities Study (2011).Population Topic Paper 2011.89Open space, green infrastructure, sport and recreation
The purpose of the policy is to provide opportunities for people to participate and enjoy sports and
recreation and to facilitate effective access to the countryside and the amenity that it offers. This isessential to the wellbeing of the community .
Open space, green infrastructure, sports and recreation areas are highly valued by local people and
play a key role in the Borough’s landscape setting and local identity, whilst also providing habitats forwildlife, and land for agriculture and forestry .
Green infrastructure relates to a network of multi-functional open space and other environmental
features. The following can form part of green infrastructure networks.
Parks and gardens.Natural and semi-natural greenspaces.Green corridors.Outdoor sports facilities.Amenity greenspace.Provision for children and teenagers.Allotments, community gardens and urban farms.Cemeteries and churchyards.Accessible countryside in urban fringe areas.River and canal corridors.Green roofs and walls. 5.144
5.145
5.146
Woking Borough Core StrategyCS17: Open space, green infrastructure, sport and recreation
All proposals for new residential development (other than replacement dwellings) will be required to
contribute towards the provision of open space and green infrastructure, including the following:
children’s play areas and outdoor recreational facilities for young people.outdoor sports facilities.
Developers will be expected to contribute to provision through the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) or
on larger sites through on-site provision and/or a S106 contribution as appropriate.
Development involving the loss of open space will not be permitted unless:
alternative and equivalent or better provision is made available in the vicinityor the development is directly related to the enhancement of the open space.
90
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
There will be a presumption against any development that involves the loss of a sport, recreation or play facility
except where it can be demonstrated that there is an excess of provision, or where alternative facilities ofequal or better quality will be provided as part of the development.
The loss of public open space will not be permitted where there will be adverse impacts on biodiversity .Development which would create additional pressures on the Green Infrastructure network should, as part of
the planning application process, incorporate details of how it is intended to mitigate against these pressures.
The Council encourages the improvement of the quality and quantity of the Green Infrastructure network in the
Borough. The protection and enhancement of physical access, including public rights of way to open spaceand green infrastructure is supported.
The number of allotments in the Borough should be protected. There will be ‘in-principle’ support for new
allotments and opportunities sought to contribute to meeting the Council’s standards set out in Appendix 4.
Development will not normally be permitted which would have a detrimental impact upon the landscape
quality, ecological value or water quality of the following corridors. The Environment Agency requireundeveloped buffer zones alongside watercourses to help protect them (8 metres for main rivers and 5 metresfor ordinary watercourses). These include the:
Valley of the Wey and Wey NavigationHoe ValleyBasingstoke CanalBourne Stream.
The Council will seek to protect river corridors by creating undeveloped buffer zones, which will serve as green
infrastructure as well as habitats of biodiversity value.
New residential units within five km of an SPA will be required to provide or contribute to the provision and
improvement of Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) which is a component of Green Infrastructureand also its Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM). This land will be used to mitigate the impactand effect of residential development on the SPA, by providing informal recreation land of appropriate qualityacross Woking Borough. Standards for the provision of SANG are set out in the Council’s Thames Basin HeathsSPA Avoidance Strategy 2010-15. 
The Proposals Map identifies areas of dedicated Urban Open Space across the Borough to meet the needs of 
the Community .  
Reasoned justification
An audit of open space, sport and recreation facilities in the Borough was undertaken in 2008. The
study found there is a deficit of these facilities in the Borough. Since 2008, the study has been updatedin part though the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and the review of the Pitch Strategy (2012) to ensure thatthe information on need and capacity is up-to-date and credible. Therefore, it is appropriate to requirenew residential development, which results in a net increase in units, to contribute to the provision ofchildren’s play areas, outdoor recreational facilities for teenagers and outdoor sport facilities. 5.147Improved play provision for children and young people will be made to serve local areas where there
is an identified shortfall, or to meet increased demands as a result of new development. TheInfrastructure Delivery Plan sets out the detail of identified need in the Borough.
Outdoor sports facilities will be provided to meet identified demands and shortfall as highlighted in
the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and previously in the Open Space, Sport and Recreational FacilitiesAudit (2008).
Where provision is on site, the standards set out in Appendix 4 should be applied. The Accessible
Natural Greenspace Standards (ANGSt) produced by Natural England should also be adhered to.Assessing current provision against ANGSt helps the Council to identify where adequate provision isbeing made for natural green space, and where action needs to be taken to deliver appropriate levelsof natural space close to people’s homes.
The Council’s current priorities for addressing shortfalls in children’s play areas are parts of:
BarnsburyBrookwoodByfleet (north of Parvis Road)Goldsworth Park (St John’s Road area)Maybury (area around Windsor Way)Pyrford Village.
A need for additional multi-use games areas suitable for teenagers has been identified in many parts
of the Borough. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan sets out the detail of identified need in the Borough.
The Council recognises that water resources, such as river and canal corridors are of great
importance for water quality, nature conservation, recreation and landscape value. Riversand canals are also an important source of open space, form valuable links betweenGreen Infrastructure and/ or habitats, aid with flood storage and can enhancebiodiversity .
Natural England has demonstrated that the new population arising from
housing developments at a distance of up to 5km away from the SPA cancause significant disturbance to the breeding success of rare birdpopulations. This is because of the impact of recreational activities ofresidents, in particular walking, and walking with dogs. As a result, allhousing developments within 5km of the SPA will now be subject tostringent tests and impact assessments. SANG attracts informalrecreation users, such as dog walkers, and walkers away fromSpecial Protection Areas. SANG can be new open space or theimprovement of existing open space to increase its capacity forinformal recreation, at a minimum standard of 8 hectares per 1,000population. SANG land is to be provided and maintained inperpetuity in line with the quality and quantity standards advocatedby Natural England – the Government’s advisor on these matters.Full information about the Boroughs Special Protection Areas andthe SANG is set out in the Thames Basin Heaths Special ProtectionArea Avoidance Strategy 2010-15.5.148
5.149
5.150
5.151
5.152
5.153
5.154
Woking Borough Core Strategy 91Delivery strategy
Through the protection of existing facilities to meet current and future need and demand.
This will be achieved through the Development Management process and where appropriate developer
contributions.
By working in partnership with local community groups, partner organisations and providers of open
space, sports facilities and green infrastructure in the Borough and in areas adjoining the Borough.
Regarding green infrastructure, quantitative improvements will be achieved through the incorporation in
development proposals of extensions to the network. Qualitative improvements could include financialcontributions to attain enhanced management. If this is not possible, there may be circumstances wheresuch development may be acceptable if it includes full compensatory measures.
SANGs will be delivered by the implementation of policy CS7: Biodiversity, CS8: Thames Basin Heaths
Special Protection Areas, International, National, Regional and Local Nature Designations and theThames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy 2010 – 2015.
Monitoring and review
Net change (positive or negative) in the amount of green infrastructure, public open space and built
sports facilities.
Amount of developer contributions secured and spent on Green Infrastructure provision.Amount of formal and informal open space lost and gained. Number of planning applications approved contrary to objections raised by the statutory consultees
and SWT .  
Delivery of Open Space items listed in the infrastructure schedule, updated biennially . 
Net increase or loss of allotment pitches.5.156
5.157
5.158
5.159
5.1605.155
92
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Green Spaces Development Plan, 2005.
Open Space, Sport and Recreational Facilities Audit, updated 2008.Draft Playing Pitch Strategy Review, 2012.Play Strategy, 2007Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy 2010-15.Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2011.93
 Woking Borough Core StrategyTransport and accessibility
A well connected and integrated transport network supports the sustainable functioning and
development of the Borough. Woking Rail Station is a key hub for the South East, providing direct railaccess to London, the South East and the South West. Woking Rail Station currently has a directRailair coach service to Heathrow Airport running every 30 minutes. Investment in cycling hassignificantly increased since Woking’s designation as a Cycle Town in 2008, providing attractivealternatives to the car . There is significant scope to influence a shift in the mode of travel from car-based journeys to public transport and cycling.
Surrey County Council is the Highways Authority for the Borough. Woking Borough Council will work
in partnership with Surrey County Council to achieve the aims and objectives of the Surrey TransportPlan  which sets out the transport strategy for Surrey . The vision of the Surrey Transport Plan seeks tohelp people meet their transport and travel needs effectively, reliably, safely and sustainably; in orderto promote economic vibrancy, protect and enhance the environment and improve quality of life.
The majority of trips taken in the Borough are by car , resulting in congestion, particularly at peak
times. The NPPF requires the Council to promote sustainable transport choices, manage the locationof development and provide an integrated transport network to influence a shift to non-car modes. 
Key to the achievement of the spatial vision is an integrated transport system that provides easy
access to jobs, community facilities, green infrastructure and recreation, by all modes; in particularsustainable transport modes such as public transport, walking and cycling. A successful transportsystem offers an effective interchange between modes, and local, regional and national destinations,and complements the economic role of the Borough as a regional focus for infrastructure, inparticular the regeneration of the town centre. Woking Rail Station plays a pivotal role in this.5.161
5.162
5.163
5.164
CS18: Transport and accessibility
The Council is committed to developing a well integrated community connected by a sustainable transport
system which connects people to jobs, services and community facilities, and minimises impacts onbiodiversity . This will be achieved by taking the following steps:
Joint working with key stakeholders through the Transport for Woking Partnership to ensure that the
principal objectives and overall vision of the Surrey Local Transport Plan are met.
Locating most new development in the main urban areas, served by a range of sustainable transport
modes, such as public transport, walking and cycling to minimise the need to travel and distancetravelled.
Ensuring development proposals provide appropriate infrastructure measures to mitigate the adverse
effects of development traffic and other environmental and safety impacts (direct or cumulative).Transport Assessments will be required for development proposals, where relevant, to fully assess theimpacts of development and identify appropriate mitigation measures. Developer contributions
13 will be
secured to implement transport mitigation schemes. 
Requiring development proposals that generate significant traffic or have significant impact on the
Strategic Road Network to be accompanied by a travel plan, clearly setting out how the travel needs ofoccupiers and visitors will be managed in a sustainable manner .
13This will be achieved either through current planning obligations or through the
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
94
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Reasoned justification
The main urban centres offer a wide range of retail, employment and community services. It is in these
areas where public transport interchanges and walking and cycling networks are readily available. Byconcentrating development in the main urban centres, the amount and length of journeys can beminimised, particularly by private car , as the needs of the population can be met by the services andfacilities around them, and use of sustainable transport modes can be maximised. This will lead to areduction in energy consumption, efficient use of public transport, lower transport carbon emissions andan overall improvement in the well being of the population due to the health benefits of walking andcycling and increased social inclusion. 
New developments can create significant transport, environmental and safety implications, and it is
important that these are taken into account when determining planning applications. The Council will workin partnership with Surrey County Council to ensure developments, where appropriate, make suitableprovision for service vehicles, do not reduce highway safety and do not lead to an increase in heavy goodsvehicle movements along unsuitable roads. Necessary mitigation measures will be assessed on a site-by-site basis to enable mitigation to be tailored to address specific issues. Land required for major highwaysand transportations schemes, including any schemes that will be developed in a future funding bid, will be safeguarded as part of the Site Allocations DPD and will be reflected on the Proposals Map. 
Woking Rail Station provides a fast and frequent service to London, intra-regional and
local rail services and is an interchange for the Railair coach service to LondonHeathrow Airport. Woking as a transport hub has a direct linkage to the economicviability and vitality of the town centre and rest of the borough. The rail station is afocus for providing an integrated transport interchange to influence a shift inbehaviour to non-car modes of travel. Works to improve capacity at Woking RailStation are included in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. The Council has adevelopment agreement with a developer to redevelop the land between theHigh Street and Commercial Way and as part of that, the Council will make arequirement to improve interchange facilities at Woking Station.5.165
5.166
5.167
Supporting proposals that deliver improvements and increased accessibility to cycle, pedestrian and public
transport networks and interchange facilities. In particular , proposals to improve easy access betweenWoking Rail Station and the town centre will be encouraged.
Implementing maximum car parking standards for all types of non-residential development, including
consideration of zero parking in Woking Town Centre, providing it does not create new or exacerbateexisting on-street car parking problems. Minimum standards will be set for residential development. However ,
in applying these standards, the Council will seek to ensure that this will not undermine the overall
sustainability objectives of the Core Strategy, including the effects on highway safety . If necessary, theCouncil will consider managing the demand and supply of parking in order to control congestion andencourage use of sustainable transport.
Ensuring that changes made to transport infrastructure or increase in road vehicle usage will not have an
adverse effect on the integrity of an SPA, SAC or Ramsar site.
The Proposals Map and the Site Allocations DPD will safeguard land to deliver schemes that are adopted
by the County Council to support the Core strategy .95
 Woking Borough Core Strategy14Available from the Department for Transport and Surrey County Council.Transport Assessments set out the transport issues related to development proposals and identify
measures to reduce impacts and improve accessibility . Transport Assessments will be expected fordevelopment proposals with significant transport implications. Where transport impacts areanticipated to be small, development proposals may be required to submit a Transport Statement, inline with DfT Guidance on Transport Assessments. 
New developments that lead to an increase in the number of people travelling to a site can put
pressure on the road network, particularly as car ownership in the Borough is higher than the nationalaverage. A Travel Plan can be utilised to manage the travel demands of occupiers and visitors,employing measures to control the number of private vehicle trips to a site and influence a shift tosustainable transport choices for site users. The Council will require a Travel Plan from developmentproposals that generate significant traffic and a Travel Statement from smaller scale developments, inaccordance with good practice guidance
14. 
Around two out of every three trips made are less than 5 miles in length, many of which could be
easily cycled, walked or undertaken by public transport. Facilitating the movement of people betweensustainable modes of transport is a key factor in the use of such travel modes. Woking has hadsignificant investment in cycle infrastructure through the Cycle Woking partnership between WokingBorough Council and Surrey County Council. This programme upgraded and extended the cyclenetwork, encouraged school children into cycling with a new mountain bike course at GoldsworthPrimary School and increased the number of cycle parking facilities across the Borough. SurreyCounty Council has been successful in obtaining £3.93M of Grant Funding through the LocalSustainable Transport Fund (Key Component) bid (July 2011) which has been focused generally inthe Woking and Guildford (urban) areas. In addition, further funding could be obtained through theLarge Bid of the same fund (June 2012).
Maximum car parking standards are a means of restricting the number of cars on the road and
influencing a shift in behaviour towards other transport modes, particularly in urban centres with highaccessibility . The Council produced a Parking SPD in 2006 which sets appropriate car parking andcycle parking standards for all forms of development. This includes residential car parking standardsthat have regard for highway safety issues resulting from off-street parking and maximum car parkingstandards for non-residential developments. The SPD will be reviewed after the adoption of the CoreStrategy and at regular intervals to ensure the standards set are the most appropriate.
Safeguarded land identified on the Proposals Map and in the Site Allocations DPD will include extant
transport proposals in the Woking Borough Local Plan 1999. A list of the adopted and proposedschemes to support the Core Strategy can be found in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. The CountyCouncil is in the process of reviewing the need of some of the schemes and the Core Strategy will beupdated to reflect the outcome of this exercise.
5.171
5.1725.168
5.169
5.170
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
The Surrey Transport Plan (the Third Local Transport Plan), 2011, produced by Surrey County Council.
Transport Assessment, 2010, produced by Surrey County Council.Transport and Accessibility Topic Paper , 2011, produced by Woking Borough Council.Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2011, produced by Woking Borough Council.Cumulative Assessment of Future Development Impacts on the Highway Network, 2011, produced by
Surrey County Council.Progress has been made towards the delivery of transport infrastructure to support the Core Strategy .
The Council’s Transport Topic Paper includes a list of cycle infrastructure that has been delivered aspart of the Cycle Woking project. Planning has been granted for the Sheerwater Access improvementscheme and funding has been secured to deliver it. Funding has also been secured through the LocalSustainable Transport Fund to implement sustainable transport schemes across the Borough. Specificschemes identified for delivery are set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. The Council has decidedto appoint consultants to undertake a procurement exercise to seek improvements to the Victoria Archto facilitate enhanced movement into and through Woking Town Centre on the A320. A TransportTechnical Note has been prepared, which sets out transport infrastructure that will be needed to
mitigate the transport impacts of development.
Delivery strategy
This policy will be implemented through the development management (WBC) and transportation
development control (SCC) process and in partnership with key stakeholders through Transport forWoking. The Site Allocations DPD will safeguard land necessary to deliver transport infrastructure tosupport the Core Strategy .
Monitoring and review
Number of new developments permitted and completed within 30 minutes travel by publictransport to local services (including health, education and retail). 
Number of major developments submitted with Transport Assessments.Number of major developments permitted and completed with travel plans, in accordance with
Surrey County Council’s Travel Plans Good Practice Guide, 2009. 
Transport infrastructure improvements secured with developments.Annual patronage of Borough rail stations.Average journey time per mile during the morning peak on major routes in the authority . Amount of B-use floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) in the centres.Amount of A-use floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) in the centres.Amount of developer contributions collected for transport mitigation schemes.Amount of funding spent on sustainable transport schemes in the borough.Number of parking spaces provided through residential and non-residential developments.Local air quality in the Borough.5.1745.173
9697
 Woking Borough Core StrategyCS19: Social and community infrastructure
The Council will work with its partners to provide accessible and sustainable social and community
infrastructure to support growth in the Borough. It will do so by promoting the use of social and communityinfrastructure for a range of uses.
The loss of existing social and community facilities or sites will be resisted unless the Council is satisfied
that:
there is no identified need for the facility for its original purpose and that it is not viable for any other
social or community use, or
adequate alternative facilities will be provided in a location with equal (or greater) accessibility for the
community it is intended to serve
there is no requirement from any other public service provider for an alternative social or community
facility that could be met through change of use or redevelopment.
Applicants will be expected to provide evidence that they have consulted with an appropriate range of
service providers and the community .
The provision of new community facilities will be encouraged in locations well served by public transport,
pedestrian and cycle infrastructure.
The Council will work with other public sector bodies to encourage efficient use of public sector assets,
such as co-location, to facilitate the delivery of community facilities.
Developers will be required to provide and/or make a contribution towards the provision of community
facilities where it is relevant to do so. The methods of securing financial contributions are set out in policyCS16: Infrastructure delivery .Social and community infrastructure
The Core Strategy seeks to achieve a sustainable community for Woking and improve upon the well-
being of its people. This requires an effective balance between the provision of housing andemployment and providing the necessary infrastructure to support the growth. Social and communityinfrastructure includes: schools, higher education facilities, health centres, GP surgeries, dentists,child care premises, supported accommodation, libraries, museums, community halls, places ofworship, church halls, day centres, children’s centres, indoor and outdoor recreation and sportsfacilities and any other facility owned by a publicly funded body to provide front line services.
The provision of adequate community facilities and social and community infrastructure is critical as it
has a direct bearing on the well-being of the community . Community facilities play an important role inthe development of a sustainable community, by providing a place for people to meet. They also offerservices that are essential for education, health and well-being and support community cohesion andbenefit the general quality of life of residents. The provision of community facilities is particularlyimportant in view of our ageing population (see policy CS13: Older people and vulnerable groups) andour reliance on third sector (charity and voluntary organisations) and faith sectors to provide services tothe community .
One of the purposes of the Core Strategy is to deliver a significant amount of housing and jobs in the
Borough. The Council is therefore committed to working with partners to deliver the social andcommunity infrastructure to support it.5.175
5.176
5.177
98
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Reasoned justification 
It is essential that the growth in population in the Borough is supported by adequate social and
community infrastructure, including schools, health centres, centres for the community and communityhalls, for example. The Council will work with partners to seek to develop the role of centres for thecommunity and where possible new schemes such as community hubs, which provide leisure,recreation, education and community activities for older people and vulnerable groups.
The Council’s Priority Places (as set out in policy CS5) are in need of additional infrastructure. Meeting
the needs in the most deprived areas is a priority for the Council.
The Council will encourage facilities that are capable of accommodating a mix of uses which will serve
more sections of the community, rather than traditional single-use buildings. Community groups canoften use buildings at different times of day or on different days of the week to enable the most efficientuse of facilities.
Property prices in Woking are high and consequently so are land values. The Council is aware that it can
be difficult for community organisations to compete with the prices that private developers can pay forland. The evidence shows that existing social and community facilities are well used and the Council willtherefore resist the loss of any facility that does, or has the potential to, meet a current or identified need,unless the proposal replaces the facility in an equally accessible or improved location. 
All development has some impact on the need for infrastructure, services and amenities, or benefits from
existing ones, so it is only fair that developers make a contribution towards the provision of communityfacilities where relevant. It is also right that those who benefit financially when planning permission isgranted should share some of that gain with the community, to help fund the infrastructure that is neededto make development acceptable and sustainable. In this regard, the Council will seek to securedeveloper contributions to provide community facilities. The mechanism for delivering this is set out inPolicy CS16: Infrastructure delivery . 
When an application involves the loss of social and community infrastructure which is not being
replaced, applicants will be expected to provide evidence that they have consulted with an appropriaterange of service providers and the community, to prove that there is no need for or requirement for thefacility from any other public service provider for an alternative social or community facility that could bemet through change of use or redevelopment. Applicants will be expected to show that the property hasbeen marketed for a period of at least one year . The Council and partner organisations can providecontact details of community organisations in the Borough.
Delivery strategy
The Council will work with partners and key infrastructure service providers to ensure that there is a co-
ordinated approach to infrastructure provision in the Borough. Specifically, the Council will continue toplay a central role in the activities of the ISG and the Surrey wide Key Infrastructure Service ProvidersGroup. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan is a key document that assesses capacity and need. It will beupdated bi-annually and will take into account changes in need, capacity and the availability of fundingsources in order that the Council and partners can respond to any changes to priorities in a timely andco-ordinated manner . The details of the mechanisms for securing developer contributions are set out inpolicy CS16 Infrastructure Delivery . 5.178
5.179
5.180
5.181
5.182
5.183
5.184Key evidence base
Social and community facilities study, 2011.
Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2011.Surrey Infrastructure Capacity Study, 2009. 
99
 Woking Borough Core StrategyMonitoring and review 
Progress towards achieving the strategic objective of Policy CS19 will be measured against the
following indicators and targets:
Delivery of items listed in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Loss of D1 facilities (permissions and sq.m.) and what they were used for , by location.Gain of D1 facilities (permissions and sq.m.) and proposed use, by location.Usage/ patronage (based on opening hours and/or average number of people/groups using
certain facilities annually as appropriate). 
Identify any under utilised facilities.Amount of developer contributions secured for social and community infrastructure.5.185
5.186
100
Heritage and conservation
The heritage assets of the Borough are diverse and unique. They include historic buildings and places
such as Woking Palace and Sutton Place to the Shah Jahan Mosque and Brookwood Cemetery . Thereare 180 listed buildings in the Borough including four that are Grade I listed plus 25 Conservation Areas.
There is a wide diversity in the built character of Woking Borough from rural villages to an urbanised
Woking Town Centre and suburban residential areas. It is expected that new development will takeaccount of this. A Character Study has been carried out to provide a detailed description of the variousareas.
Those aspects of Woking that define its heritage will be conserved for their worth and the benefits that
they have in enriching the well-being of the local people and those who visit the area.
Reasoned Justification
Woking Borough comprises a variety of character areas. The Council has undertaken a Character Study
which provides a useful description and information about these areas. The Heritage of Wokingdocument will also be useful to applicants. It is expected that new development will take account of thecharacter within which it is situated.5.187
5.188
5.189
5.190
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
CS20: Heritage and conservation
New development must respect and enhance the character and appearance of the area in which it is
proposed whilst making the best use of the land available. New development should also make a positivecontribution to the character , distinctiveness and significance of the historic environment, including heritageassets at risk through neglect, decay or other threats. 
The heritage assets of the Borough will be protected and enhanced in accordance with relevant legislation
and national guidance as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework. The definition of what comprisesthe heritage assets of the Borough is included in the Glossary and also where relevant identified on theProposals Map. 
There will be a presumption against any development that will be harmful to a listed building. Alterations and
extensions to listed buildings must respect the host building in terms of scale, design, use of materials,retention of the structure and any features of special historic or architectural importance. Planningapplications will be refused for any alteration or extension to a listed building that will not preserve the buildingor its setting. A listed building consent will be required for any development that will affect a statutory listedbuilding.
On all development sites over 0.4 hectares an archaeological evaluation and investigation will be necessary if,
in the opinion of the County Archaeologist, an archaeological assessment demonstrates that the site hasarchaeological potential.
Within Areas of High Archaeological Potential (as illustrated on the Proposals Map), development will not be
permitted unless the following are satisfied:
Submission of an archaeological assessment of the site.Where archaeological importance of the site has been identified, a programme setting out a full
archaeological survey of the site has been submitted and agreed with the Council.
The Council will work proactively with all stakeholders to ensure the conservation, enhancement and
enjoyment of the historic environment, including identifying opportunities to mitigate and adapt to climatechange where that will not harm the integrity of the heritage asset. 101Conservation Areas are designated for their special architectural or historic interest. There are 25
Conservation Areas in Woking. The Council will continue to periodically appraise its ConservationAreas to assess changes which might have occurred over the years. This will inform a potential reviewof their boundaries or the creation of new areas. Development that adversely affects the ConservationArea and/or its setting, which cannot be mitigated, will be resisted. Development will be required todemonstrate that it will preserve and/or enhance the special features of the Conservation Areas. 
To ensure sufficient information is available to make a proper assessment of any development that 
has the potential to threaten the heritage, culture and character of the area, planning applications will be required to include detailed plans including details of materials and the relationship to adjoiningproperties.
Buildings on the local list do not have the same legal protection over demolition, alterations and minor
extensions. However , the effect of an application on the significance of a non designated heritageasset (including those of archaeological interest) will be taken into account in determining theapplication. In weighing applications that affect directly or indirectly non designated heritage assets,a balanced judgement will be required having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and thesignificance of the heritage asset.
The Council will resist the loss of listed buildings, and will use advice, negotiation and refusal of
consent to ensure features of architectural and historic interest are preserved and the setting of listedbuildings is safeguarded.
Locally listed buildings are not statutory listed, but are of local architectural or historic interest. They
contribute to the character of the area as often they are local landmarks of historic merit or havearchitectural features of local significance. Approximately 330 buildings are locally listed in WokingBorough. They form an important part of the heritage of the area and will be preserved andenhanced.
It is considered that the NPPF provides sufficient protection of the historic environment and
archaeology at the strategic level including listed buildings, Conservation Areas and historic parksand gardens. It is therefore not intended to repeat the requirements as the NPPF is a materialconsideration in itself. 
Delivery strategy
This policy will be delivered through the Development Management process. The Borough-wide
Character Study provides the evidence base and will assist applicants in identifying keycharacteristics. The Council will work proactively with all stakeholders to ensure the conservation,enhancement and enjoyment of the historic environment, including identifying opportunities tomitigate and adapt to climate change where that will not harm the integrity of the heritage asset. 
Monitoring and review
Number of imposed planning conditions that require mitigation.Trends shown by condition surveys of Local Authority owned heritage assets.Number of Grade I and II* listed buildings at risk.Number of listed building consents per annum.
Number of planning application refusals on the grounds of not preserving a listed building or itssetting.
Number of planning applications where archaeological assessments or surveys are required. 5.192
5.193
5.195
5.196
5.1975.191
5.194
Woking Borough Core Strategy
Key evidence base
Character Study, 2010, produced by the Landscape Partnership.
The Heritage of Woking - An Historic Conservation Compendium, 2000, produced by Woking BoroughCouncil.List of Ancient MonumentsList of Conservation AreasList of Listed BuildingsList of Locally Listed BuildingsList of Historic Gardens and LandscapesHistoric Environment Record (provided by Surrey County Council)102
Design
All forms of development should make a positive contribution to the environment and strengthen the
character and distinct identity of the area. 
Good design is of fundamental importance to the delivery of the Core Strategy, because it will contribute
significantly to the acceptance and appreciation of development by local residents and occupiers ofbuildings. It also has a bearing on the well-being of people.
Woking Borough Council expects the design of buildings to be inclusive and comprehensive, not only
looking at aesthetic quality, but also how the development brings various elements together to improvethe quality of life of its users and enhance the character of the area. These elements include howdevelopment incorporates high quality sustainable construction standards and ensures the functionalityof buildings. It is also about how development is accessible by its users and by various transport modes,including service vehicles.
Individual places within the Borough have their own distinctive characters. These have evolved over time,
and they are well valued by the local community as part of the heritage of the area. The Council seeks adesign solution that enhances the distinctive character of the area without compromising innovation andcreativity .
A Character Study has been carried out to provide evidence of the character of the area. This will
provide useful information to guide development and inform planning decisions. Furthermore, theHeritage of Woking Study provides additional information.
There have been concerns by local residents about the poor quality of some past developments. The
Core Strategy seeks to promote high density development in the main centres of the Borough. Thedesign of the proposed developments will be key to their acceptability by the public, the people who usethem, and the character of the area.5.198
5.199
5.200
5.201
5.202
5.203
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
CS21: Design
Proposals for new development should meet the criteria below:
Create buildings and places that are attractive with their own distinct identity; they should respect and
make a positive contribution to the street scene and the character of the area in which they are situated,paying due regard to the scale, height, proportions, building lines, layout, materials and othercharacteristics of adjoining buildings and land. Tall Buildings could be supported in Woking Town Centre, ifwell designed and can be justified within the context. The impacts of any proposal will be fully assessedand an Area Action Plan will be prepared to set out details of how it will be managed. 
Achieve a satisfactory relationship to adjoining properties avoiding significant harmful impact in terms of
loss of privacy, daylight or sunlight, or an overbearing effect due to bulk, proximity or outlook.
Be designed in an inclusive way to be accessible to all members of the community, regardless of any
disability and to encourage sustainable means of travel.
Incorporate landscaping to enhance the setting of the development, including the retention of any trees of
amenity value, and other significant landscape features of merit, and provide for suitable boundarytreatment/s.103Reasoned justification
Different parts of the Borough present different contexts for development. A Character Study has
been carried out to provide evidence of the distinctiveness of the various parts of the Borough. Allforms of development, should have regard to the Character Study . The Heritage of Woking (2000)and the Conservation Area Appraisals should also be taken into account.
Good quality construction is an inseparable element of good quality design. Developments will be
expected to make use of appropriate materials whether these are local architectural features or moreunusual high-performance components.
There is potential to exert a positive social effect through design. The design and function of an
environment can help to discourage crime and encourage positive use of public spaces. Areaswhere there is a mixture of uses or types of homes will ensure a footfall of people, offering naturalsurveillance and reducing incidents of crime and fear of crime. Quieter areas such as car parksshould be overlooked, open spaces and pedestrian routes visible from roads and buildings.
Delivery strategy
Planning applications must be supported by design and access statements and the Council expects
applicants to demonstrate how all the design issues covered in the policy have been addressed indeveloping a good proposal. 
The Council is committed to preparing a Development Management Policies Development Plan
Document which will include any details of space standards that the Council may wish to apply todevelopment. Policy CS1 and CS2 state an Area Action Plan will be prepared to provide furtherguidance on development within the Town Centre, which will also include matters regarding heightand design within this area. A Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document will be preparedsetting out further detailed matters on design.5.204
5.205
5.206
5.207
5.208
Woking Borough Core StrategyProtect and where possible enhance biodiversity within new developments (as set out in policy CS7
Biodiversity and Nature Conservation). The Council encourages the incorporation of built-in measures innew construction design. Examples of such measures may include green walls, brown roofs and theinstallation of bird and bat boxes. 
Ensure provision of well designed Suitable Accessible Natural Greenspace, (SANG) where necessary .Ensure schemes provide appropriate levels of private and public amenity space.Create a safe and secure environment, where the opportunities for crime are minimised.Incorporate measures to minimise energy consumption, conserve water resources, use the principles of
sustainable construction and provide for renewable energy generation in accordance with policy CS22Sustainable Construction and CS23 Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation.
Incorporate provision for the storage of waste and recyclable materials, and make provision for
sustainable drainage systems.
Ensure the building is adaptable to allow scope for changes to be made to meet the needs of the
occupier (life time homes and modern business needs).
Be designed to avoid significant harm to the environment and general amenity, resulting from noise,
dust, vibrations, light or other releases.
104
Monitoring and review
The strategic objectives of the policy will be measured by: 
The number of residential schemes of that meet 'Building for Life' criteria (or similar national standard)
"very good", "good", "average" or "poor" standards.5.209
Woking Borough Core StrategyKey evidence base
Character Study, 2010, produced by the Landscape Partnership.
Surrey Design Guide, 2002, published by the Surrey Local Government Association.The Heritage of Woking - An Historic Conservation Compendium, 2000, produced by Woking Borough
Council.5.0 Borough wide policies
105Sustainable construction
The NPPF requires local planning authorities to ensure that development plans contribute to global
sustainability by addressing the causes and potential impacts of climate change through policies which
reduce energy use, reduce emissions and promote the development of renewable energy . It also
requires local planning authorities to set out a clear and evidence-based local policy frameworkthrough which development proposals are to be assessed in terms of measures to reducegreenhouse gas emissions, and resilience to changes in climate. Where local circumstances warranthigher standards of energy efficiency, LZC (low or zero carbon) energy and climate changeresilience these will be clearly expressed and evidenced.
Woking Borough Council has commissioned a climate change, renewable, decentralised and low carbon
energy study to provide evidence to justify its specific requirements on development in the Borough.Furthermore, the Council has the commitment and credentials to manage and facilitate the delivery of theCore Strategy to achieve these targets. The Council leads by example and in 2010 work was completedon ten new affordable family homes in the Borough which were built to a very high environmental standardto demonstrate that the targets can be achieved. The scheme was designed to blend with the traditionalarchitectural style in the Borough but achieved Code for Sustainable Homes level five and is believed to bethe first mainstream housing project to have been built to this level in the UK. 
The approach is underpinned by the Council’s Climate Change Strategy which was first adopted in
2002. This comprehensive strategy recognises the contribution that all council services can maketowards climate change mitigation and adaptation and aligns with the target reduction in carbondioxide equivalent emissions set out in the UK Climate Change Act (of at least 34% by 2020 and 80%by 2050, both against a 1990 baseline). The strategy is divided into ten key themes, one of which isPlanning and Regulation, recognising the significance this policy area can have in reducing local areaemissions. 
The Government has set the objective for all new houses to be zero carbon by 2016 and non-
domestic buildings by 2019. A number of measures are proposed in order to meet these standards,combining significantly improved energy efficiency along with widespread deployment of renewableand low carbon energy supply systems. Stepped tightening of standards of energy efficiency isproposed through amendments to Part L of the Building Regulations. The initial revisions wereintroduced in October 2010, with further revision planned for 2013. Even with the definition of a “zerocarbon home” being clarified in 2011 to only including “regulated” energy, that from heating, fixedlighting, hot water and building services and not covering the emissions related to “unregulated”energy use from cooking or from plug-in electrical appliances such as computers or televisions, anumber of steps are going to be required to meet the zero carbon target.5.210
5.211
5.212
5.213
Woking Borough Core Strategy
106
Despite high standards for energy efficiency and widespread use of LZC energy, achieving zero carbon
emissions through on-site measures alone may be prohibitively costly and may not be technicallypossible for all types of residential and non-domestic buildings. Therefore the proposals includemeasures termed ‘Allowable Solutions’ to address the ‘residual’ emissions through funding a range ofoff-site measures. Allowable Solutions for homes that have been discussed include increased levels ofcarbon compliance, exports of low carbon or renewable heat from the development to otherdevelopments, and investments in low and zero carbon community heat infrastructure. AllowableSolutions will be expected to mitigate the carbon emissions from a home for around 30 years after it isbuilt. It is likely that a maximum price will be set by government for each tonne of residual emissions tobe met by the development industry through Allowable Solutions. The Council will seek to ensure fundingfrom Allowable Solutions arising from developments in the borough is used to support a programme oflow and zero carbon measures within the local community in Woking Borough.5.214
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
}These e missions are no longer
included in the 2016 defi nition for
Zero Carbon homesAll emissions, including those f rom
unregulated e nergy use
All emissions from
regulated e nergy use
Emissions standard
for Carbon
complianceAllowa ble
Solutions
On-site LZC Heat
and power
Fabric Energy Efficiency
CS22: Sustainable construction
New residential development on previously developed land will be required to meet the energy and Carbon
Dioxide (CO²) and water components of the Code for Sustainable Homes level 3 (or any future nationalrequirement) from now until 31 March 2013, the energy and CO² and water components of at least Code level4 from 1 April 2013 and the energy and CO² and water components of Code level 5 from 1 April 2016. Newresidential development is encouraged to meet the full requirements of each Code level, with particularencouragement for the material and ecology elements. Where the scale, nature and location of a developmentwould justify a higher Code level, the Council will negotiate with developers to achieve that because of thelower cost of developing such sites.
New residential development on greenfield sites will be required to meet the Code for Sustainable Homes level
5 (or any future national requirement) from now because of the relatively lower cost of developing such sites.Fig 5: The hierarchy of steps for achieving zero carbon107
 Woking Borough Core Strategy15Climate Change and Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon Energy
Evidence Base, June 2010, ecsc.The Council will consider a case based on evidence of viability if an applicant can demonstrate that the
requirement for code level 5 cannot be met. This will be considered on a case by case basis.
New non-residential development of 1,000 sq.m or more (gross) floorspace is required to comply with
BREEAM very good standards (or any future national equivalent).
All new development should consider the integration of Combined Heat and Power (CHP) or other forms of
low carbon district heating in the development. All new development in proximity of an existing or proposedCHP station or district heating network will be required to be connected to it unless it can be demonstratedthat a better alternative for reducing carbon emissions from the development can be achieved. Details ofthe zones where connection will be required will be set out in an SPD and will be determined by factorssuch as the capacity of the existing CHP network, distance from it and physical constraints. 
The evidence base
15sets out the locations in the Borough which have significant potential for CHP or other
forms of low carbon district heating networks. Subject to technical feasibility and financial viability, alldevelopment within these zones will be required to be designed and constructed to enable connection tothe future network.
Applications for developments with exceptionally high total energy consumption, such as large leisure
facilities with a high heat demand or buildings with exceptionally high power/cooling loads (such as datacentres), will be required to reduce the total carbon emissions from the development by 10% through theuse of renewable energy measures on site.
Where it can be demonstrated that the standards set out in this policy cannot be met on site, permission
will only be granted if the applicant makes provision for compensatory energy and CO² and water savingselsewhere in the Borough equivalent to the carbon savings which would have been made by applying this policy .
The Council will encourage proposals for residential extensions and non-residential developments of 
1,000 sq.m or less (gross) floorspace to incorporate energy and water efficiency measures.
The standards set out in the policy will be reviewed to reflect any future change in national standards
and/or any equivalent standards that might be introduced.
Electric vehicle charging points
The Council is actively promoting electric vehicle charging points and has already provided a number ofthese in the Borough. These are of particular value when the electricity source is low carbon. Details ofwhen new development will be expected to provide electric vehicle charging points or when a contributiontowards public charging points will be required, will be set out in an SPD. 
Design and construction
The design of all new developments will be required to take account of layout, landform, orientation andlandscaping to maximise efficient use of energy and adapt to the impacts of climate change. 
The design of all new developments should facilitate the reduction of waste and the recycling and
composting of the waste produced.
108
 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
16Strategy for Sustainable Construction, HM Government, 2008All developments should consider the use of sustainable construction techniques that promote the reuse and
recycling of building materials. All development is encouraged to use responsible resourcing of materials andis encouraged to source materials locally . All new residential development is encouraged to meet the‘materials’ elements of the Code.
Checklist
All applications for new development should include a completed copy of the Council’s climate neutralchecklist (with the exception of very minor development such as minor exterior alterations).
Ecology and biodiversity
All development is encouraged to make biodiversity enhancements such as green roofs and bird and batboxes. All new residential development is encouraged to meet the ‘ecology’ elements of the Code.
The Minimum % Improvement in Dwelling Emission Rate over 2010 Target Emission Rate (TER) and
Maximum Indoor Water Consumption in Litres/ Person/Day required in order to meet the equivalent Codefor Sustainable Home Standards set out in the policy are set out in Table 4. 
Reasoned justification 
The way in which developments are regulated, planned and built and the way in which resources are
used to do this can determine whether or not they are sustainable. By simply re-evaluating how andwhere we build things we can reduce emissions and help adapt to the effects that climate change willbring about. Factors such as location, layout and landscape are all important as well as the use ofclimate neutral technologies. 
Local evidence shows that the infrastructure in the Borough and the stresses placed upon it justify going
further than the minimum requirements set at a national level. This evidence includes an EconomicViability Assessment.
Construction methods used and standards of buildings can help to reduce these effects and the design
of buildings can ensure they are able to adapt better to the changing climate. Buildings are responsiblefor almost half of the country’s carbon emissions, half of our water consumption, about one third oflandfill waste and one quarter of all raw materials used in the economy
16. 
All developments should consider the use of sustainable construction techniques that promote the reuse
and recycling of building materials. This is to achieve more sustainable forms of development includingthe conservation of important mineral resources. This is considered particularly important given thatSurrey is likely to become increasingly reliant on recycled aggregates and imported marine sharp sandand gravel towards the end of the plan period as land won resources capable of being worked withinthe county without breaching environmental constraints rapidly diminish. 5.216
5.217
5.218
5.2195.215The Code for Sustainable Homes (the Code) is the national standard for the sustainable design and
construction of new homes. The Code is the Government’s preferred system for measuring theperformance of new homes. The Code aims to reduce carbon emissions and create homes that aremore sustainable. The code has six levels with mandatory requirements at each regarding energyand water usage (see Table 4), surface water run-off and waste. It also covers the categories ofpollution, health and well-being (which incorporates Lifetime Home Standards), management andecology but with flexibility over which standards to choose to achieve a specific Code rating. Theattainment of higher Code levels requires the incorporation of renewable energy production. 
Table 4: Code levels for mandatory minimum standards 
Source: Code for Sustainable Homes Technical Guide (Nov 2010)5.220
109
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Code Level Minimum % improvement in
dwelling emission rate over 2010target emission Rate (TER)Maximum indoor waterconsumption in litres/person/day
Level 1 0% 120
Level 2 0% 120
Level 3 0% 105
Level 4 25% 105
Level 5 100% 80
Level 6 Net Zero CO² Emissions 80110
Despite its limited size and other physical constraints, there is a significantly greater level of existing
renewable and low carbon energy in Woking than in many other boroughs of comparable, or indeed, largersize. The reasons behind this are set out in detail in the evidence base and can be summarised as:
a strong and early lead taken by the local authority through investing in decentralised energy since
the 1990s
well-established delivery partners, including one of the first Energy Services Companies (ESCO) in
the UK
consistent and assertive use of planning powers and tools to secure investment in decentralised
energy through new development for over five years.
Future Water , the Government’s Water Strategy for England
17was published in February 2008 and sets
out the Government’s vision for the water sector by 2030. Future Water maps out how the aboveoverarching target of reducing domestic water usage to 130 litres per person per day, can be achievedfrom a current estimate of 150 litres of water used by every person in Britain per day . Average waterusage in Woking is estimated to be 170 litres per person per day . The Government introduced BuildingRegulations to improve the water efficiency of new homes from 6 April 2010
18. This required a whole
building standard of 125 litres per person per day . 
The region’s level of water stress combined with higher than average levels of water consumption in the
Borough, the existing infrastructure in the town centre, and the scale of development required by thestrategy justify sustainable construction requirements in advance of the proposed national programme.This policy will apply to all new development in the Borough. Special requirements will apply forgreenfield development because of the relatively lower cost of developing such sites.
The establishment of the Thameswey Group of companies by the Council in 1999, which includes two
ESCos (Thameswey Energy Limited and Thameswey Central Milton Keynes Limited), has enabled theCouncil to progress its investment in decentralised energy infrastructure through a Special PurposeVehicle. This has established a robust commercial business platform on which to base further expansionof energy infrastructure and diversify its customer base. The infrastructure available in the town centreand elsewhere in the Borough has made Woking Borough Council a name synonymous with tacklingclimate change, and has given the Council an almost unique position. Development in parts of the towncentre can connect to an existing district heating network today and through Thameswey the practicalinfrastructure is already in place to supply, bill and service customers.
On sites where it has been proved to be unviable for development to meet the standards set out in policy
CS22 on-site, one way that applicants could achieve equivalent energy and water savings elsewhere inthe Borough would be to make a financial contribution to the Council to enable it to help to fund schemesthat would make the savings. The Council will publish updates of energy and water schemes that will beeligible and the cost per tonne of carbon dioxide and per cubic metre of water saved.5.2235.221
5.222
5.224
5.225
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
17Future Water , the Government’s water Strategy for England, Defra, February
2008.
18Building (Amendment) Regulations 2009: New Part G in Schedule 1 to the
Building Regulations and new minimum water efficiency requirements. TheAmendment Regulations were due to come into force on 1 October 2009 butthis was postponed to 6 April 2010 by circular 10/2009.Allowable Solutions are a new concept and legislation for them is yet to be put in place. Developers
are likely to make a payment to an Allowable Solutions provider , who will take the responsibility andliability for ensuring that Allowable Solutions, which may be small, medium or large scale carbon-saving projects, deliver the required emission reductions. The Council, will work with developers andother key stakeholders to develop and adopt its allowable solutions framework when legislated. TheCouncil will seek to ensure funding from allowable solutions arising from developments in theborough are used to support a programme of low and zero carbon measures within the localcommunity in Woking Borough.  More detail on Allowable Solutions will be set out in the Climate
Change SPD.
Delivery Strategy
The Council will prepare and keep under review a Climate Change SPD which will provide detailed
information regarding the implementation and delivery of this policy . Specifically, the SPD will include:
the zones within which all new development will be required to connect to a CHP station or district
heating network 
advice on the open book approach to viability assessmentsdetails of the Allowable Solutions framework and the Council’s carbon offset fund.
The Council’s key partner in delivering the strategy is ESCo Thameswey Energy Limited which has
enabled the Council to progress its investment in decentralised energy infrastructure through a Special
Purpose Vehicle. 
The Core Strategy has strong links with the Climate Change Strategy and each document supports the
delivery of the other . The Council will work with community groups such as Local Agenda 21 to deliverboth strategies.
Monitoring and Review 
This policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR.
Tonnes of CO² saved.
Percent of commercial development completed which is BREEAM good, very good or excellent
(percentage for each).
Number of dwellings and percentage of completions achieving each Code Standard.Overall number of dwellings and amount of commercial floorspace (and as a percentage of that
permitted and completed) which is providing a CHP onsite or connected to a district heat network.  
The number of dwellings and amount of commercial floorspace (and as a percentage of that
permitted and completed) which connects to the CHP/district heat network. Both overall numberand the number within the specific zones defined in the Climate Change SPD. Monitored via therevised Climate Neutral Checklist. 
Amount of non-residential floorspace which incorporates energy and water efficiency measures.
Measured by Code equivalent standards.
Number and/or percentage of dwellings and/or amount of commercial floorspace providing
electric vehicle charging points or making a financial contribution towards public charging points.5.2305.228
5.2295.2275.226
111
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Key evidence base
Climate Change, Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon Evidence Base, produced by ecsc, 2010.
Woking Borough Council Climate Change Strategy, 2008.112
Renewable and low carbon energy generation
Key to the reduction of carbon emissions will be the generation of energy from renewable sources. The
UK has committed to securing 15% of its energy from renewable sources by 2020 and government hasset out how it expects this to be achieved in the UK Renewable Energy Strategy (RES) 2.
The NPPF gives a strong positive message about renewable and low carbon energy generation both as
stand alone development and as part of residential and commercial development.
The Government is seeking to stimulate greater investment in energy efficiency and renewable energy
generation through a wide range of measures. The Energy Act (2008) provided the basis on which theSecretary of State could introduce fiscal measures that reward the generation of LZC energy . Thisincludes the introduction of a feed-in tariff (FIT) for small scale renewable electricity in April 2010 andthe planned two-phase introduction of renewable heat incentive (RHI) in autumn 2011 (non-domestic)and October 2012 (domestic). These measures have been designed to provide a guaranteed income toowners and installers of small scale LZC heat and power generating technologies at a level and for aduration that is sufficient to incentivise significant investment in these measures.
Reasoned justification 
The South East Plan included a sub-regional target for the Thames Valley and Surrey sub-region. The
Council is confident that the evidence used to inform the targets is sound and credible and will thereforeretain them.
The targets for Thames Valley and Surrey are set out in Table 5. Whilst no sub-regional targets have been
identified beyond 2016, the overall target for the region is likely to result in further increases equating toapproximately a doubling of the 2016 levels by 2026.5.231
5.232
5.233
5.234
5.235
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
CS23: Renewable and low carbon energy generation
The Council recognises significant progress needs to be made if national targets for the generation of
renewable energy are to be met and encourages the development of stand-alone renewable energyinstallations in the Borough. All proposals will be considered on their individual merits with regard to scale,location, technology type and cumulative impact on the surrounding area.
The Council particularly encourages applications from community-based and community-owned projects.Applicants should take appropriate steps to mitigate any adverse impacts of proposed development through
careful consideration of location, scale, design and other measures. All reasonable steps to minimise noiseimpacts should be taken.
Applicants should provide sound evidence of the availability of the resource which will be harnessed or the
fuel to be used, including details of the adequacy of transport networks where applicable and detailed studiesto assess potential adverse impacts such as noise nuisance, flood risk, shadow flicker and interference withtelecommunications.Table 5: Sub-regional targets for land-based renewable energy 
Source: extract from policy NRM14 of the South East Plan, 2009.
The Climate Change Act 
Development of renewable and low carbon energy provides one of the mainstays of the provisions
set out in the Climate Change Act. The Act puts into statute the UK's targets to reduce the carbondioxide equivalent emissions by at least 34% by 2020 and 80% by 2050 (both against a 1990baseline). The Act is supported by the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan which sets out the UKGovernment’s strategy for climate and energy and proposes measures to reduce carbon emissionsacross all sectors.
Woking Borough Council commissioned a climate change, renewable, decentralised and low carbon
energy study which sets out the Borough’s opportunities and constraints for renewable energydevelopment. The key opportunities were considered to be medium-large scale wind energy,combined heat and power (CHP) and solar heat and photovoltaic (PV). 
A wind energy feasibility study for the Borough (quoted in the climate change, renewable,
decentralised and low carbon energy study) concluded that wind speed for medium - large turbinesis not a limiting factor anywhere in the Borough but there were a number of land and planning-relatedconstraints such as ancient monuments, designated landscapes and habitats which may constrainthe development of wind turbines. In addition, there are ‘possible’ areas of constraint such asaerodrome notification areas where there is a requirement to consult the relevant operators andauthorities. The study revealed there are very few unconstrained places for wind turbines in theBorough, therefore there will be some practical obstacles to be overcome in siting medium-large turbines. Nonetheless, there are many areas where it may be possible to locatewind turbines subject to over-coming one or more possible constraints. Locatingwind turbines in any locations within the Borough would require detailed studiesto assess potential adverse impacts such as noise nuisance, flood risk,shadow flicker and interference with telecommunications.
There are opportunities for further use of CHP and the Council’s
experience in the application of this technology means it is well placedto encourage further use of CHP . However , an adequate ‘base’ heat
demand is required to maximise the efficiency of CHP and otherforms of community heat network. In addition, physical constraintscan limit the installation of new heat distribution infrastructure (or theexpansion of existing networks). 
Photovoltaic or PV are solar electricity systems that capture the
sun's energy using photovoltaic cells and convert the sunlight intoelectricity . Solar water heating systems (also called solar thermal)use the heat from the sun to heat water that can be used fordomestic hot water . 5.236
5.237
5.238
5.239
5.240
113
 Woking Borough Core StrategySub-region 2010 Renewable Energy Target
(Mega Watts)2016 Renewable Energy Target(Mega Watts) 
Thames Valley and Surrey 140 209114
Photovoltaic and solar thermal energies are considered to have good potential in Woking due to the
favourable insolation levels in the south east of England. PV provides a good complementary energy sourceto CHP and, along with wind energy, provides a higher level of carbon emissions reduction than heat-basedrenewable energy sources. Woking has been a pioneer of local authority-led large scale PV installations withthe result that nearly half of the total installed PV capacity in the region is located in the Borough.
A number of different fuel types are collectively described as ‘biomass’ including: wood fuel from
woodland management or forest thinning operations, waste wood from sawmills and the constructionindustry, agricultural products and wastes including straw, slurry and chicken litter , energy cropsincluding miscanthus grass and short rotation coppice and household putrescible waste. There is limitedpotential for the Borough to generate adequate biomass to meet a significant growth in biomass-basedenergy supply . However , supply chains are becoming established within Surrey (where greater potentialexists) and Woking’s road network and rail aggregates depot provide potential to enable importation ofbiomass fuel from local sources into the Borough. The existence of heat distribution mains in some partsof the borough could be used to distribute energy via community-scale biomass heating.
There are no active or recent landfill sites where methane gas is being produced on a regular basis or at
any volume that would enable gas capture and re-use for energy production. The sludge from the onlysewerage treatment works in the Borough is transferred to another site outside the Borough before beingrecycled. However , there may be opportunities to divert suitable wastes from existing waste collectionand disposal arrangements to be used in anaerobic digestion to generate biogas. There are no powerstations in the Borough so waste heat recovery opportunities and the small rivers with low flow providevery limited potential for hydro-electricity .
Delivery strategy
An SPD will be produced which sets out the detail and delivery mechanisms behind this policy .
The Council’s key partner in delivering the strategy is ESCo Thameswey Energy Limited. The existence of
an ESCo in the borough with experience operating community energy systems and retailing heat tocustomers will help to ensure delivery of any new community heat energy . 
The Core Strategy has strong links with the Climate Change Strategy and each document supports the
delivery of the other . The Council will work with community groups such as Local Agenda 21 to deliver bothstrategies.
Monitoring and review 
This policy will be measured against the following indicators and targets annually through the AMR to
enable the Council to effectively monitor the Borough’s centres.
MW of new renewable energy installations permitted.MW installed capacity of new renewable energy .5.241
5.242
5.243
5.244
5.245
5.246
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Climate Change, Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon Evidence Base, produced by ecsc, 2010.
Woking Borough Council Climate Change Strategy, 2008.Review of Renewable and Decentralised Energy Potential in SE England, 2010, produced by Land Use
Consultants and TV Energy for the South East England Partnership Board.Woking’s landscape and townscape
Woking Borough has a varied landscape. Its townscape also benefits from attractive local and
neighbourhood centres. It is essential that the character and sense of place conveyed by thesedifferent landscapes and townscapes are fully considered when making decisions that affect them.Future development should be well situated, and sensitive to its location, to protect the Borough’sdifferent character areas, whilst accommodating the change needed to contribute to environmental,social and economic objectives.
Landscape character is a distinct, recognisable and consistent pattern of elements in the landscape
that makes one landscape different from another . Townscape character is the appearance andcharacter of buildings and all other features of an urban area taken together to create a distinctvisual impression. Landscape and townscape character is that which makes an area unique. Allforms of development should have regard to the Character S tudy .
Reasoned justification
This policy does not seek to prevent changes to the landscape; its aim is to guide the direction of any
change, whether initiated through new development or land management decisions, indicatingsensitivities that should be considered in order to minimise negative impact, and provide the mostpositive opportunities for change.
Development in the urban fringe, adjoining the countryside, requires special consideration because
these areas are most vulnerable to a range of adverse environmental pressures. It will be important tomaintain the clear transition between the urban areas and the countryside and to ensure thatdevelopment on the edge of the urban area does not create obtrusive and unattractive skylines. Theurban fringe should be conserved and, where possible, be enhanced through appropriate landscaperestoration, management and habitat creation.5.247
5.248
5.249
5.250CS24: Woking’s landscape and townscape
All development proposals will provide a positive benefit in terms of landscape and townscape character ,and local distinctiveness and will have regard to landscape character areas.
To protect local landscape and townscape character , development will be expected to:
conserve, and where possible enhance existing character , especially key landscapes such as
heathlands, escarpments and the canal/river network and settlement characteristics; maintain locallyvalued features, and enhance or restore deteriorating features
respect the setting of, and relationship between, settlements and individual buildings in the landscapeconserve, and where possible, enhance townscape character , including structure and land form,
landscape features, views and landmarks, and appropriate building styles and materials
support land management practices that have no adverse impact on characteristic landscape patterns
and local biodiversity .
Protect and encourage the planting of new trees where it is relevant to do so.
115
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
116
Development will not normally be permitted on the slopes of the escarpments which are shown on the
Proposals Map, or which would result in a significant reduction in the amount of tree cover . Developmenton the top of the escarpments will only be permitted where it would not adversely affect the character ofthe landscape.
The landscape values of canals, rivers and their valleys are an important attribute and can add
considerably to the character of an area. Included in this definition are the:
Valley of the Wey and the Wey NavigationHoe ValleyBasingstoke CanalBourne Stream.
Policy CS24 will prevent development which would harm this visual quality by protecting water courses,
their immediate banks and wider setting.
Trees form an important part of the landscape fabric of the Borough. They provide an important habitat
for a variety of species, have a positive impact on the water cycle through their water carrying capacityand slow-down of surface run-off, enhance the amenity of the area, absorb carbon dioxide and otherpollutants and provide urban cooling through creating shade and reducing ambient temperatures. TheCouncil will seek the retention of existing quality trees (except where they are dead, dying or dangerous)and encourage the planting of new ones where it is relevant to do so. New trees must have sufficient rootvolume availability, appropriate root management, irrigation, drainage and aeration in order for the tree tothrive. The Council’s forthcoming Tree Strategy will set out more detail.
Delivery strategy
All new development must respect and, where appropriate, enhance the character and distinctiveness of
the landscape character area in which it is proposed. Landscape enhancement works may be requiredto avoid adverse impacts associated with new developments.
Some schemes may require landscape assessments, depending on the size and location of proposals.The Council will encourage the preparation of Design Statements for local and neighbourhoods by local
amenity and community groups.
Monitoring and review
The number of planning applications requiring landscape character assessments to be submitted.
Assessments should be produced in line with the Landscape Character Assessment Guidance,published by Natural England and Scottish Natural Heritage.5.252
5.253
5.255
5.256
5.257
5.2585.251
5.254
Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
Character Study, October 2010, produced by The Landscape Partnership.117
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Presumption in favour of sustainable development
A key part of the Government’s plan to reform the planning system is the publication of the National
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), which seeks to simplify national planning policy guidance into oneconcise document. The NPPF supersedes previous Planning Policy Statements, Planning PolicyGuidance Notes, Circulars and other national planning policy guidance. A list of previous nationalguidance that is now superseded is included in Annex 3 of the NPPF . At the heart of the NPPF is thepromotion of sustainable development. Consequently, development that is sustainable and is inaccordance with the development plan for the area should be permitted without delay . The presumptionin favour of sustainable development provides the necessary framework to ensure that there is aneffective partnership working between the Council and applicants to explore opportunities for makingdevelopment proposals acceptable within the context of the development plan and the NPPF .
Reasoned justification 
The NPPF was published and took effect on 27 March 2012. Consequently, its requirements are a
material consideration for the purposes of development management and other planning decisions.The NPPF introduces a new presumption in favour of sustainable development that requires localplanning authorities to take a positive approach to development management by working inpartnership with applicants to explore opportunities for making development proposals acceptable. Itreiterates the Government’s commitment to a plan-led system and expects development to bedetermined in accordance with the development plan.5.259
5.260CS25: Presumption in favour of sustainable development
When considering development proposals the Council will take a positive approach that reflects thepresumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. Itwill always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean that proposals can beapproved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, social andenvironmental conditions in the area.
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Core Strategy and/or other development plans for
the area (and, where relevant, with polices in neighbourhood plans) will be approved without delay, unlessmaterial considerations indicate otherwise.
Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out-of-date at the time of
making the decision then the Council will grant permission unless material considerations indicateotherwise – taking into account whether:
Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as awhole; or
Specific policies in that Framework indicate that development should be restricted. Partnership working is already a key principle that underpins the work of the Council. It will therefore
work with applicants to ensure that development makes a positive contribution towards the sustainabledevelopment of the area and are in accordance with the development plan of the area.
The Council has an up to date Core Strategy, which is in general conformity with the NPPF to provide a
robust planning policy framework for the considerations of planning applications. However , incircumstances where there are no policies in the development plan relevant to the consideration of aparticular development proposal or the relevant policies are out of date, the requirements of the NPPFas a whole will be used to judge the acceptability of the development proposal..
The Council will always consider whether there is anything that could be done to make a development
proposal acceptable. It will only be when it is satisfied that nothing could be done within the context ofthe development plan and the NPPF to make it acceptable that planning permission will be refused. 
Delivery Strategy
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and partnership working
with applicants and key stakeholders..
Monitoring and review
The overall effectiveness of the policy will be measured by how well the growth proposals identified in
the Core Strategy are being delivered. The monitoring of the performance of Policies CS2, CS3, CS4,CS5, CS10 and CS12 will be relevant in this regard.
The policy will also be monitored by measuring the number of planning applications approved solely on
the basis of the application of the NPPF because the development plan is silent or out of date.
This will be reported in an Annual Monitoring Report.5.261
5.262
5.263
5.264
5.265
5.266
5.267
118 Woking Borough Core Strategy5.0 Borough wide policies
Key evidence base
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).119 Woking Borough Core Strategy
The Core Strategy should show a clear path for its implementation to demonstrate how its vision and
objectives will be achieved. Furthermore, it should set out how it is effecting a positive change in thelives of people who live, work and visit the Borough by addressing the key challenges facing theBorough. This should be closely monitored to assess whether the policies and proposals aredelivering the objectives, target and standards at the right time.The NPPF sets out the key tests ofsoundness for the Core Strategy to meet. One of them is a clear demonstration of its effectiveness.This section sets out how the Core Strategy will be implemented and monitored.
Implementation
The Core Strategy will be delivered by the following sectors:
Public Sector - through investment in infrastructure to create the necessary environment for other
policies and proposals to be delivered, direct investment in delivering some policies andproposals such as affordable housing and rationalisation of public sector assets to maximise theireffective and efficient use. This will include disposal of assets for alternative uses or co-location forefficient use of land. It will also deliver the Core Strategy through development enabling andmanagement by ensuring that development meets all necessary standards and objectives tosupport infrastructure provision.
Private Sector - through direct investment in land and buildings and developer contributions
towards infrastructure delivery .
Voluntary Sector - through direct investment in land and buildings.
An Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been prepared to set out the scale, type and cost of
infrastructure needed to support the Core Strategy, who will provide it and how it will be delivered.The Woking Partnership is responsible for coordinating the delivery of the Sustainable CommunityStrategy . It has an Infrastructure Sub Group, which will seek to coordinate the delivery of thisprogramme. The Council will ensure that development is supported by necessary infrastructureand/or financial contributions to infrastructure provision before planning permission will be granted.
The Council recognises that the implementation of the Core Strategy will involve a variety of delivery
agencies and, for that matter , will need to take a proactive role in coordinating them to ensure that theobjectives they seek to achieve are not lost in the process. It will also take a realistic approachtowards the delivery of the policies and proposals of the Core Strategy . In this regard, it accepts thatthe nature and cost of schemes will influence when specific schemes come forward in the short,medium or long term. Some schemes might have to be phased to achieve its expected objectives.Other proposals will require extensive consultation depending on their nature, location andsensitiveness. The Council will therefore ensure that public consultation is integral to the deliveryprocess. The Council will work closely with its partners to coordinate all these to ensure acomprehensive delivery of all aspects of the Core Strategy .
Each policy in the Core Strategy includes a section on delivery, monitoring and review. Details of
these proposals comprise of how, when and by whom the policy will be implemented. Furthermore, itincludes targets and indicators against which the policy will be monitored and reviewed.6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.56.0 Implementation and monitoring
of the Core Strategy120
6.0 Implementation and monitoring of the Core Strategy
Woking Borough Core StrategyPlanning Application Process - The Council has a primary role for enabling and determining the
suitability of development proposals. It will exercise this responsibility proactively to ensure the deliveryof the Core Strategy . It will seek to ensure that schemes that come forward are legally, technically andpractically feasible in the short, medium and long term before they are approved. It will be proactive toensure developers are fully aware of the objectives and expectation of the basis upon which thesuitability of their schemes will be judged. It will ensure that planning applications are submitted withadequate and appropriate information to make informed decisions before the application is accepted.Furthermore, it will ensure strict compliance of all necessary adopted standards such as design,parking and sustainable construction when planning applications are determined.
The Council will resist any proposed development that will prejudice the future development of a
neighbouring site and/or prohibit the comprehensive development of a larger site. 
Developer Contributions - Development should be supported by adequate infrastructure. The Public
Sector has a significant role to play in providing part of this infrastructure. However , development hasimpacts and it is only fair that developers also make a contribution towards mitigating the impacts oftheir development. The Council will ensure that this is the case. The Council will require developers tocontribute towards the provision of facilities, services and infrastructure to make a scheme acceptable inplanning terms before planning approval is granted. This infrastructure will include green infrastructureand other forms of social, community and environmental requirements. The Council will ensure that allforms of development will achieve a net benefit to the community; taking into account its needs andaspirations. The Infrastructure Delivery Plan provides evidence of the infrastructure needs to supportgrowth identified in the Core Strategy and how it will be delivered.
The Council has approved Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) as a mechanism for securing developer
contributions. An Infrastructure Schedule and a charging level will be established as part of this process.In the transitional period, the Council will continue to use Planning Obligations and Planning Conditionsas the main mechanisms for securing developer contributions. The requirements for Planning Obligationsas set out in the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 and Community Infrastructure LevyAmendment Regulations 2011 and 2012 will apply . 
Compulsory Purchase Powers - The Council has Compulsory Purchase Powers, which it is willing to use
to assemble land to enable the implementation of the Core Strategy . This power will be used as a lastresort, because the Council's preferred approach to any land assembly will be through negotiation. 
Rationalisation of Public Sector Assets - The Council will seek to maximise opportunities for the use of
public sector assets for the implementation of the Core Strategy . Public sector assets in the form of landand buildings will play a significant role in delivering the policies and proposals of the Core Strategy . Itcould provide land for the provision of housing and employment or buildings to provide communityfacilities and services. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) and theEmployment Land Review (ELR) take into account public sector land that is available and suitable fordevelopment. The Council is committed to the Surrey Public Sector Asset Review. This review willestablish a common database for all public sector assets, their performance and efficient use to informdecisions about how they could be utilised efficiently . Any future review of SHLAA and ELR will take theoutcome of this exercise into account. 6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
6.11121
Delivery mechanisms of the Council – Woking Borough Council will continue to be very proactive
towards delivering its key priorities, including affordable housing and mitigation of climate change. It hasset up Thameswey Limited, which is an independent company to deliver these priorities. ThamesweyLimited enters into public/private joint ventures to deliver its energy and environmental strategies andtargets. As part of its energy efficiency programmes, the Council, through Thameswey, implemented itsfirst CHP system in 1992 and the United Kingdom’s (UK) first small scale CHP/heat fired absorptionchiller system in 1994. What marks these systems out from any other system in the UK is the direct saleof co-generated heat and sustainable electricity to local customers at a lower price than conventionalsources. The company will seek to work in partnership with developers and customers to deliver thepolicies and proposals of the Core Strategy where it is technically and economically feasible.
The Council has also set up Thameswey Housing Limited , which is a subsidiary of Thameswey . It
focuses on the delivery of affordable homes with emphasis on the intermediate rent market. It willcontinue to acquire and build properties for affordable housing. The Core Strategy identifies asignificant unmet need for affordable housing. Thameswey Housing Limited will contribute towardsmeeting this need.
Other Council plans and strategies will complement the implementation of the Core Strategy . This will
include:
Supplementary Planning DocumentsHousing StrategyClimate Change StrategySustainable Community StrategySite Allocations Development Plan DocumentDevelopment Management Development Plan DocumentTown Centre Area Action Planany other plans and strategies that the Council may feel it is necessary to prepare to enable the
Core Strategy to be delivered.
Working in partnership – The Council will proactively work in partnership to deliver projects of cross
boundary significance such as the strategic monitoring and mitigation of Thames Basin HeathsSpecial Protection Areas and transport projects where the County Council is the highway authority . 
Monitoring
Monitoring the performance and effects of the Core Strategy will be integral to its delivery . The
Localism Act 2011 requires Core Strategies to have clear arrangements for monitoring and reportingresults to the public and civic leaders. In this regard, the Council will be preparing Annual MonitoringReports to be based on the period 1 April to 31 March. The Annual Monitoring Report will bepublished on the Council’s website. It will demonstrate how the policies of the Core Strategy areachieving their objectives.6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15
6.16
Woking Borough Core Strategy122
The Council has a project management plan set out in the Local Development Scheme (LDS) for the
preparation of its Local Development Documents. How the Core Strategy has been prepared inaccordance with timescales set out in the plan is the first stage of its monitoring. At this stage, the CoreStrategy has been prepared according to timescales in the plan.
Each policy includes a section on how it will be monitored and reviewed. It also identifies a set of
indicators and targets for the effective monitoring of the policies in a consistent manner . A compositeversion of indicators showing how the Core Strategy will be monitored and delivered is included atAppendix 5.
Risk and contingencies
The Council is working towards the comprehensive delivery of the policies and proposals of the Core
Strategy and has no reason to believe that they will not be implemented in full. However , it accepts thatthere could be circumstances where development fails to come forward for a number of reasons, someof which can be beyond its control. Where the Council is able to use its influence and power to enablethe delivery of the Core Strategy it will do so. The Core Strategy has an in-built mechanism to monitorperformance through an Annual Monitoring Report. Generally, the outcome of the monitoring process willinform whether or not the Core Strategy and/or other complementary plans and strategies should bereviewed. At this stage, two potential areas of risk and the contingency measures to deal with them inthe event that they materialise are identified below.
Failure of sites coming forward for housing and/or employment development due to difficulties of land
assembly and/or housing and employment delivery falling behind the projected trajectory. – At the end
of three years after the adoption of the Core Strategy, the Council will undertake a comprehensivemonitoring of the performance of housing and employment floorspace delivery . This monitoring will lookat the cumulative delivery of housing and employment floorspace. If delivery is significantly behind theprojected cumulative target over this period as set out in the housing trajectory and the Five YearHousing and Employment Land Supply Position Statements are not providing any evidence that this willbe addressed in subsequent years, the Council will take the following steps.
Use its compulsory purchase powers to ensure that key sites are brought forward to meet any
shortfall in supply .
Re-prioritise its infrastructure investment programme (through CIL) to create the conducive
environment for key sites to come forward.
Review and re-prioritise its heads of terms for securing developer contributions to enable priority
schemes to be developed.
Review its SHLAA, Site Allocations DPD to bring forward new sites.Carry out an Employment Land Review and Market Appraisal of employment land to maximise their
efficient use.
The Council has safeguarded Moor Lane, Westfield and Brookwood Farm for possible long-term
housing. Restrictions on the release of these sites are now lifted to enable them to come forward fordevelopment to achieve a five year housing supply between 2012/2013 – 2016/2017.
If this situation continues, the Council will seek a selective review of the housing and employment
policies of the Core Strategy .6.17
6.18
6.19
6.20
Woking Borough Core Strategy6.0 Implementation and monitoring of the Core Strategy123Introduction to Woking 2026
Infrastructure provision to support development – The Council will continue to work in partnership
with infrastructure providers and the Woking Partnership to coordinate an effective and efficientdelivery of infrastructure. A significant proportion of the funding to deliver infrastructure will besecured in the form of development contributions on the back of housing and employmentdevelopment. In this regard, all the above contingency measures will also apply where relevant.6.21
Woking Borough Core Strategy
124
 Woking Borough Core StrategyBiodiversity & Planning In Surrey, November 2010 (Surrey Wildlife Trust and Surrey Biodiversity Partnership)
Character Study (October 2010)Climate Change Study (June 2010)Draft Infrastructure Delivery Plan (July 2011)Economic Viability Assessment (2010)Employment Land Review - Employment Position Paper (2010)Employment Land Review – Market Appraisal (April 2010)Gypsies and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (April 2007)Habitats Regulation Assessment (June 2011)Heritage of Woking – An Historic Conservation Compendium, 2000, produced by Woking Borough CouncilHousing Land Supply Position Statement (2010 and 2011)Housing Topic Paper (2010)Infrastructure Requirements Study (2006)Open Space, Sports and Recreation Facilities Audit (2008)Population Paper (2010)Review of Renewable and Decentralised Energy Potential in SE England, 2010, produce by Land Use
Consultants and TV Energy for the South East England Partnership Board
Social and Community Facilities Audit (July 2011)Social and Community Infrastructure Requirements Study (2006)Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (July 2009)Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (2009, 2010 and 2011)Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2009)Surrey Hotel Futures (September 2004)Surrey Infrastructure Capacity Study, 2009 Sustainability Appraisal Report (June 2010 and July 2011)Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy (2010-2015)The Surrey Transport Plan (Local Transport Plan Third Edition – LTP3), (2011)Town, District and Local Centres Study (September 2009)Transport and Accessibility Topic Paper (2011)Transport Assessment (2010)Woking and Surrey Sustainable Community Strategy (2006 and 2010)
All of the above documents can be viewed on the Council’s website www.woking.gov.uk/woking2027. It is
important to note that the list is not exhaustive. It only represents what the Council considers to be the mainevidence base used to support the Core Strategy . Appendix 1: Evidence basesupporting the Core Strategy125Introduction to Woking 2026
Appendix 2: Site boundaries
Brookwood Farm, Brookwood
Woking Borough Core Strategy126
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Moor Lane, Westfield127Introduction to Woking 2026
Broadoaks, Paris Road, 
West Byfleet
Woking Borough Core Strategy128 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Sewage Treatment Works, Carter’s Lane129
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 3: Town, District and Local
Centre boundaries Woking Town Centre 
130
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
West Byfleet District Centre 131Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core Strategy
Byfleet Local Centre132
 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Goldsworth Park Local Centre133Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHorsell Local CentreWoking Borough Core Strategy134
Kingfield Local Centre 135Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core Strategy
Knaphill Local CentreWoking Borough Core Strategy136
Sheerwater Local Centre137Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core Strategy
St Johns Local Centre  
138
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 4: Open space provision standards
Type of open space Provision standard
Accessible Natural Greenspace Standards*
(ANGSt)
(Source: Natural England: Nature Nearby: Accessible
Natural Greenspace Guidance, March 2010 and IDPThe standards recommend that everyone, whereverthey live, should have an accessible naturalgreenspace:
of at least 2 hectares (ha) in size, no more than 300
metres (approx 5 minutes walk) from home;
at least one accessible 20 ha site within two km 
of home;
one accessible 100 ha site within five km of home;
and
one accessible 500 ha site within ten km of home;
plus
a minimum of one ha of statutory Local Nature
Reserves per 1,000 population.
Designated Play Areas
Local Area for Play (LAP) Small landscaped areas of open space designated
and laid out for very young children (up to the age ofsix) to play close to where they live.
Local Equipped Area for Play (LEAP) Open space designed and laid out with feature
including equipment for children who are beginningto go out and play independently close to wherethey live. 
Neighbourhood Equipped Area for Play (NEAP)An open space specifically designated, laid out and
equipped mainly for older children but with playopportunities for younger children as well.  
(Source: WBC Play Strategy and IDP)Accessible within 100m walking distance or 60m
straight line distance from home (approx 1 minutewalking time). 
All residents should have one LEAP within a 400m
walking distance or 240m straight line distance fromhome (approx 5 minute walking time).
Accessible within a 1,000m walking distance or 600m
straight line distance from home (approx 15 minutewalking time). 
Play provision is to be delivered locally in accordance
with the priorities set out in the Council’s most up todate Play Strategy .139Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyType of open space Provision standard
Outdoor sports 
(Source: (draft) WBC Playing Pitch Strategy Review,
2012).Playing Pitches
Football - 0.48 ha per 1,000 populationCricket - 0.4 ha per 1,000 people.Rugby - 0.03 ha per 1,000 people.Overall standard for grass playing pitches - 0.91 ha
per 1,000 people. This area includes the pitch spaceand run off margins, and added space required forancillary facilities. 
Other outdoor sports facilitiesTennis - 1 court per 1,470 people, or 0.68 courts per
1,000 population. This corresponds to 0.06 ha per1,000 population, including a site multiplier to takeinto account any ancillary facilities required.
Bowls - 1 green per 13,000 people or 0.08 greens
per 1,000 population. This corresponds to 0.02 haper 1,000 population, including a site multiplier totake into account any ancillary facilities required. 
Overall standard for other outdoor sport 0.08 ha per
1,000 population.
Floodlit Multi-Use Games Areas (MUGAs)One court per 4,500 people or 0.22 courts per 1000
population. This corresponds to 0.03ha per 1000population, to include space for ancillary facilities ifrequired.  
Artificial Grass Pitches (AGP) One AGP per 25,000 people or 0.04 AGPs per 1,000
population, or a space equivalent of 0.04 ha per1,000 population.
Summary of Local Standards
Playing pitches 0.91 ha/1000
Other outdoor sport 0.08 ha/1000
MUGAs 0.03 ha/1000
AGPs 0.04 ha/1000
Total - all outdoor sport 1.06 ha/1000
140
 Woking Borough Core StrategyType of open space Provision standard
Allotments
(Source: Infrastructure Delivery Plan and reports to
Council)All residents in the Borough should have access to anallotment within 800m of their home (approx 15 minutewalk).
Local demand in Woking Borough has been calculated
as current allotment provision plus total number onwaiting list. Meeting the demand would provide a localstandard which the Council will seek to maintain.
Number of plots (2012) = 822Waiting list (2012) = 123Total demand (2012) = 945 plots or 10.1 plots per
1,000 population.
Parks and gardens
Includes Woking Park and recreation grounds(Source: WBC Green Spaces Development Plan)800m straight line distance (approx 15 mins walking) 
There are currently 12 sites with a total size of 49ha in
the Borough. This gives a standard
0.52ha/ 1,000 population which the Council will seek to
maintain or improve in line with the Green SpacesDevelopment Plan.
Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) These standards are set out in the Thames BasinHeaths Special Protection Area Avoidance Strategy . 
Cemeteries
(Source: WBC Green Spaces Development Plan and
IDP)Not relevant to provide a standard because the primaryuse is not recreation and available space depends onamount of burial space taken up.
However if large areas of un-used space are available:Size greater than 20ha =5,000m straight line distanceSize less than 20ha = 800m straight line distanceAppendix 4: Open space provision standards141Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and
monitoring 
Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
6To lead the way in high quality sustainable
development that minimises the adverse impacts ofclimate change. This will be achieved throughmaximising opportunities for implementingrenewable energy technologies, maximising theefficient use of energy and water in buildings andmanaging waste effectively .1 – 3, 5, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 21 - 23Delivering and monitoring the spatial vision and objectives 
The Core Strategy performance framework is led by the spatial vision and objectives as set out in this appendix.Spatial Vision – Paragraph 1: Woking will be a Borough of high environmental quality and standards where
people choose to live, work and visit, an exemplar in the achievement of sustainable growth. 
7To maintain and improve air and water quality and
manage effectively the impacts of noise and lightpollution.1, 7 -10, 17, 18, 21-24
Spatial Vision – Paragraph 2: Woking will be a regional focus of economic prosperity centred on a vibrant,
enhanced town centre that provides a good range of quality shops, jobs, cultural facilities, services andinfrastructure to cater for the Borough’s needs, surrounded by distinct communities anchored by attractive districtand local centres providing convenient access to everyday shops, services and local community facilities. 
Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
1To enable a diverse range of development such
as offices, housing, shops, leisure and culturalfacilities in Woking Town Centre to enable its statusas a centre of regional significance to bemaintained. Development will be of high quality andhigh density to create an attractive environment forpeople to live, do business and visit.1, 2, 10 – 19, 21, 24
2To enable attractive and sustainable development of
the district and local centres to provide convenientaccess to everyday shops and local services, localcommunity facilities, parks and open spaces.1, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 24
5To enable a buoyant local economy with good
quality offices, business parks and industrial areas,which meet the needs of modern business. This willmainly be encouraged in Woking Town Centre, WestByfleet District Centre and the employment areas.1 – 6, 15, 16, 18142
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
Spatial Vision – Paragraph 3: Woking will be a sustainable community where the benefits of growth and prosperity
are shared throughout the Borough without pockets of deprivation.  
Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
13To significantly reduce both absolute and relative
deprivation in Sheerwater , Maybury and the LakeviewEstate in Goldsworth Park.1, 5, 15, 16, 19
Spatial Vision – Paragraph 4: New development in the Borough will be well designed to respect the character of the
area. New housing development will help to meet the needs of all sections of the community.  
8 To encourage the high quality design of buildings,
neighbourhoods and the public realm that creates asense of place where people feel safe to spend timeand interact without fear of crime.1 – 3, 5, 11, 13, 17, 20, 21, 24Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
3 To enable the provision of well designed homes of
different types, tenures and affordability to meet theneeds of all sections of the community . This will be insustainable locations and at densities that maximisethe efficient use of urban land without compromisingthe distinctive character of the local area.1 – 6, 10 – 14, 16, 21
Spatial Vision – Paragraph 5: A green Borough where people will have easy access to good quality green spaces
and infrastructure for recreation and leisure. 
12 To preserve and enhance the cultural, historic,
biodiversity and geodiversity features of the Boroughand make them accessible to the benefit of residents.1, 2, 6-8, 14, 16-18, 20, 24Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
4To protect the integrity of the Green Belt and to
harness its recreational benefits for the community .1 – 8, 10, 14, 17, 18, 24
9To ensure that the provision of community
infrastructure, including key services and facilities,keeps pace with growth of the Borough. This willinclude schools, healthcare, water supply, drainageand flood alleviation, leisure, green infrastructure andcommunity facilities.1-6, 8, 13, 16, 19, 23, 24143Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core Strategy
Spatial Vision – Paragraph 6: The Borough will have a balanced and sustainable multi modal transport
system that links homes, jobs and key services and by doing so improves the overall health and well-being of
all residents.
Core Strategy Objective(s) Key delivery policies
10 To work in partnership with Surrey County
Council and other stakeholders with an interest intransport provision to deliver a transport system thatenables people to access key services, facilitiesand jobs by all relevant modes of travel. Inparticular , by encouraging the use of publictransport and creating a safe environment forpeople to walk and cycle to the town, district andlocal centres.1 3, 5, 13, 16, 18
11To provide an integrated and effective transport
interchange that has an improved Woking RailwayStation as a focus.1 3, 5, 13, 16, 18144
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the implementation of
policies CS2 – CS25. Through the monitoring of policies CS2 – CS25.Policy
CS1: A spatialstrategy forWoking Borough
Through the developmentmanagement process.
Assisted by the Area Action Plan.Through the implementation of the
Infrastructure Delivery Plan andworking with Surrey CC, CycleWoking and Transport for Woking toensure effective and co-ordinateddelivery .Number of net additional dwellings (and density)
permitted and completed within the town centreboundary .
Net change in B1 floorspace (sq m) permitted
and completed in the town centre and the PooleRoad/Butts Road area.
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 floorspace
permitted and completed (sq m) within the towncentre boundary and net change.
Percentage of new A1 retail floorspace located in
the primary and secondary shopping frontages.
Net change in hotel bed spaces permitted and
completed within the Town Centre boundary and
the rest of the Borough.
Vacancy rates in the primary shopping frontage,
secondary shopping frontage and rest of towncentre.
Number of transport improvements in the town
centre including cycle parking spaces providedand improvement schemes to the cycle network.  
Net change in community facility floorspace (as
defined by policy CS19) permitted andcompleted in the town centre.
Number of traders trading at the Farmers Market.CS2: WokingTown CentreMonitoring of each policy 145Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored? Policy
Through the development
management process.
Through the delivery of the
Infrastructure Delivery Plan andworking with Surrey CC, CycleWoking and Transport for Wokingto ensure effective and co-ordinated delivery .Number of net additional dwellings (and
density) permitted and completed within WestByfleet District Centre.
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 retail
floorspace permitted and completed in WestByfleet Centre.
Net change in B1 floorspace permitted and
completed (sq m) in West Byfleet DistrictCentre.
Net change in A1 floorspace permitted and
completed (sq m) within the Primary Shoppingarea and percentage of this as a total of A1permitted and completed.
Net change in social and community facility
floorspace (sq m) (as defined by policy CS19)permitted and completed in West Byfleet DistrictCentre.
Number of cycle parking spaces provided.Number of cycle journeys made.CS3: West
Byfleet DistrictCentre
Through the developmentmanagement process.
Infrastructure Delivery Plan Bi-annual Local Service Provision
AuditNumber of net additional dwellings (and
density) permitted and completed by centre.
Net change in A1 retail floorspace permitted
and completed in local centres,neighbourhood centres and shoppingparades.
Net change in other A class floorspace
permitted and completed in local centres,neighbourhood centres and shoppingparades.
Net change in office floorspace permitted and
completed in local centres.
Local Service Provision Audit to be undertaken
every 2 years.
Number of transport improvements in the
centres.
Number of A1 units lost (absolute) and as a
percentage of A1 units in the NeighbourhoodCentre or Shopping Parade.
Number of post offices, petrol stations or pubs
lost to be recorded separately .
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 and B1a
floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) inNeighbourhood Centres.  
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5
floorspace (sq m) permitted and completedoutside the Town, District and Local Centres,Neighbourhood Centres and ShoppingParades.  CS4: Local and
neighbourhoodcentres andshoppingparades
146
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Maybury - homes will primarily be
provided through theredevelopment of poor qualityhousing stock and outmoded andoutdated employment floorspace. 
Sheerwater - new homes will
primarily be provided by bringingforward land in the Council’sownership for redevelopment. 
Through the Housing Strategy and
the Delivery Plan within it.
Working in partnership with the
Woking Partnership (the LSP) andthe Surrey Strategic Partnershipincluding the Delivery ManagementGroup of the Surrey StrategicPartnership).
Compulsory Purchase powers will
be used if necessary .
Through the Development
Management process.
Local labour agreements will be
delivered through either a planningcondition or legal agreement(S.106). 
Working in partnership Surrey
County Council with Surrey CountyCouncil and public transportproviders.
Through the delivery of the
Infrastructure Delivery Plan andworking with Surrey CC, CycleWoking and Transport for Woking toensure effective and co-ordinateddelivery .
Public art contributions will be
sought as developer contributionsvia CIL and prior to its adoption viaS106.Number of net additional dwellings permitted
and completed within the Priority Places andnumber of bedrooms in each additionaldwelling.
Tenure split baseline will be taken from 2011
Census data (when published) and frominformation held by the Council’s housing team.Changes in the tenure split will be updatedannually based on dwelling completions in thetwo areas and with data from the Housing teamand any RSLs working in the two areas.
The implementation of the Local Lettings Policy
in Sheerwater will be monitored by the HousingTeam.
Net change in employment floorspace (B uses)
permitted and completed in Monument WayEast & West/Woking Business Park/ForsythRoad employment areas.  
Change in vacancy rates in Monument Way
East & West/Woking Business Park/ForsythRoad employment areas.
Net change in A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5
floorspace permitted and completed (sq m) inSheerwater Local Centre and on edge of centresites.
The number of A1 (convenience and
comparison) units delivered. This will bemonitored through the Retail Monitoring Report.
Delivery of the new road in accordance with the
project plan.
Number of additional bus services provided
(monitored by Surrey CC).
Number of cycle parking spaces provided
(monitored by Surrey CC).
Number of cycle journeys made.Annual progress report on delivery of identified
schemes.Policy
CS5: Priorityplaces Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored? Policy
With Policies CS17 and 21 
The Council will work with
partners to seek to improve thebuilt environment of Maybury andSheerwater:
Promoting the highest quality
of design of new developmentand maximising the potentialand setting of historic assets inMaybury .
Explore establishing a safe
network of paths, parks andavenues to reduce barriers tomovement, both real andperceived, to promote accessto shopping parades.
Enhancement of public open
space in each neighbourhood,continue to improve securityand access through lighting,new planting, realigningfootpaths, local policing andNeighbourhood Watch.
Maximise the potential of
green space. Continue toimprove the facilities on offerthrough replacing playequipment, providing activitiesfor teenagers and creating newfacilities.
New development proposals
should strive to promote asense of place and helptransform the image andidentity of Sheerwater andMaybury .
Reducing barriers to
pedestrian and cyclemovement.
Refurbishment of the shopping
parade on Dartmouth Avenue.
New developments should be
designed so there is naturalsurveillance to reduce crimeand fear of crime.Delivery of infrastructure items listed in the
infrastructure schedule. This will be updated bi-annually . 
The AMR will annually monitor the delivery of
the items set out in the schedule. 
Amount of developer contributions secured
and how this has been allocated/ spent. Thiswill include matters such as public art andOpen Space.
Achievement of targets set out in the Woking
Partnerships Priority Places Action Plan.
Periodic evaluations of infrastructure projects
through the Annual Monitoring Report and theupdating of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
Regular monitoring of corporate strategies,
including the play strategy and housingstrategy to monitor progress against widercorporate objectives. 
The Council, with the Surrey Strategic
Partnership and the Woking Partnership, willkeep under review the outcomes of futurepublications of the Indices of MultipleDeprivation in order to ensure that theBorough’s priority communities are identified.  
Achievement of targets set out in the Woking
Partnership Priority Places Action Plan.
Net change in A1, floorspace (sq m) permitted
and completed in the vicinity of Lakeview.
Net change in D use floorspace (sq m)
permitted and completed in the vicinity ofLakeview.
Number of cycle parking spaces provided
(monitored by Surrey CC).
Number of cycle journeys made (monitored by
Surrey CC).
Annual progress report on delivery of
identified schemes.CS5: Priorityplaces(continued) 
147
148
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management and planningapplication process.
Green Belt boundary review. Site allocations DPDAmount of development (by type) granted
consent in the Green Belt.
Major Developed Sites  – the amount, nature,
type and percentage of development whichhas taken place within the defined boundaries. 
Number of sites/ hectares released from the
Green Belt for residential development. Policy
CS6: Green Belt
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Will be delivered through the
Development Managementprocess.  
Certain applications may require a
biodiversity study to ensure thereare no adverse impacts onbiodiversity and/or geodiversity .
Natural England and/or Surrey
Wildlife Trust will be consulted asnecessary .  
Any development with potential
impact on the TBH SPA or the SACwill be subject to a HabitatsRegulations Assessment isrequired when a planningapplication is received.Surrey CC produces annual statistics on the
proportion of Local Biodiversity Sites wherepositive conservation management has been oris being implemented (previously based on NI197) with detailed information for WokingBorough. 
The Surrey Biodiversity Action Plan will be
monitored (by Surrey CC through the HabitatAction Plan Working Group to ensure that thetargets set are being achieved. Habitat andSpecies Action Plans monitor and reportprogress on individual plans through theBiodiversity Action Reporting System (BARS).The progress of Action Plans are formallyreviewed every 5 years. 
Natural England published data on the Condition
of SSSIs. Condition is rated as Favourable,Unfavourable but recovering, Unfavourablecondition with no change or Unfavourablecondition and declining.
Surrey Wildlife Trust surveys of SNCIs in Woking
Borough.
Information on the progress of the countryside
works programme, provided by the Cultural &Community Development team.
Number of planning applications permitted
against the advice of Natural England and/orSurrey Wildlife Trust and reasons for this.
The percentage of major applications
incorporating measures to protect and enhancebiodiversity .Policy
CS7:Biodiversity andnatureconservation149Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process.
Site Allocations DPD.Through working in partnership
with Natural England.
Planning applications will require
an Appropriate Assessment ifthere are considered to besignificant impacts.Area (ha) designated as being of
international importance
Status of the three protected bird species in
the SPA.
The amount and type of SANG land available Net additional residential development within
the 400m exclusion zone.
The total amount of developer contributions
secured towards SAMM and SANG.
Number of permissions that use a different
linear threshold or alternative mitigationmeasures.
The number of permissions that required an
Appropriate Assessment.
Condition of SPA land, monitored by Natural
England (published data on Condition ofSSSI).  Condition is rated as Favourable,Unfavourable but recovering, Unfavourablecondition with no change or Unfavourablecondition and declining.Policy
CS8: ThamesBasin HeathsSpecialProtectionAreas
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process andpartnership working with theEnvironment Agency .
Climate Change SPDUpdates of SFRAInfrastructure Delivery PlanAdvising about SUDs, biodiversity
and geodiversity at the pre-application advice stage.
By ensuring that proposals within
or adjacent to areas at risk ofsurface water flooding provide aFlood Risk Assessment.Number and type of planning permissions
granted contrary to Environment Agency /Water Authority advice and for what reasons.
Number of new properties in Flood Zones 2,
3a and 3b.
Number and percent of new developments
incorporating sustainable urban drainagesystems (SUDs).
Number and nature of applications that seek
to reduce the risk of flooding.Policy
CS9: Floodingand watermanagement
Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
150How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process.
Working in partnership with
developers and landowners.
Bringing forward land allocations
(designated in a Site AllocationsDPD)
Supporting changes of useRedeveloping unsuitable
employment sites 
Permitting taller buildings in
appropriate locations
Use of Compulsory Purchase
powers
Design Standards SPDRegular updates of SHLAA and
ELRNet additional dwelling completions – against
an annual average target of 292. 
Annual five year housing land supply position
statement.
Percent of dwellings built on previously
developed land against a target of 70% overthe plan period.
Average densities achieved on site by location,
assessed against indicative densities.  
Net additional number of dwellings permitted
and completed in Mayford Village.Policy
CS10: Housingprovision anddistribution
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process
Partnership working with RSLs and
the HCA
Use of Compulsory Purchase
powers
Affordable housing SPDOpen book approachUpdates of SHMANumber of net additional affordable dwellings
permitted and completed, by location. 
Size, type and tenure of net additional
affordable dwellings permitted and completed. 
Level of commuted payments collected by the
Council. 
Amount of commuted sums collected towards
affordable housing provision 
Percent of schemes providing affordable units
on-site, off-site or via a financial payment in lieu.Policy
CS12: Affordable
housing How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process
Design SPDReviews of SHMASize and type of new dwellings delivered by
location. 
Overall dwelling mix achieved in comparison to
needs identified through SHMA
Net loss of 2+ bedroom homesPolicy
CS11: Housing
mix151Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process
Site Allocations DPDReview of GTNA in 2012The delivery of additional pitches for Gypsy 
and Traveller accommodation between 2017 and 2027. 
The level of supply (pitch numbers) measured
against need identified in the GTAA.
The number of unauthorised or illegal
encampments or developments andenforcement actions carried out.  
Number of pitches granted planning
permission/ delivered (6 monthly canvass)
Provision of a site for Travelling Showpeople
in the Site Allocations DPD.Policy
CS14: Gypsies,Travellers andTravellingShowpeopleHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the developmentmanagement process
Affordable housing SPDUpdates of the SHMAInfrastructure Delivery PlanImplementation of policies CS18
and CS19 
The Council will work with
partners and key infrastructureservice providers to ensure a co-ordinated approach toinfrastructure provision in theBorough.  
The Council’s Community Asset
Management Programme 
Housing StrategyExtra Care StrategyUpdates to Social and community
facilities study .The number of additional nursing home bed
spaces provided. 
The number of private sheltered housing units
permitted and completed for sale.
The number of affordable sheltered housing
units permitted and completed for social rent.
The number of extra care housing spaces
against need. 
Number of net additional private sheltered
dwellings.   
Number of net additional affordable sheltered
housing units for social rent against need.
Number of specialist accommodation
beds/dwellings lost.
Number of bedrooms of new specialist
accommodation dwellings.
Number of net additional bed-sits provided.Percentage of specialist accommodation
dwellings which incorporate Lifetime Homesstandards (or future national equivalent).
Percentage of specialist accommodation
dwellings which are wheelchair accessible.Policy
CS13: Older
people andvulnerablegroups
152
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process.
Partnership working.Delivery of the Economic
Development Strategy .Net change in permitted and completed B1 
(a, b, c), B2 and B8 floorspace (sq m) in theBorough by location.
Amount of employment floorspace lost to non-
employment uses (permitted, underconstruction and completed) by location.
Number/ amount of permitted and completed
new incubator units, managed workspace andserviced office accommodation. 
VAT registrations/de-registrations by industry .Number of live/work units permitted and
completed.
Number of employee jobs (total and by
industry) in the Borough.
Job density in the Borough.Earnings by workplace.Number of net additional dwellings completed
within the Butts Road/Poole Road employmentarea.
Net change in office floorspace permitted and
completed in the Butts Road/Poole Road area.Policy
CS15:
Sustainableeconomicdevelopment153Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
The Council will work with
partners and key infrastructureservice providers to ensure a co-ordinated approach toinfrastructure provision in theBorough.  
In some cases to require
developers to put in place thenecessary infrastructure beforedevelopment commences. Thiswill be secured via condition/legal agreement through thedevelopment managementprocess. 
Infrastructure Delivery PlanUpdates to the Infrastructure
Capacity Study
Through the development
management processAdoption of a CIL.
Delivery of infrastructure items listed in the
infrastructure schedule. 
Total amount of financial contributions
(secured and spent) towards infrastructureprovision. 
Amount of contributions secured towards
particular forms of infrastructure (i.e. openspace, transport, public art) Policy
CS16:Infrastructuredelivery
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the development
management process.
Partnership working with Natural
England, Environment Agency,SWT , Surrey County CouncilRights of Way Officer ,Basingstoke Canal Association,Horsell Common, and othersimilar interest groups and landowners.
Policies of CS7 and CS8. The Council’s Cultural and
community Team actively work inpartnership with stakeholders andlandowners to manage andprovide additional allotmentsacross the borough.
Updates to the Open space,
sports and recreation facilitiesaudit
Infrastructure Delivery Plan Net change (positive or negative) in the
amount of green infrastructure, public openspace and built sports facilities.
Amount of developer contributions secured
and spent on Green Infrastructure provision.
Amount of formal and informal open space
lost and gained. 
Number of planning applications approved
contrary to objections raised by the statutoryconsultees and SWT .  
Delivery of Open Space items listed in the
infrastructure schedule, updated bi-annually . 
Net increase or loss of allotment pitches.Policy
CS17: Open
space, greeninfrastructure,sport andrecreation
154
 Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through Transport for Woking (TfW)
and Transport for Surrey (TfS)meetings. 
Through the development
management process.
Infrastructure Delivery PlanSurrey Transport PlanWorking with developers for the
Gateway scheme in Woking TownCentre to deliver high qualityinterchange facility . 
Parking Standards SPDLocal air quality assessments.Updating the Proposals Map
through the Site Allocations DPD.
Joint working with Surrey County
Council to develop, approve andapply for funding for Wokingtransport schemes.Number of new developments permitted and
completed within 30 minutes travel by publictransport to local services (including health,education and retail). 
Number of major developments submitted with
Transport Assessments.
Number of major developments submitted with
travel plans, assessed in accordance withSurrey County Council’s Travel Plans GoodPractice Guide, 2009. 
Amount of transport infrastructure
improvements secured with developments.
Annual patronage of Borough rail stations.Average journey time per mile during the
morning peak on major routes in the authority 
Amount of B-use floorspace permitted and
completed (sq m) in the centres.
Amount of A-use floorspace permitted and
completed (sq m) in the centres.
Amount of developer contributions collected for
transport mitigation schemes.
Number of major developments submitted with
travel plans, prepared in accordance withSurrey County Council's Travel Plans GoodPractice Guide, 2009.
Amount of funding spent on sustainable
transport schemes in the borough.
Number of parking spaces provided through
residential and non-residential developments.
Local air quality in the BoroughPolicy
CS18: Transport
and accessibility155Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core Strategy
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Partnership working. 
Updates to the Social and
community facilities audit.
Through the development
management process
Implementation of Policy CS16
and CS17.Delivery of items listed in the Infrastructure
Delivery Plan.
Loss of D1 facilities (permissions and sq.m.)
and what they were used for , by location
Gain of D1 facilities (permissions and sq.m.)
and proposed use, by location
Usage/ patronage (based on opening hours
and/or average number of people/groupsusing certain facilities annually asappropriate). 
Identify any under utilised facilities.Amount of developer contributions secured
for social and community infrastructure.Policy
CS19: Social
and communityinfrastructure
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the Development
Management Process.
By ensuring that the County
Council is consulted on relevantplanning applications.
Through applicants submitting
either an archaeologicalassessment of the site or a fullarchaeological survey of the site,depending on the nature of theapplication. Number of imposed planning conditions that
require mitigation or recording.
Trends shown by condition surveys of Local
Authority owned heritage assets.
Number of Grade I and II* listed buildings
at risk.
Number of Listed Building Consents per
annum.
Number of planning application refusals on
the grounds of not preserving a listedbuilding or its setting.
Number of planning applications where
archaeological assessments or surveys arerequired. Policy
CS20: Heritage
andconservation Woking Borough Core Strategy156Appendix 5: Delivering and monitoring 
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Climate Change SPD 
Climate Neutral Checklist/ C PlanThrough partnership working with
ESCo Thameswey Energy Limited aSpecial Purpose Vehicle.  
Through the Development
Management process.Tonnes of CO² saved
Percentage of commercial development which
is BREEAM good, very good or excellent(Percentage for each).
Number of dwellings and percentage of
completions achieving the Code Standard.
Overall number of dwellings and amount of
commercial floorspace (and as a percentage ofthat permitted and completed) which isproviding a CHP onsite or connected to a districtheat network.  
The number of dwellings and amount of
commercial floorspace (and as a percentage ofthat permitted and completed) which connectsto the CHP/district heat network. Both overallnumber and the number within the specificzones defined in the Climate Change SPD.Monitored via the revised Climate NeutralChecklist. 
Amount of non-residential floorspace which
incorporates energy and water efficiencymeasures. Measured by Code equivalentstandards.
Number and/or percentage of dwellings and/or
amount of commercial floorspace providingelectric vehicle charging points or making afinancial contribution towards public chargingpoints.Policy
CS22:
SustainableconstructionHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the Development
Management Process, Area ActionPlan for the Town Centre,Development Management DPD andDesign SPD
Compliance with the Equality Act
2010 and Part M of the BuildingRegulations 
Consultation with Council’s
Arboricultural Officer , Surrey WildlifeTrust and Environment Agencywhere appropriate
Working in partnership with Surrey
Wildlife Trust, Natural England, theEnvironment Agency, Surrey Policeand other key stakeholders
Implementation of policies CS8,
CS22 and 23The number of residential schemes of that
meet 'Building for Life' criteria (or similarnational standard) "very good", "good","average" or "poor" standards.Policy
CS21: Design157Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyHow will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the Development
Management process.
Through partnership working with
ESCo Thameswey Energy Limiteda Special Purpose Vehicle.  
Climate Neutral Checklist and/or
C-Plan software*. MW of new renewable energy installations
permitted.
MW installed capacity of new renewable
energy .Policy
CS23:
Renewable andlow carbonenergygeneration
*C-Plan is web-based software which has been designed to specifically deal with the carbon and energy
impacts of  proposed developments. C-Plan helps developers and planning authorities understand howdevelopments proposals measure up against sustainable development planning policies. C-Plan links togetherplanners and developers, providing them with tools for compliance checking, tracking, reporting andmanaging the flow of  information between them. A C-Plan factsheet is attached for further information.
Developers are required to provide information about the predicted energy consumption and carbon dioxide
emissions of  new developments and meet renewable energy or CO2 targets. C-Plan makes it easy forplanning authorities to gather the right information from developers, to validate that information against theircarbon reduction policy criteria and to monitor and report the outcomes on an authority-wide basis.
How will the policy be delivered? How will the policy be monitored?
Through the DevelopmentManagement process.
Through a Design SPD.Working in partnership with
Natural England.
Through the implementation of
policy CS:20.The number of planning applications requiring
landscape character assessments to besubmitted. Assessments should be produced in
line with the Landscape Character AssessmentGuidance, published by Natural England andScottish Natural Heritage.Policy
CS24: Woking’slandscape andtownscape
Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 6: List of Saved (and Superseded) Policies of 
Woking Local Plan (1999)
158Saved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede Local PlanPolicies
3  
Key Objectives CS1
NaturalEnvironmentPolicies 
BuiltEnvironmentPolicies
BE1 CS21, CS24
BE2 CS21
BE3 CS21
BE4 CS21
BE5 DMDPD BE5
BE6 CS21, CS22, CS23
BE7 CS17
BE8 CS20
BE9 DMDPD BE9
BE10 DMDPD BE10
BE11 CS20
BE12 CS20
BE13 CS20NE1 CS7, CS8
NE2 CS7
NE3 CS7, CS17, CS21, CS24
NE4 CS7, CS17, CS24
NE5 CS7
NE6 CS17, CS24
NE7 CS24
NE8 DMDPD NE8
NE9 DMDPD NE9
NE10 CS21, CS24 
NE11 CS9159Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategySaved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede LocalPlan Policies  
BE14 CS20
BE15 CS20
BE16 CS20
BE17 CS20
BE18 DMDPD BE18
BE19 DMDPD BE19
BE20 DMDPD BE20
BE21 DMDPD BE21
BE22 DMDPD BE22
Green BeltPolicies
GRB1 CS6
GRB4 CS6, CS10
GRB6 (to be deleted
after implementation ofproposals)GRB6
Housing Policies
HSG2 To be deleted
HSG5 CS10
HSG6 CS10
HSG8 DMDPD HSG8 CS10, CS11
HSG9 CS11
HSG10 CS12
HSG11 DMDPD HSG11
HSG12 CS10
HSG13 CS13
HSG14 CS13
HSG15 DMDPD HSG15
Woking Borough Core StrategyAppendix 6: List of Saved (and Superseded) Policies of 
Woking Local Plan (1999)
160Housing PoliciesSaved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede Local PlanPolicies  
HSG16 DMDPD HSG16
HSG18 CS10, CS17, CS18, CS21 
HSG19 CS10, CS21
HSG20 To be deleted
HSG21 CS21
HSG22 DMDPD HSG22
HSG23 DMDPD HSG23
HSG24 DMDPD HSG24
Employment andEconomicDevelopment
EMP1 CS15
EMP2 CS3, CS4
EMP3 CS15
EMP4 CS15
EMP5 CS15
EMP6 CS15
EMP7 CS3, CS4, CS15
EMP8 CS15
EMP9 CS2, CS3, CS15
EMP10 DMDPD EMP10
Shopping
SHP1 CS1
SHP2 CS1, CS2, CS3, CS4, CS15
SHP3 CS3, CS15
SHP4 CS3
SHP5 CS3
SHP6 CS4, CS15161Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategySaved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede LocalPlan Policies  
Shopping
SHP7 DMDPD SHP7
DMDPD SHP8 CS2, CS3, CS4, CS21 
DMDPD SHP9 CS21 
SHP10 DMDPD SHP10
Leisure,Recreation andthe Arts
REC1 CS17
REC2 CS17
REC3 CS17
REC4 CS17
REC5 CS19
REC6 CS19
REC7 DMDPD REC7
REC8 DMDPD REC8
REC9 DMDPD REC9
REC10 DMDPD REC10
REC11 CS17, CS19
REC12 CS17
REC13 CS17
REC14 DMDPD REC14
REC15 To be deleted
REC16 REC16
REC17 REC17
Woking Borough Core Strategy162
Appendix 6: List of Saved (and Superseded) Policies of 
Woking Local Plan (1999)
Saved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede Local PlanPolicies  
Community andUtility Services
CUS1 CS19
CUS2 CS19
CUS4 To be deleted
CUS5 To be deleted
CUS6 DMDPD CUS6
CUS7 DMDPD CUS7
CUS8 CS23
CUS9 CS23
CUS10 CS19
CUS11 DMDPD CUS11
CUS12 DMDPD CUS12
Movement
MV1 CS18
MV2 CS16, CS18
MV3 CS18
MV4 CS16, CS18
MV5 CS18
MV6 DMDPD MV6
MV7 DMDPD MV7
MV8 To be deleted
MV9 CS18
MV10 To be deleted
MV11 To be deleted
MV12 DMDPD MV12
MV13 To be deleted
MV14 CS18
MV15 CS2, CS18
MV16 DMDPD MV16
MV17 CS18
MV18 CS18163 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Saved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede LocalPlan Policies  
Movement
MV19 CS18, CS21
MV20 CS18
MV21 CS18
MV22 DMDPD MV22
MV23 CS16, CS18
MV24 To be deleted
MV25 CS5, CS18
MV26 CS18, (schemes may be
deleted after review bySurrey County Council)
MV27 CS18
Woking Town
Centre
WTC1 CS2, CS21
WTC2 CS21
WTC3 CS21
WTC4 CS21
WTC5 CS21
WTC6 DMDPD WTC6
WTC7 CS2
164
Woking Borough Core StrategySaved Local Plan
PoliciesProposed DPD WBLP 1999Policies Core Strategy Policiesto Supersede Local PlanPolicies  
Woking Town
Centre
WTC8 CS2, CS10
WTC9 CS2
WTC10 CS2
WTC11 To be deleted
WTC12 CS2
WTC13 CS2
WTC14 CS2
WTC15 CS2
WTC16 To be deleted
WTC17 To be deleted
WTC18 CS18 
WTC19 CS1, CS2, CS18
WTC20 CS1, CS2, CS18
WTC21 CS18
WTC22 CS18
WTC23 To be deleted
WTC24 (Proposals as 
shown on Core StrategyProposals Map)SADPD WTC24 Proposals Map 
Village Centres
VCN1 CS4
VCN2 CS4
VCN3 CS21
VCN4 CS18
Woking Town Centre
IMP1 Section 6 - Implementation
and monitoring
IMP2 Section 6 - Implementation
and monitoring
IMP3 CS16, Section 6 -
Implementation andmonitoringAppendix 6: List of Saved (and Superseded) Policies of 
Woking Local Plan (1999)165
Glossary
Woking Borough Core StrategyAdoption: The formal approval or acceptance of Local Development Documents by the Council.
Affordable housing: “In relation to housing, ‘affordable’ means accommodation which meets the needs of
eligible households including availability at a cost low enough for them to afford, determined with regard tolocal incomes and local house prices; and include provisions for:
1.the home to be retained for future eligible households; or
2.if these restrictions are lifted, for any subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.
In the Council’s Housing Strategy, this is taken to mean housing which meets and continues to meet the needs
of people on low and middle incomes who would otherwise not be able to attain housing locally on the openmarket. Affordable housing is that which can be afforded where the dwelling has the smallest number of roomsappropriate to meet the needs of a household which cannot afford to buy or rent on the open market withoutsome form of subsidy .
The preferred means of delivery of affordable housing in order of preference is:
Social housing either for rent, or through shared equity schemes. Subsidised low cost market housing for sale or rent (65-80% market) Off site provision - This is only considered suitable in exceptional circumstances, and can be offered via
land, buildings, or financial contribution. This will be controlled with a planning obligation. 
Annex 2 of the NPPF provides the definition of affordable housing tenures.”Annual Monitoring Report (AMR): Monitors progress against the Local Development Scheme (project plan for
LDF documents) and policy targets.
Area Action Plans: Document for key areas of change or conservation which focuses on proposals for the area
and their implementation. 
B Uses: B uses are defined in the Use Classes Order 1987 (as amended):
B1: Business
Offices (other than a use within class A2 - financial and professional services)
Research and development of products or processesLight industry appropriate to a residential area
B2: General industrial
The carrying on of an industrial process other than one falling within class B1 (excluding incineration
purposes, chemical treatment or landfill or hazardous waste).
B8: Storage or distribution
Storage or as a distribution centre (including open air storage).
BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method): The world's most widely
used means of reviewing and improving the environmental performance of buildings. The residential version ofBREEAM is called EcoHomes.
CIL (Community Infrastructure Levy): Standard charge decided by local authorities and levied on new
development. 166
 Woking Borough Core StrategyGlossary
The CIL will be levied as a certain amount per square metre of development. The money will be used to pay for
infrastructure. It would be a standard charge on all development rather than the change being calculatedindividually for each planning permission. 
Community: Usually refers to those living within a specific area but can be any group with shared needs or
interests living in the Borough.
Community Strategy: Long-term vision for improving the quality of people’s lives, with the aim of improving the
economic, social and environmental well being of the Borough. Sometimes referred to as a Sustainable CommunityStrategy . 
Core Strategy: Sets out the long-term vision for area and the main strategic policies and proposals to deliver that
vision.
Deprivation: Deprivation covers a broad range of issues and refers to unmet needs caused by a lack of resources
of all kinds, not just financial. The Council uses the English Indices of Deprivation produced by the DCLG toidentify areas of deprivation. The English Indices of Deprivation attempt to measure a broader concept of multipledeprivation, made up of several distinct dimensions, or domains, of deprivation.
Development Plan Document (DPD): Local Development Framework (LDF) documents containing the core
planning policies and proposals. These are subject to independent examination. Woking Borough Council isintending to prepare the following DPDs: Core Strategy, Development Management Policies, Site Allocations DPD,Proposals Map.
Economic Development: For the purposes of the policies in this Core Strategy, economic development includes
development within the B Use Classes, public and community uses and main town centre uses. 
Examination: Formal examination of Local Development Documents by an independent inspector appointed by
the Secretary of State.
ecsc: The Energy Centre for Sustainable Communities’ is a sustainable energy consultancy that designs and
implements projects to create a socially responsible, sustainable energy future. Became part of the ThamesweyGroup of companies in 2007.
Heritage assets: Parts of the historic environment which have significance because of their historic,
archaeological, architectural or artistic interest.
The heritage assets of the Borough include:
Listed Buildings (statutory and non-statutory);Conservation Areas;Areas of historic or architectural importance.Scheduled Ancient Monuments;Registered Gardens and landscape;Sites of Archaeological significance;Ancient Woodland.
Inspector: Representative from the Planning Inspectorate, which is an impartial government agency . Leads the
examination of the Core Strategy and other Development Plan Documents.167Local Development Documents (LDD): Comprises of Development Plan Documents, Supplementary Planning
Documents and Statement of Community Involvement i.e. both statutory and non-statutory documents.
Local Development Framework (LDF): A folder of Local Development Documents that provides the framework
for planning in the Borough and to guide planning decisions. 
Local Development Scheme (LDS): Three-year project plan for the production of Development Documents.
Local Sustainable Transport Fund: Has two key objectives; firstly to support the local economy and facilitate
economic development, for example by reducing congestion, improving reliability and predictability of journeytimes or enhancing access to employment and other essential services; secondly to reduce carbon emissions,for example by bringing about an increase in the volume and proportion of journeys made by low carbon,sustainable modes including walking and cycling.
Major Developed Sites (MDS) in the Green BeltGreen Belts contain some Major Developed Sites such as factories, collieries, power stations, water and
sewage treatment works, military establishments, civil airfields, hospitals, and research and educationestablishments. These substantial sites may be in continuing use or be redundant. They often pre-date thetown and country planning system and the Green Belt designation.
These sites remain subject to development control policies for Green Belts, and the Green Belt notation should
be carried across them, however , infilling or redevelopment is not inappropriate development in sites allocatedas Major Developed Sites in DPDs. 
Infilling of Major Developed SitesLimited infilling at Major Developed Sites in continuing use may help to secure jobs and prosperity without
further prejudicing the Green Belt. Where this is so, local planning authorities may in their development plansidentify the site, defining the boundary of the present extent of development and setting out a policy for limitedinfilling for the continuing use within this boundary . Such infilling should:
(a) have no greater impact on the purposes of including land in the Green Belt than the existing
development;
(b) not exceed the height of the existing buildings; and
(c) not lead to a major increase in the developed proportion of the site.
Redevelopment of Major Developed SitesWhether they are redundant or in continuing use, the complete or partial redevelopment of Major Developed
Sites may offer the opportunity for environmental improvement without adding to their impact on the opennessof the Green Belt and the purposes of including land within it. Where this is the case, local planning authoritiesmay in their development plans identify the site, setting out a policy for its future redevelopment. They shouldconsider preparing a site brief. Redevelopment should :
(a) have no greater impact than the existing development on the openness of the Green Belt and the
purposes of including land in it, and where possible have less;
(b) contribute to the achievement of the objectives for the use of land in Green Belts
(c) not exceed the height of the existing buildings; and
(d) not occupy a larger area of the site than the existing buildings (unless this would achieve a reduction in
height which would benefit visual amenity).
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF): Published on 27 March 2012. The NPPF sets out the
Government’s planning policies for England and how these are expected to be applied. It sets out theGovernment’s requirements for the planning system only to the extent that it is relevant, proportionate andnecessary to do so. It provides a framework within which local people and their accountable councils canproduce their own distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs and priorities of theircommunities.
Woking Borough Core Strategy
168
 Woking Borough Core StrategyGlossary
Natura 2000: A European network of protected sites which represent areas of the highest value for natural
habitats and species of plants and animals which are rare, endangered or vulnerable in the European Community .The Natura 2000 network includes two types of area Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and Special ProtectionAreas (SPA). 
Planning Inspectorate (PINS): The Planning Inspectorate holds independent examinations to determine whether
or not DPDs are ‘sound’. The Planning Inspectorate also handles planning and enforcement appeals.
Proposals Map: It is part of the Local Development Documents that identify areas that should be protected,
safeguarded sites in the Minerals and Waste Development Framework, areas to which specific policies apply . Alsoknown as the adopted proposals map. 
Previously developed land (often referred to as brownfield land): Land which is or was occupied by a permanent
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the whole of thecurtilage should be developed) and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land that is or hasbeen occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction or wastedisposal by landfill purposes where provision for restoration has been made through development controlprocedures; land in built-up areas such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments;and land that was previously-developed but where the remains of the permanent structure or fixed surfacestructure have blended into the landscape in the process of time.
Ramsar: Ramsar sites are wetlands of international importance designated under the Ramsar Convention. The
initial emphasis was on selecting sites of importance to waterbirds within the UK, and consequently many Ramsarsites are also Special Protection Areas (SPAs) classified under the Birds Directive.
Regional Spatial Strategy (RSS)/Regional Strategy: It is part of the development plan and new local development
documents must be in general conformity with the RSS. The RSS provides broad development strategy for theregion for a 15 to 20-year period. The RSS for the South East is called the South East Plan.
Representations: General comments or responses to a consultation which support or object to proposals.
Site Allocations DPD: Produced after the Core Strategy . This will specify exactly where new development will take
place in accordance with the policies set out in the Core Strategy .
Site specific allocations: Allocation of sites for specific or mixed-use development.
Sound/soundness: Describes where a DPD is considered to ‘show good judgement’ and also to fulfil the
expectations of legislation, as well as conforming to national and regional planning policy .
South East Plan: The title given to the Regional Spatial Strategy for the South East to cover the period to 2026. It
was published on 6 May 2009. It was revoked by the coalition government on 6 July 2010 however a legaljudgment on 10 November 2010 reestablished the South East Plan as part of the development plan for the time-being. The Government has written to all local authorities and made them aware of its intention to revoke allregional strategies through the Localism Act 2011. 
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC): These areas are of international importance because they are home
to rare or endangered species of plants or animals (other than birds). SACs are designated under the Habitats Directive.
Special Protection Areas (SPA): Areas which support significant numbers of ground nesting birds and their
habitats. SPAs are classified under the Birds Directive. 
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI): Sets out the Council’s standards for involving the community in the
preparation, alteration and review of Local Development Documents and the consideration of planning applications.
Statement of Proposals Matters/Statement of Representations Procedure: The regulations set out that the
Council must produce a Statement of Matters which sets out the title of the document, subject matter of and areacovered, period for representations, address where representations should be sent and list of places at which thedocument is available for inspection and the times at which it can be inspected.169Introduction to Woking 2026
Woking Borough Core StrategyStrategic Environment Assessment (SEA): A system of incorporating environmental considerations into
policies, plans and programmes. It is sometimes referred to as Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment.The specific term Strategic Environmental Assessment relates to European Union policy .
SuDS: Sustainable Drainage Systems.
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD): Non-statutory documents that expand upon policies and
proposals in Development Plan Documents.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA): A social, economic and environmental assessment primarily used for DPDs,
incorporating the requirements of the SEA Directive. 
Sustainable Development: United Nations General Assembly defines it as – meeting the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’. (This was the originaldefinition of sustainable development).
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) defines it as – positive growth making economic,
environmental and social progress for this and future generations.
For Woking, sustainable development means having a Borough: 
of high environmental quality where people choose to live, work and visit; a regional focus of economic prosperity centred on a vibrant town centre that provides a good range
of quality shops, jobs, cultural facilities and infrastructure to cater for the Borough’s needs; 
distinct communities anchored by attractive district and local centres providing convenient access to
everyday needs; 
where the benefits of growth and prosperity are shared throughout the Borough without pockets of
deprivation; 
where development respects the character of the area; where people will have easy access to good quality green spaces and infrastructure for leisure and
recreation and a transport system that caters for all needs in a sustainable manner . 
The common principles that underpins all the definitions is that sustainable development is about
economic, social and environmental aspects of development and how we work to meet our needs withoutcompromising the ability of future generations to meet theirs. These strands of sustainable developmentmust always be considered in a comprehensive manner .
Town Centre Uses: 
retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres) leisure, entertainment facilities, and the more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas,
restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres,indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls) 
offices, and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels
and conference facilities)
Woking Partnership: This represents the residential, business, statutory and voluntary interests of the area.
Members include the Primary Care Trust, Surrey Police, Surrey County Council, Woking Chamber of Commerce,Woking Association of Voluntary Service, Community Learning Partnership, and the People of Faith Forum.
Woking Borough Core Strategy170
Notes171 Woking Borough Core Strategy
Notice of adoption of the Woking Core Strategy and Proposals Map October 2012
Notice is hereby given that in accordance with Regulation 26 and 35 of the Town and Country Planning (Local
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012, Woking Borough Council formally adopted the Woking Core Strategy andits accompanying Proposals Map at its meeting on 25 October 2012.
The Woking Core Strategy covers the entire Borough of Woking. It sets out the overall strategic context for the
spatial planning and the management of development in the Borough. It covers the period up to 2027. 
The Woking Core Strategy was the subject of Independent Examination by an Independent Inspector between 19
December 2011 and 26 July 2012. The Examination included public hearings that were held between 20 March2012 and 4 April 2012. The Inspector’s report was received on 26 July 2012 and can be inspected at the depositvenues listed below under the heading ‘Inspection of the Documents’.
Any person aggrieved by the adoption of the Woking Core Strategy may make an application to the High Court
under Section 113 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 on the grounds that:
The document is not within the appropriate power; and/or
A procedural requirement has not been complied with.
Any such application must be made not later than the end of the period of six weeks starting from the date of the
adoption (in this particular case, 6 December 2012).
Inspection of the Documents
The Woking Core Strategy, the Sustainability Appraisal and the Proposals Map together with the Inspector’s Reportcan be inspected at the following venues:
Civic Offices ,Gloucester Square, Woking - Monday to Friday 9am - 4.45pm.  
Woking Library – Monday, Wednesday and Friday 9am – 6pm, Tuesday and Thursday 9am – 7pm,
Saturday 9am – 5pm. 
Knaphill Library – Tuesday 10am – 6pm, Wednesday 2pm – 5pm, Thursday and Friday 10am – 5pm,
Saturday 9.30am – 4pm.
West Byfleet Library – Tuesday and Friday 10am – 5pm, Thursday 10am – 6pm, Saturday 9.30am – 4pm.
Byfleet Library – Tuesday 10am – 6pm, Friday 10am – 5pm, Saturday 9.30am – 4pm.
Please see www.surreycc.gov.uk for the addresses of the libraries.  
It can also be viewed on Woking Borough Council’s website at www.woking.gov.uk 
For further information about the Woking Core Strategy, the Sustainability Appraisal Report, the Sustainability
Appraisal post adoption statement, the Proposals Map and the Inspector’s Report, please contact the PlanningPolicy Team on 01483 743871 or email planning.policy@woking.gov.ukStatement of Adoption of a Development Plan
Document Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act2004 Town and Country Planning (Local Planning)
(England) Regulations 2012Woking Core Strategy
Woking Local Development Document
Woking Borough Council
Civic Offices, Gloucester Square, 
Woking, GU21 6YL
Phone: 01483 755855
Web: www.woking.gov .uk