Worthing Borough Council 
Submission Draf Local Plan 
2020 - 2036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 The Council would like to express thanks to local 
artist Emma Bennett for allowing us to use her excellent artwork as a front cover and as chapter dividers throughout this Plan. 
Further examples of her work can be seen at: 
www.artbyemmabennett.co.uk or on Instagram at: artbyemmabennett 
Emma’s work is also available to view and purchase How To Have Your Say 
This is the Submission Draf Local Plan which, when adopted, 
will provide a strategy for sustainable development and change in Worthing borough up to 2036. The Local Plan provides the broad policy framework and a long-term spatial strategy to manage development, respond to climate change, promote regeneration, protect the environment, deliver infrastructure and support vibrant healthy communities. 
This period of public consultation forms the ‘Publication 
stage’ of the preparation of Worthing’s Local Plan. This is the version of the Plan that the Council considers to be ‘Sound’ for submission to central government for independent Examination by a government appointed Planning Inspector. At this stage comments should only relate to whether the Plan complies with legal requirements, including the duty to cooperate, and whether the document is sound. 
Public consultation runs from 26th January to 23rd March 
2021 closing at 5pm. Representations submitted afer this time will not be accepted as they will be treated as ‘not duly made’ . 
Persons making representations may request the right to be 
heard by the examiner. Requests must be made in writing before the end of the consultation period. 
Where can I view this document? 
You can view the document, associated supporting documents & evidence online and access the comments form at: 
htps://www.adur-worhing.gov.uk/worhing-local-plan/ At this stage the Council is unable to place hard copies of the documents on deposit in the usual locations but this will be actioned at such time restrictions are eased.  In certain circumstances, the Council will be happy to provide hard copies of the Local Plan to specific groups, particularly those with limited internet access. 
How do I comment? 
Online comments can be made using the online consultation form. This is the easiest and most eficient way to submit your representation directly to us. If you are unable to complete the online consultation form, you can download a response form and email it to us. 
Alternatively, hard copies of the comment form can be 
sent to the postal address below. Comments will also be accepted by email or letter. For every representation, please specify the paragraph number or policy reference that you are commenting on within your response. 
If you know somebody who would like to take part and 
doesn’t have internet access they can telephone the Planning Policy Team to request a copy of the comment form and information about the consultation. 
Address: Worthing Borough Council 
Planning Policy Portland House 44, Richmond Road Worthing, BN11 1HS 
at the Montague Gallery, Montague Centre, Worthing 
2  
  Email: planning.policy@adur-worthing.gov.uk 
Telephone: 01273 263000 
Submission Process: 
In submitting comments to this consultation we are also required, under The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012, to notify you when the independent examination will take place. 
At the end of the consultation period, all duly made 
comments will be made public and will be submitted to the Secretary of State, who will pass them to a Planning Inspector, along with the Local Plan and other relevant supporting documents. Comments and names will be published, but other personal information will remain confidential. By responding to this consultation, you consent to the Council publishing this information. 
Comments will be reviewed by the Planning Inspector 
appointed by the Secretary of State to carry out the independent examination of the Local Plan. You may be invited to discuss your comments at the examination if you have expressed a wish to do so. If you chose not to provide your data for this purpose, or ask us to erase your data, you will be unable to participate in the Local Plan process. 
If you have any queries please contact the Planning Policy 
Team using the details above. Data collection - what we collect 
and how is it used? 
The Planning Policy Team collects personal data to fulfil 
the Council’s statutory duty and help us deliver sustainable development. Processing this data is necessary for the performance of statutory plan making and associated policy work carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of oficial authority vested in the Council. We are committed to collecting, using and protecting personal data appropriately. 
In this regard, Worthing Borough Council is the data 
controller of personal data for the purposes of applicable data protection legislation and comments will be processed in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018 and the UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK GDPR). 
We collect names, addresses and other contact details. 
However, when publishing the representations received during a consultation we will only publish the name of the individual respondent or the organisation that they represent. All other personal information (including contact details and signatures) will be omitted or redacted. Records are kept in accordance with the Council’s disposal schedule (which can be viewed at the link enclosed) and we will not be kept for longer than necessary. 
htps://www.adur-worhing.gov.uk/planning-policy/privacy-notice/ On rare occasions, the Council might decide that it is necessary, justified and lawful to disclose some personal data but in these circumstances we will let you know our intention before publication. We will not provide personal data to anyone else or use the data about you for any other purpose unless the law allows or requires us to. 
All interested parties can request to be added to the 
Worthing Planning Policy Consultee Database. All those on the database will receive a Newsletter and will be notified when any relevant documents are published. Contact details will be stored confidentially, in accordance with the GDPR and any stakeholder can unsubscribe at any time. 
For further information, please refer to the Planning Policy 
Privacy Notice: 
htps://www.adur-worhing.gov.uk/planning-policy/privacy-notice/ 
3  
 
 
 
 Foreword 
As you read this Local Plan my sincere hope is that you 
gain a sense of our determination to craf and grow our town to create a community that can thrive, now and for generations to come. That strongly weaved amongst it is our aim to address local and national issues, whether that be housing provision or climate change. 
Like our residents, we have high ambitions for our places, 
our communities and their futures. We respect the fascinating histories that have made us what we are and we intend to build upon them to develop prosperous, flourishing and healthy communities for the long term. What people tell us matters to them is access to jobs, good education and healthcare, decent housing, safe communities, beautiful open spaces, good natural environment and an opportunity to participate in the communities in which they live. However, real challenges exist and we know that for many people and their families, life is not always easy. In addition, the climate change agenda has rapidly grown in importance. These are uncertain, yet exciting times. 
To help meet these challenges, the Council recognises the 
importance of having an up to date Local Plan that can enable ‘local decision making’ and guide development that is sustainable, inclusive and resilient. Preparing a new Local Plan provides an opportunity to look afresh at what shape and focus we want the town to be in the future. We want to plan positively, providing for much needed housing and employment and ensuring the delivery of associated infrastructure to meet the needs of our growing population up to 2036, whilst retaining the important character and features of the town which our residents, businesses and visitors all value. 
Work on preparing a new Local Plan has progressed well. 
Informed by the various studies that make up our evidence base and the consideration of a wide range of responses made during previous consultations the Council has prepared the policies and site allocations set out in this document. 
The Local Plan is incredibly important, as it helps us 
work towards delivering a thriving and stronger town. It is therefore very important to us that we hear your views as this is the final statutory stage to make representations. Consultation on this Regulation 19 submission Draf Local Plan runs for 8 weeks from 26th January to 23rd March. Following the close of consultation, the Council will collate and consider all comments received before submitting them and the Local Plan to the Secretary of State for independent examination. 
Cllr Kevin Jenkins 
Executive Member for Regeneration 
4 5     
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
  
     
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   Contents 
Part 1 Introduction 9 
Characteristics of the Borough 18 
Issues and challenges 21 
Part 2 Vision and Strategic Objectives 27 
Vision 28 
Strategic objectives - Social 30 
Strategic objectives - Economic 32 
Strategic objectives - Environment 34 
SP1 - Presumption in favour of sustainable development 36 
SP2 - Climate change 37 
SP3 - Healthy communities 40 
Part 3 Spatial Strategy 45 
SS1 - Spatial strategy SS2 - Development sites SS3 - Town centre 48 52 58 
6 SS4 - Countryside and undeveloped coast SS5 - Local green gaps SS6 - Local green spaces 60 61 64 Part 4 Site Allocations 67 
Introduction 68 
A1 Beeches Avenue 72 
A2 Caravan Club, Titnore Way 74 
A3 Centenary House 76 
A4 Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Road 78 
A5 Decoy Farm 80 
A6 Fulbeck Avenue 82 
A7 Grafon 84 
A8 HMRC Ofices, Barrington Road 86 
A9 Lyndhurst Road 88 
A10 Martlets Way 90 
A11 Stagecoach, Marine Parade 92 
A12 Teville Gate 94 
A13 Titnore Lane 96 
A14 Union Place 98 
A15 Upper Brighton Road 100   
  
    
  
  
     
 
   
   
  
      
  
    
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Part 5 Development Management Policies 103 Worthing Plan 2020 - 2036 
DM1 Housing mix 104 
DM2 Density 108 
DM3 Afordable housing 111 
DM4 Gypsy & traveller & travelling showpeople 114 
DM5 Quality of the built environment 115 
DM6 Public realm 119 
DM7 Open space, recreation & leisure 121 
DM8 Planning for sustainable communities / 125 
community facilities 
DM9 Delivering infrastructure 126 
DM10 Economic growth and skills 130 
DM11 Protecting and enhancing employment sites 134 
DM12 The visitor economy 136 
DM13 Retail and town centre uses 139 
DM14 Digital infrastructure 147 
DM15 Sustainable transport & active travel 149 DM16 Sustainable design 154 
DM17 Energy 158 
DM18 Biodiversity 161 
DM19 Green infrastructure 164 
DM20 Flood risk and sustainable drainage 166 
DM21 Water quality and sustainable water use 169 
DM22 Pollution 171 
DM23 Strategic approach to the historic 
environment 174 
DM24 The historic environment 178 
Glossary and Acronyms 181 
Glossary 182 
Acronyms 191 
7 Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
8 Worthing Local Plan 
Introduction 1 10 
Worthing Local Plan1
Introduction 
  
 
    
  1.1 This is the Submission Draf Local Plan which, when 
adopted, will provide a strategy for sustainable development and change in Worthing up to 2036. The Local Plan provides the broad policy framework and a long-term spatial strategy to manage development, respond to climate change, promote regeneration, protect the environment, deliver infrastructure and support vibrant healthy communities. 
Current Stage of Consultation 
1.2 This period of public consultation forms the ‘Publication stage’ of the preparation 
of Worthing’s Local Plan. This is the version of the Plan that the Council considers to be legally compliant and ‘Sound’ for submission to central government for independent Examination by a government appointed Planning Inspector. All details relating to the consultation and how responses can be made can be found at the start of this document. Following the close of the consultation, all responses received will be collated and submitted to the Planning Inspectorate. Purpose of the Plan 
1.3 Using three broad categories (‘Social’ , ‘Economy’ and the ‘Environment’) the new Local Plan will balance the benefits of ‘growth’ against the potential impact of future development. More specifically, the Local Plan: 
• identifies the key planning challenges and addresses them through a Vision and a set of associated social, economic and environmental objectives; 
• provides opportunities to create new homes of diferent types and tenures and jobs for present and future generations; 
• protects and delivers community facilities and infrastructure to support existing and future communities; 
• creates opportunities for improving the health and well-being of communities; 
• seeks to protect and enhance the valued qualities of our environment; and support the move to zero carbon’ 
• gives local communities, developers and investors greater certainty about the types of proposals for development that are likely to be approved; and 
• sets out a range of policies that will be used to assess development proposals and planning applications. Introduction 
 
 
  1.4 The spatial strategy makes it clear what development is intended to happen 
over the life of the plan until 2036, where and when this will occur and how it will be delivered. This is done by designating key development sites and specific allocations of land for diferent purposes and establishing policies to guide and help consider development proposals. The Plan is supported by an associated Policies Map which is used to illustrate geographically how the adopted policies will be applied. 
1.5 Once adopted, the new Plan will replace the Council’s local planning policies set out in the Core Strategy (2011) and the saved policies from the Worthing Local Plan (2003). It will inform the preparation of a number of future Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) and will be an important consideration in deciding planning applications. It will also inform related strategies and projects proposed by the Council, its partners and other stakeholders. 
1.6 The Local Plan has been prepared in a way that is flexible and able to adapt to change. However, it will be subject to continual monitoring to ensure that it remains relevant and efective. In addition, and in accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), a review of the Local Plan will be undertaken within five years of adoption. At any stage when a partial or full update of the Plan is required this will be reported within the Council’s Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) and the timetable for the review will be set out in the Local Development Scheme (LDS). 
1.7 It should be noted that this Plan does not cover matters relating to minerals and waste as this is the responsibility of West Sussex County Council. The County Council is also responsible for all roads and transport planning in West Sussex except for the trunk roads (A24 / A27 / A264) which are the responsibility of Highways England. What Area Will the Plan Cover? 
1.8 The new Local Plan will cover most of Worthing borough. However, unlike the existing Core Strategy, it will not cover the land in the north of the borough that lies within the South Downs National Park. The National Park Authority is a planning authority in its own right and produces the Local Plan which sets planning policy for the South Downs National Park area as a whole. 
1111   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 1 
What has Informed this Plan? 
1.9 Although the Local Plan reflects local issues and choices, there are also some 
important limitations as the Local Plan must be aligned to, and conform with, European legislation and national planning policies and their support for sustainable development. Most notably, the preparation of the Local Plan has encompassed the requirements of the Government’s NPPF. To support the NPPF, the Government has published Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) which has been taken into account. The Local Plan has also been influenced by local strategies, evidence documents and consultation responses. The following section provides a brief explanation of the key documents /stages. 
Consultation Stages 
1.10 The process of preparing a new Local Plan is made up of a number of statutory 
consultation stages when residents, businesses and other stakeholders are asked to comment on the Council’s proposals. The first stage of consultation, the ‘Issues and Options’ stage was undertaken in 2016 when the Council sought views on the key challenges for the borough and how Worthing should grow and develop. The responses informed the Draf Local Plan (published for consultation at the end of 2018) that set out the Council’s preferred options to address the issues that had been identified. 
1.11 Consultation responses have been collected in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) using both formal consultation methods and through more informal engagement. Full details of the consultations undertaken have been set out in the Consultation Statement. 
Evidence Base 
1.12 A key requirement in developing planning policies is that they are underpinned 
by robust and up-to-date local evidence. As such, a significant number of studies have been undertaken on diferent subject areas. References to some of these studies appear throughout this document and in associated Topic Papers. The full 
12 extent of the evidence base can be viewed on the Council’s website. 1.13 The Local Plan is accompanied by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which sets out the infrastructure requirements to meet the development forecast to come forward in the borough over the plan period. Whilst there are many infrastructure needs identified, none in isolation would restrict the Council’s ability to achieve the level of growth the Plan provides for. 
1.14 The Council must ensure that the aspirational policies identified in the Plan are realistic and deliverable. To make this assessment a Whole Plan Viability Assessment has been undertaken to assess the cumulative impact of the policy and development requirements on a range of development scenarios across the borough. 
The Council’s Ambitions 
1.15 To be efective and respond to local priorities, the Local Plan has had regard to a 
variety of other strategies of the Council and its partners. In particular, this has included Adur and Worthing Councils ‘Platforms for our Places - Going Further’ which sets out the Council’s ambitions for our places to 2022 and beyond. The Local Plan seeks to help deliver and support the relevant elements of the following five ‘platforms’ and their associated commitments: 
Prosperous Places 
Thriving People & Communities 
Tackling Climate Changes & 
Supporting our Natural Environment 
Good Service & New Solutions 
Leadership of Place 
The Worthing Local Plan  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
1.16 In July 2020 the Council published ‘And then... bouncing back in post pandemic 
Adur and Worthing’ . The Local Plan will need to help support the place based activities and interventions identified that will enable local communities to thrive, prosper, be healthy and resilient in response to the Coivid-19 pandemic. 
1.17 The Council supports the place brand called ‘Time for Worthing’ which has recently been developed by local businesses and residents. This aims to capture the borough’s commercial and lifestyle opportunities and unite the diverse communities which call Worthing 
home. The vision is to work collectively to raise the profile of the town and bring fresh energy and investment to our place – be that business, enterprise, skilled workers, tourism and visitors. The Local Plan is just one of a number of documents and strategies published by the Council and its partners that will help to ensure that these aims are realised. 
The Duty to Co-operate 
1.18 The Duty to Co-operate places a legal duty on local planning authorities and other public bodies to engage constructively and actively on planning issues which afect more than one local planning authority. In line with this requirement, Worthing Borough Council has worked on an ongoing basis with key partners to consider a range of cross boundary issues. 
1.19 Worthing Borough Council is a member of the West Sussex and Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board. The Board has commissioned evidence on a number of strategic studies and has committed to: • prepare, maintain and update a Local Strategic Statement to provide a broad strategic direction and establish areas for inter-authority co-operation; 
• develop and implement a programme for jointly addressing strategic planning and development issues; and 
• maintain liaison with the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership(s) and other relevant bodies. 
1.20 This strategic work has influenced the Local Plan, particularly the spatial strategy. A Duty to Co-operate Topic Paper has been published to accompany this Plan. This incorporates a number of Statements of Common Ground (SoCG) agreed between Worthing BC and neighbouring local authorities. The Statements set out details of this process and demonstrate how the requirements of the Duty have been met and how key cross boundary issues have been addressed. 
1.21 Sustainability Appraisal / Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Government legislation requires that all Development Plan Documents, including Local Plans, have to be assessed in terms of their impact on society, the economy and the environment. The Sustainability Appraisal (that incorporates the requirements of the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive) is an iterative process that is an integral part of plan making. It is used to consider all realistic options for growth and then identifies the significant social, environmental and economic impacts to ensure that the outcomes are as sustainable as possible. 
1.22 A Sustainability Appraisal (SA) has been undertaken and published alongside this Plan. The SA considers the impacts of proposed development options on people’s health, and covers the criteria of Health Impact Assessment (HIA). The SA will also consider the potential efects of the Plan on people in respect of disability, gender and racial equality impacts, in light of the Equalities Act 2010. 
13  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 1 
Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) 
1.23 Under the provisions of the Habitats Regulations, the Council is required 
to consider the potential impacts of land use plans on sensitive habitats of international importance. The Council has worked with partners to determine whether the Local Plan alone, or in combination with other plans, is likely to result in a significant adverse efect. 
Sustainable Development 
1.24 As evidenced and supported by the assessments referred to above, the purpose of the planning system is to contribute to sustainable development. This is a fundamental principle of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 2019 which defines ‘sustainable’ as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. In this regard, the NPPF sets three overarching objectives to be delivered through the preparation of plans and the policies in the framework: 
• social - supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities; 
• economic - contributing to building a strong, responsive and competitive economy; and 
• environmental - enhancing and contributing to our natural, built and historic environment. 
1.25 To assist in understanding how these objectives are being met the Local Plan has been structured throughout to reflect these three themes. In addition, the Local Plan has embedded the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDGs). These consist of 17 interconnected goals underpinned by targets designed to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. They address the global challenges we face, including those related to poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, peace and justice. The goals form part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is a call for action by all UN member states. Implementation and success rely on countries’ own sustainable development policies, plans and programmes. Local Planning Authorities are 
14    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction
15Introduction 
encouraged to localise the UN SDGs It is considered that the UN SDGs will 
enhance the sustainability credentials of the Plan and thus will provide a more robust monitoring framework. The Monitoring Framework will be used to review the robustness and efectiveness of the policies contained in this Plan. 
1.26 The UN SDGs are becoming increasingly recognised and adopted by numerous public, private and voluntary sector organisations therefore working towards a common and shared consensus for sustainable development. The Royal Town Planning Institute (RTPI) endorses the use of the UN SDGs within Local Plans as best practice. The Monitoring Topic Paper, that establishes the monitoring framework for the Plan, sets out the compatibility of each goal and associated targets against relevant policies in the Plan. The efectiveness of all policies in the Plan will be monitored and reported to elected Members. The Annual Monitoring Report will be used to provide a detailed review and, where appropriate, steps will be taken to ensure the Council’s planning policy framework is efective and up-to-date. This might include the publication of Supplementary Planning Documents to support the policy position established in this Plan. In the longer term, efective and robust monitoring will help to inform any subsequent review of the Plan. 
How to use this Document 
1.27 This Local Plan has been written with the intention that it should be read as a whole. Taken together, the policies, associated supporting text and proposals within the Plan forms a coherent strategy for sustainable development in Worthing. It is therefore important that individual policies are not considered in isolation. 
1.28 This document focuses on the strategy, policies and proposals of the Local Plan. Greater detail as to the background, policy context and supporting studies can be found in the accompanying evidence base and associated Topic Papers. The policies, when adopted, may be supported by Supplementary Planning Documents which can be prepared at any time to support the Local Plan and its delivery. SPDs will be used to provide additional guidance on specific policies or development sites / areas. 1.29 Whilst the NPPF does not formally form part of the Council’s Local Plan, it is a material consideration that must be taken into account during the consideration of planning applications. The Local Plan does not duplicate policies that are set out in the NPPF but, where appropriate, it applies them locally to respond to local circumstances. If the Local Plan is silent on a particular issue the default policy position is the NPPF. 
1.30 Many policies within this Plan refer to, or are informed by, guidance, standards and principles that are prepared by other bodies at the national and local level. Over the Plan period it is anticipated that some of these sources will be revised or replaced. In most circumstances, any revised and updated guidance should be used. Where appropriate, the Council will provide up to date information on its website to inform interested parties of any changes to adopted policy requirements and which guidance should be used. 
1.31 
Characteristics of the Borough 
Worthing originally developed as a popular Victorian and Edwardian seaside resort. It is now one of the largest towns in West Sussex, with around 110,700 residents and a working population of approximately 60,000 people. Its location on the south coast between the English Channel to the south and the South Downs National Park to the north provides a distinctive 
15   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 1 
1.32 
1.33 
1.34 and much cherished setting. It is this high quality 
environment that helps to underpin and support the local economy and which is valued by those who choose to live, study, work and visit here. In turn, this helps to generate an increasing requirement for homes, jobs and leisure uses. 
As illustrated on the Context Map, Worthing 
occupies an area of 3,369 hectares of the coastal plain, with the only breaks in an almost continuous band of urban development along the coast being at the far eastern and western ends of the borough. Whilst being principally a compact urban area, there are a number of highly valued greenspaces, parks and gardens within and around the town. 
Worthing plays an important role within a wider 
sub-region with key links to other authority areas such as Brighton & Hove, Adur, Arun, Horsham and Crawley for housing, leisure and employment. 
The seafront is one of Worthing’s most important 
assets acting as a focus for many of the historical buildings, gardens and public spaces. Significant enhancements have been made to parts of the seafront and this is having a positive efect on local businesses with a range of new independent shops and eateries having opened in recent years. The town centre and seafront areas continue to ofer the 1.35 
1.36 
1.37 Outside of the town centre and seafront area, the 
borough is more suburban in character. The historic development of the town occurred through the merging of separate villages and centres such as Tarring and Broadwater. The expansion of the town in this way is still evident today with distinct areas centred on the parish church or local shopping areas that each have their own identity and character. A significant amount of growth was witnessed between World War I and World War II resulting in large areas of predominantly two storey residential developments which now extend to the foot of the South Downs. 
In recent years the town has seen a resurgence 
in popularity as young people and families move into the borough, which is partly influenced by the afordability challenges faced within the residential market in Brighton and Hove. 
In line with the Strategic Objectives that follow, 
some key characteristics / facts for Worthing are set out within three thematic areas (Social, Economic, Environment) – these follow the context map overleaf. 
16 greatest opportunities for major redevelopment. 
ArunAdurBorough Boundary 
South Downs National Park 
Coastline & Local Green Gaps 
Industrial Estate/Business Park 
Parks & Green Spaces 
Town Centre 
Retail Locations by Size 
Secondary School 
Further Education 
Leisure Hospital 
Railway Station 
Trunk Roads 
Arterial Roads ArunAdur
Chichester DC Horsham DC 
Arun DC 
Worthing BC Brighton & Hove 
CC Mid Sussex 
DC 
Adur DC 
A24 Context Map 
A27 
A27 
A2031 
A2032 
A259 
A259 
17 Introduction1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Characteristics Of The Borough 
Social 
Population has risen
over recent decades and is expected tocontinue to do so during the plan period.It is estimated that there has been a 5.8% population increasebetween 2011 (104,600)and 2019 (110,700)and that there will be a further 7.8% increase by 2035 (19,300). Average life expectancyis 79 years for menand 83.1 years forwomen. These are slightly lower than theaverages for the SouthEast and England. 
In 2019 average houseprices were 10.89times median earningswhich is well above the national average- this has put homeownership beyondthe reach of manyhouseholds. In July 2020 there were1,425 households on the Housing Register.This high level ofafordable housingneed is further evidenced within the Worthing StrategicHousing MarketAssessment (2020)which calculates an afordable housingneed of 490 dwellings per annum upuntil 2039. 
Between 2006 and 2019 a total of 3,916 new homes were built in the borough. The percentage ofthe population agedover 75 is higher thanthe South East regionaverage. Althoughthere has been some growth in the mid-agebracket over the last 20 years, it is predictedthat the proportionof the populationover the age of 65 willcontinue to increase over the Plan period. 
5.8% 
Population increase 
between 2011 & 2019 3,916 
New homes built 
between 2006 and 2019 The percentage ofobese adults is higherthan the Englandaverage with physicalactivity of adults beingslightly lower thanaverage. Prioritiesfor Worthing includepromoting healthylifestyles, raisingawareness of risk factors for addictive behaviours, increasingawareness of mental health, encouraginghealthy relationshipsand tackling loneliness. Residents from minority ethnic groups make up a relatively small, butimportant, proportionof Worthing’s population. However, central areas have a significant number of residents from other EU countries. Worthing has a totalstock of approximately51,800 homes (2019).The majority (90%) ofthe stock is in privatesector ownership,which is slightly abovethe Coastal West Sussex average. 10% ofthe stock is owned byRegistered Providers.There is no local authority owned stock. 
Population growthis largely driven bydomestic migrationwith the majority ofmovements being fromAdur and Brighton &Hove. There are significant disparities within diferent areas of the town and 4 wards in Worthing (Heene,Central, Broadwater & Northbrook) are within the 20% most deprived nationally. 
The English Indices ofDeprivation 2019 ranksWorthing 175th out of317 local authorities. 
490 
Existing homes Affordable dwellings 
required per annum 51,800 
18 18  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Characteristics Of The Borough 
Economy 
Worthing is located
within the Coastal West Sussex and Brighton& Hove Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA). In 2018 there were an estimated 300,000 staying trips and 3.7million day tourist trips- with total expenditurein the local area byvisitors estimated to be £140m per annum. 
3,695 
Businesses in Worthing There are areas of heavy road congestion,especially at peaktimes. This is most prevalent along theA259 coast road and along the A27. The A24provides the main roadlink into the town from the north. 
Worthing is a netexporter of labourwith a net outflow of approximately 1,200workers. Worthing is part of the‘Coast to Capital’ LocalEnterprise Partnership(LEP) which is a publicand private sectorpartnership that seeksto improve economicprosperity. Strong manufacturingbase as well as a significant servicesector, led by largepublic sector employersand financial firms. In employment terms thelargest industries (2018)were healthcare (29%),retail (15%), education(7%), manufacturing(7%) and administrativeservices (7%). 
There is a good
supply of hotels andguesthouses (largelylocated around the seafront) whichofer a variety ofaccommodation typesand standards. 
13.5% 1,200 
Increase in businesses Net outfow of 
between 2014 & 2018 labour force Retail economyperforms reasonablywell but its primaryshopping areas couldbe performing morestrongly. Vacancyrates for retail units are below the national average but slightlyabove the average forWest Sussex. 
In 2016, productivity(measured by GrossValue Added) wasapproximately£66k per employee.Statistics shows that Worthing is stillperforming relativelywell in comparisonwith other Coast to Capital localauthorities. 
Public transportservices in the town are relatively good,particularly the rail andbus links along an eastwest corridor. There are five railway stationsin the borough. There is a general pattern of lower wage rates along the coast and wages in Worthing are below the South East average. Resident wages are higher than workplace wages suggesting that the types of employment roles available locally are less well paid than elsewhere in the sub-region. 
Worthing has a well-defined network /hierarchy of shopping areas (town centre, district centres and local / neighbourhoodcentres). In 2018, there were 3,695 businesses in Worthing (an increaseof 13.5% since 2014).There are fewer micro businesses more small, medium and large businesses thanin comparator areas.This is the sign of astronger, more resilientbusiness base. 
£140m 
Annual visitor spend 
19 19 1 Introduction 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
20Due to its permeable
geology, Worthing hasa larger proportionof land with a high probability of groundwater floodingthan many other areasof England. Worthing is within a‘highly water stressed’region and, as such, water resources must be managedsustainably to meet theobjectives of the WaterFramework Directive. 
Air quality is generallygood, but an AirQuality ManagementArea (AQMA) is inoperation on the A27where most of the air pollution is generatedby trafic. Much of the built environment and heritage is highly valued and the borough includes: 26Conservation Areas; 9 Environmental Areas of Special Character; 360+ listed buildings;and a large number of buildings regarded as being of important local interest. Worthing recorded ayear on year decreasein CO2 emissions percapita from 2010 to2018. Carbon emissions reduced from 4.7 tonnes per capita to 3.0 tonnesper capita during thisperiod. There are two river flood zones in Worthing - the area ofthe Ferring Rife to thewest of the boroughand Teville Stream to the east. 
In 2018, 7.9% of Worthing’s population experienced fuel poverty. This was in line with the South East average but was lower than the percentage of people experiencing fuel poverty nationally(10.2%). 
In 2019, the Council declared a Climate Emergency and madea commitment to becoming a carbonneutral Council by2030. The Council also signed the UK100 Cities Pledge toachieve 100% Clean Energy by 2050. 
The 7.5km of shoreline is home to a wide variety of flora andfauna. To the east and west of the borough, areasof valuable opencountryside form longestablished breaks in development betweensettlements. 
Low-lying areas ofcoastal land are susceptible to floodingfrom the sea. Since 2017, Worthing’sbathing water hasbeen classed as beingof ‘suficient’ qualityby the EnvironmentAgency. 
The extensive chalk downlands, much of which falls within the South Downs National Park, helps to providethe town with its water supply, biodiversity,and opportunities forleisure and recreation. There are over 360 hectares of parks andopen recreation spaceswithin the boroughincluding HighdownGardens (Registeredas a Historic Park & Garden) and 10 Parks& Gardens registeredas having local historicinterest. The borough is home toa number of statutoryand non-statutorynature conservation designations includingLocal Wildlife Sites and Cissbury Ring (locatedwithin the National Park) which is a Siteof Special ScientificInterest. Important fisheriesare located of the south coast between Shoreham-by-Sea andLittlehampton. 
207.5km 
Of shoreline 360 hectares 
Parks and open 
recreation spaces Over 360 
Listed buildings 1 
Air Quality 
Management Area 1 Characteristics Of The Borough 
Environment 
20   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IntroductionIntroduction 
Issues and Challenges 
1.38 The Vision and Strategic Objectives that follow this section address a number of 
key issues and challenges for the Local Plan. 
1.39 Although Worthing has seen some key successes in recent years there is still much work to do to ensure that the borough continues to prosper, meets the needs of its residents and better fulfils its role within the wider sub-region. There is much potential for an exciting period of change ahead, taking advantage of key sustainable development opportunities that can help the town’s economy to grow and improve its regional competitiveness. 
1.40 Whilst there is an aspiration to accommodate and deliver growth this must be achieved within a very constrained area. Worthing is a very compact town with a tightly drawn boundary. As illustrated on the Land Availability Maps that follow, whilst Worthing measures 33.7 sq km in area 8 sq km (24%) of the borough is taken up by part of the South Downs National Park. The existing built up area (22.5 sq km) takes up the vast majority of the land (88%) within the borough that lies outside the National Park. As explained within Chapter 3, a further constraint is that much of the residual land (the coastline and narrow & sensitive gaps to the east and west) are not appropriate for development. 
1.41 Limited land availability, infrastructure constraints, areas of flood risk, heritage assets and high quality landscapes around the borough means that there is little room for expansion. This lack of developable land around the town is clearly the crucial factor when considering options for significant growth and the Local Plan’s ability to fully meet the borough’s identified development needs. Put simply, it is the same features we want to protect which, in part, constrain the borough’s ability to grow and develop. The overarching challenge is therefore to strike the balance between taking a positive approach to sustainable development and regeneration against the limited physical capacity of Worthing to accommodate it and the need to maintain a good quality of life for new and existing residents. 1.42 An increasing population, alongside the special qualities of the area, creates a high demand for housing. This demand has caused a widening gulf between local incomes and house prices which has resulted in dificulties for many people (particularly younger people) to get onto the housing ladder. The three key priorities set out in the Council’s Housing Strategy (2020-23) are to: improve housing related well-being and support; deliver better homes and stronger communities; and improve the level of afordable housing supply. 
1.43 The Council must therefore plan for housing in the variety of forms needed to meet current and future needs and take into account how the population is changing. In particular, the Council will need to increase the amount and availability of afordable housing to take account of relatively high house prices and below average wages. Housing delivery will also need to respond to the needs of diferent groups, particularly the needs of an ageing population. In summary, when responding to housing needs the Council must ensure that the right types of housing are built in the right locations. 
1.44 Whilst the need to deliver housing will be a priority, to ensure that we deliver balanced and sustainable communities, the provision of other uses such as employment, leisure and community facilities will also need to be carefully considered. 
21   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Introduction 1 
1.45 Although the Council will work positively to 
deliver growth, there is no expectation that all needs (particularly housing) can be met within the borough. Therefore, it will be imperative that the Council continues to work with neighbouring authorities and partners through the Duty to Co -
operate to explore all options on whether there is any ability for other areas to deliver some of Worthing development needs, and how this might be achieved. 
1.46 From an economic perspective, Worthing is performing adequately and the town has a strong base to build upon. The Council’s Economic Strategy (2018) identifies a number of improvements that would allow the town to significantly enhance its attraction and competitiveness. One of the Council’s overarching objectives is to attract inward investment to regenerate and grow the local economy. A particular focus will need to be placed on supporting the town centre. Whilst retail will continue to perform an important role, the town centre will need to adapt to changing economic conditions and expectations, particularly at a time when it will be recovering from the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic. 
1.47 To help meet the town’s potential it is essential that the Local Plan helps to unlock key development 
22 sites, particularly those in and around the town centre and seafront that provide the greatest potential to deliver social and economic benefits. Some of these sites have been vacant or in poor condition for a number of years and their sustainable redevelopment provides a unique opportunity to improve the town’s identity, enhance the public realm, add vibrancy and improve connectivity. The redevelopment of some of these sites also provides an opportunity to capitalise on the seafront setting and maintain and improve community facilities and the borough’s retail, tourism and leisure ofer in order to better compete with other towns across the wider area. Elsewhere, a challenge will be to provide new premises to meet identified employment needs and support local business. 
1.48 The way in which infrastructure services are being delivered is changing due to resource eficiency and financial constraints as well as some services becoming increasingly digitised. This has an impact on the ability to plan for future infrastructure needs as well as afecting ‘building space’ requirements. All of these changes have the potential to impact on Worthing’s infrastructure. These changes must be carefully managed to achieve the best outcomes for Worthing. 
1.49 Given the limited land available to meet development needs, the Council will look favourably at proposals that make ‘best use’ of each available site and, where appropriate, increase the density of development. At the same time, the Local Plan has a key role to play in ensuring that new development respects the character of the surrounding area. This includes protecting heritage assets and preserving valued open spaces, attractive landscapes, coastline and the setting of the South Downs National Park. 
1.50 Taking proposed new development and demographic projections into account, it is clear that the town is going to experience an increase in population over the plan period. A challenge is therefore to ensure that all essential infrastructure is delivered to support the levels of growth forecast. For example, road congestion and related pollution (air and noise) is already a significant problem in the borough so it is vital  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Introduction 
that a shif to active travel modes are achieved, sustainable transport measures are 
promoted and the potential impacts of new development are mitigated. 
1.51 The lack of available land for growth is likely to result in great pressure being placed on many existing land uses. Residential land values are usually significantly higher than other uses so it is no surprise that developers and landowners ofen promote schemes that would result in the change of an alternative use to housing. Whilst the high levels of housing need must always be taken into consideration, it should not override the need to ensure that the town also provides the right balance of other uses to ensure that people have places to work and enjoy their leisure time. As a consequence, a key challenge will be to ensure that, where appropriate, existing uses are protected. This will include the safeguarding of employment sites and the protection of valued open spaces and community facilities. 
1.52 Overarching all elements of the Plan is the universal but vital challenge for Worthing to ensure that the area is resilient to the predicted impacts of climate change which can include hotter, drier periods as well as increased rainfall and flood events. In response to the Council’s Climate Emergency Declaration the Plan must support the move towards carbon neutrality and clean energy, and ensure development helps the borough to adapt and increase its resilience to the efects of climate change, now and in the future. New development must utilise sustainable construction techniques whilst adaptation and mitigation measures must improve the resilience of communities, reduce inequality and bring a range of social benefits. Worthing is within a ‘highly water stressed’ (when the demand for water exceeds the amount available) and, as a consequence, the Council will require the sustainable management of water resources to meet the Water Environment Regulations 2017. efect on the quality of their health and well-being. Many of the strongest predictors of health and well-being, such as social, economic and environmental factors, fall outside the healthcare setting. These wider determinants of health have a significant impact on people’s health and well-being. The poorest and most deprived are more likely to be in poor health, have lower life expectancy and likely to have a long-term health condition or disability. The Local Plan is an important mechanism to promote well-being and address the wider determinants of health. In particular, the Local Plan will seek to address the high variation in levels of deprivation with policies that will help to deliver high quality housing and support the quality of community life, social cohesion, access to the natural environment and generally create balanced communities. 
1.54 The Covid-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on all sections of society. Whilst it is too early to say how pronounced and long term these impacts might be it is widely accepted that there will be many implications for the local economy, for transport and for social structures. Like all local authorities the Council will have to respond positively to support post-Covid recovery. Planning will play an important role in this process and, if anything, the pandemic has emphasised the importance of the Local Plan’s role in planning for sustainable, resilient and inclusive outcomes (‘Build Back Better’). Although the Local Plan is designed to provide a clear framework for development it must be accepted that, in these uncertain times, there may need to be an even greater requirement for adaptability and flexibility. Furthermore, all policies will be monitored on a regular basis to ensure that they remain efective and deliverable. 
1.53 The West Sussex Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2019) sets out that the environment in which people are born, grow, live, work and age has a profound 
23 ArunAdur
Land Availability Map 
A27 
A27 
A24 
A259 
A259 
A2032 
A2031 Introduction 1 
ArunAdur
South Downs 
National Park 
Borough excluding 
South Downs National Park 
ArunAdur
Edge of Town Development Opportunities 
Railway Station 
Trunk Roads 
Arterial Roads 
ArunAdur
Worthing Borough 
Boundary 
Area within South 
Downs National Park 
Area within existing 
built up area (BUA) boundary 
ArunAdur
Area not including SNDP, existing BUA and edge of town development opportunities 
24 Indicative Land Areas Introduction 
Worthing Borough 
Boundary 
33.7 sq km Area within South 
Downs National Park 
8 sq km 
25 
Area within existing 
built up area (BUA) boundary 
22.5 sq km Area not including 
SDNP , coastline, existing BUA and edge of town development opportunities 
Approx 0.03 sq km Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
26  
Worthing Local Plan 
Vision and Strategic 
Objectives 2 28 
Worthing Local Plan2
Vision and Strategic 
Objectives
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 2.1 The Vision sets out what kind of town Worthing aspires 
to be by 2036. It responds to local challenges and opportunities, is evidence based and takes account of objectives identified by the community. 
2.2 The Strategic Objectives, that follow, link to the Vision and are based around the three key roles for the planning system set out in the NPPF (social, economic and environmental). These objectives help to inform the three Strategic Policies that also form part of this chapter. 
2.3 The overarching objectives and principles established in this chapter then provide the direction for the spatial strategy and policies for the plan area which are set out in the chapters that follow. Worthing Vision
By 2036 
V1 
Worthing will be recognised as a highly sustainable 
and desirable place to live, work and visit with a low carbon economy, continuing to attract high calibre businesses and significant inward investment that will help the town’s economy to grow and improve its regional competitiveness. 
V2 
Regeneration of the town centre and seafront will have built on recent successes to unlock key development sites and deliver a vibrant and diverse retail, cultural and leisure offer for residents and visitors of all ages. 29 
Vision and Strategic Objectives
 V3 
Limited land resources will have been developed in 
the most efficient way to meet the widest range of identified needs, whilst at the same time ensuring that the borough’s historic and natural environment, intrinsic character, heritage assets, and its coastal and countryside setting have been protected and enhanced, adding to the borough’s natural capital. V5 
Significant progress will have been made towards Worthing becoming a carbon neutral town. Active travel and public transport will be significantly improved and supported by a road network that prioritises sustainable transport modes. Electric vehicles will be promoted along with, and through, car clubs. A sustainable road network will be complemented by a good public transport system, giving people choice about how they travel. 
V4 V6 
High quality new sustainable development will have been integrated with existing communities and opportunities taken to deliver new and improved facilities and services. The borough will have prepared for the increasing effects of climate change, through adaptation and mitigation measures and by delivering a net gain in biodiversity. Safeguard 
existing dwellings and the 
character and amenity of 
   
  Vision and Strategic Objectives 2 
residential areas. SO5 Ensure 
new development 
integrates into existing 
communities, supporting local centres 
to enhance the well-being of all 
people, and reduce inequalities. SO6 
Improve 
accessibility to services, 
local centres and the town by 
sustainable modes of transport thereby 
reducing the need to travel by car. SO3 
Encourage 
the creation of healthy, 
accessible and sustainable 
environments, improve opportunities 
to access the natural environment 
and support healthy and active 
lifestyles. SO7 Deliver 
high quality accessible 
and sustainable new homes that 
best refect the identifed needs within 
the borough (in terms of size, type 
and tenure). SO1 
Ensure 
that there is suffcient 
infrastructure capacity to meet 
existing needs and the needs 
arising from new development. SO4 Ensure 
that developments 
provide an appropriate level of 
affordable housing to help those in 
housing need. SO2 
Social 
30  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 
Planning for a Sustainable Society 
2.4 To achieve these objectives the Plan includes related policies that seek to create 
and support sustainable, cohesive communities that are strong, vibrant and healthy. To achieve this objective the Plan aims to deliver high quality, successful development in the most eficient way to help meet the identified needs of all its users. In addition, the Plan aims to improve health and well-being and address the wider determinants of health, in particular, seeking to address the variation in levels of deprivation across the borough. 
Policies 
SP3 Healthy Communities DM6 Public Realm 
DM1 
DM2 DM3 DM4 Housing Mix Density Afordable Housing Gypsy, Traveller & Travelling 
Showpeople DM7 
DM8 
DM9 Open Space, Recreation & 
Leisure 
Planning for Sustainable 
Communities / Community Facilities 
Delivering Infrastructure 
DM5 Quality of the Built Environment 
31 
Related Sustainable Development Goals Vision and Strategic Objectives2
Support 
Worthing’s tourism role 
through the provision of additional 
high quality tourism facilities. 
  
   
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives2 
SO12 Deliver 
high quality public realm 
and enhanced infrastructure 
(particularly digital infrastructure) to 
attract inward investment. SO13 
Encourage 
family friendly and 
evening economies and improve 
the retail, cultural, community and 
leisure offer in the town centre through 
the improvement of existing areas, the 
delivery of new developments and 
improved connectivity. SO10 
Seek 
to improve the skills of 
the workforce and the quality 
of the environment to encourage 
the creation of high value jobs by 
existing and new businesses. SO14 Retain 
and enhance key 
employment areas and provide 
a choice of employment sites to meet 
the needs of existing and future 
businesses. SO8 
SO11 Strengthen 
Worthing’s town centre 
as a location for shopping, leisure 
and business and enhance its role as 
a sub-regional centre. SO9 
Economy 
Enhance 
the gateway approaches 
and key transport corridors 
leading into the town centre. 
3232 Vision and Strategic Objectives
 
 
 
 
      Vision and Strategic Objectives 
Planning for Sustainable Economic Growth 
2.5 To achieve these objectives the Plan includes Economic related policies that seek 
to support Worthing’s ambition to build on its current economic strengths, help local businesses to grow and equip the borough’s workforce to be ready for future challenges and emerging sectors. The strategy is to protect key employment uses and plan positively for sustainable economic growth to meet quantitative and qualitative needs. This includes a policy to support digital infrastructure improvements which will help to improve the town’s regional competitiveness and the creation of high value jobs. The Plan also aims to help deliver an integrated, safe and sustainable transport system. 
Policies 
 Related Sustainable Development Goals 
SP1 Presumption in Favour of DM12 The Visitor Economy 
Sustainable Development 
DM13 Retail and Town Centre Uses 
SS2 Development Sites 
DM14 Digital Infrastructure 
SS3 Town Centre 
DM15 Sustainable Transport & 
DM10 Economic Growth and Skills Active Travel 
DM11 Protecting and Enhancing Employment Sites 
33 33 Ensure 
development helps the 
borough to adapt and increase 
its resilience to the effects of climate 
 
  
 
  Vision and Strategic Objectives2 
34change, now and in the future within the 
context of the Government’s commitment of 
Net Zero by 2050 and the Council’s Climate 
Emergency Declaration. SO19 Provide 
an integrated, safe and 
sustainable transport system
 to improve air quality, reduce 
congestion and promote 
active travel. SO20 
Make 
effcient use of previously 
developed land to maximise 
housing delivery on sustainable sites in 
recognition of the environmental and 
physical constraints to development posed 
by the sea and the South Downs. SO17 
Facilitate 
affordable, clean, 
secure energy through the 
delivery of sustainable, energy 
effcient, low carbon development and 
an increase in renewable, decentralised, 
low carbon energy and heat networks 
to achieve radical reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions. SO21 Protect 
and enhance, valued 
green spaces, stretches 
of undeveloped coastline, gaps 
between settlements and the quality 
of the natural environment creating 
net gains to biodiversity. SO15 
Protect 
maintain and enhance 
the distinct character, heritage, 
identity and setting of the 
borough. SO18 Improve 
the quality and quantity 
of the natural environment and 
public realm particularly within the town 
centre and along the seafront. SO16 
34 Environment  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 
Planning for a Sustainable Environment 
2.6 To achieve these objectives the Plan includes Environment related policies that 
aim to deliver high quality development whilst protecting and enhancing the local environment. Policies will help to enhance the multi-functional benefits of open spaces, reduce carbon emissions, improve biodiversity, minimise pollution and respond to the changing climate. The Plan also seeks to protect and enhance the historic environment (both built and natural) which gives Worthing much of its intrinsic character. 
Policies 
 Related Sustainable Development Goals 
SP2 Climate Change DM19 Green Infrastructure 
SS4 Countryside and Undeveloped DM20 Flood Risk and Sustainable 
Coast Drainage 
SS5 Local Green Gap DM21 Water Quality and Sustainable Water Use 
SS6 Local Green Spaces 
DM22 Pollution 
DM16 Sustainable Design 
DM23 Strategic Approach to the 
DM17 Energy Historic Environment 
DM18 Biodiversity DM24 The Historic Environment 
35 35  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 2 
Strategic Policies 
2.7 A fundamental principle of the NPPF is that the planning system should help to 
contribute to sustainable development. The NPPF defines ‘sustainable’ as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. To meet this aim, Local Plans must include strategic policies to establish a presumption in favour of sustainable development and address each local planning authority’s priorities for the development and use of land in its area. 
2.8 Within the context of achieving sustainable development, the Local Plan contains three overarching Strategic Policies which are considered to be core priorities. These provide a narrative and a high level / cross cutting policy approach that is then cascaded into individual Development Management Policies that follow. Put simply, the Strategic Policies capture key priorities that are of fundamental significance to the future long term sustainability of the borough but without overriding the function of the linked Development Management policies that provide the necessary detail. 
2.9 The first of the strategic policies integrates the ‘presumption’ established in the NPPF into the Local Plan. However, it should be noted that this policy does not afect or remove statutory consultation on planning applications. 
2.10 The other two strategic policies seek to address the key challenge of climate change and improving the health & wellbeing of the local population. As such, development proposals must have due regard to climate change adaptation & mitigation and the creation of healthy, inclusive and safe communities. SP1 PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
a) When considering development proposals the Council will take a positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. The Council will always work proactively with applicants to find solutions which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the economic, social and environmental conditions in the area. 
b) Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan (and, where relevant, with policies in Neighbourhood Plans) will be approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. 
c) Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of date at the time of making the decision then the Council will grant permission unless material considerations indicate otherwise - taking into account whether: 
i. the application of policies in the National Planning Policy Framework that 
protect areas or assets of particular importance provide a strong reason for restricting the overall scale, type or distribution of development in the plan area; or 
ii. any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as a whole. 
36 Climate Change 
2.11 Climate change is the defining issue of our time. The world is warming as a result 
of increased greenhouse gas emissions largely compounded by exponential economic and population growth. There is mounting evidence of its seriousness and its potential impacts. Unless greenhouse gas emissions are reduced, temperatures will continue to rise. Eventually, a tipping point could be reached, overcoming the earth’s natural bufering systems, bringing catastrophic climate change. Even if all greenhouse gas emissions stopped now, it is projected that the world would still need to adapt to at least a century of irreversible climate change. 
2.12 The impacts of climate change on the built and natural environment are being acutely felt at all scales, globally, nationally and locally. Such efects include higher temperatures especially during the summer months, increased rainfall and flooding during the winter months and an increase in extreme coastal water levels driven mainly by increases in mean sea level rise. 
2.13 The changes in seasonality of weather events are likely to become much more prevalent and intense and this will impact negatively on public health and the natural environment. In addition, there will be disruption to agricultural production and the operation of essential services and infrastructure. Some people and places will be more exposed than others to the direct impacts of climate change. Within these places, some people may be more vulnerable to the impacts as a result of their socio-economic status. This inequality is referred to as ‘climate justice’ . To help address this, the Local Plan must ensure that diversity and equality is at the heart of planning for climate change and that climate change adaptation and mitigation policies do not disadvantage diferent groups. The Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 served as stark illustration of the need to create more sustainable, inclusive societies and green economies (“Build Back Better”) that are more resilient. 
37 Vision and Strategic Objectives 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
    
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 2 
International / National Response 
2.14 It is clear that there needs to be a shif in approach to 
focus on planetary health. A UN Special Report (2018) on Climate Change states that in order to have any chance of reducing the risks of irreversible climate change in the future, the world needs to limit global temperature increases to no more than 2 degrees Celsius above pre industrial levels. However, the latest science indicates that 1.5
oC should be set to avoid 
these worse extremes. 
2.15 A reduction in greenhouse gases will be achieved through a range of measures classed as either ‘adaptation’ or ‘mitigation’ . ‘Adaptation’ is when adjustments are made to natural or human systems in response to the actual or anticipated impacts of climate change, to mitigate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. ‘Mitigation’ is an action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system, primarily through reducing greenhouse gas emissions. As well as taking actions to reduce emissions, it will also be important to maximise natural processes that can take carbon out of the atmosphere and lock it into features such as peat and trees, known as ‘carbon sequestration’ . 
2.16 On a national level, the UK has committed to becoming net carbon zero by 2050. The NPPF makes it clear that mitigating and adapting to climate change, including moving to a low carbon economy 
38 is a core planning environmental objective. Response at the Local Level 
2.17 West Sussex County Council’s Climate Change Strategy 2020 - 2030 sets out the County’s response to climate change including a commitment to work towards carbon neutrality and climate resilience by 2030. 
2.18 Adur & Worthing Councils’ declared Climate Emergency in July 2019 and have committed to work towards becoming carbon neutral by 2030. The Councils have also signed the UK100 Cities Pledge to achieve 100% clean energy by 2050. In November 2018, the Councils’ adopted an ambitious programme of action on sustainability under ‘Sustainable AW’ . More recently a Carbon Reduction Plan (2019) has been published which sets out a pathway to achieve carbon neutrality by 2030 for the Councils’ own direct emissions. 
Role of the Local Plan 
2.19 The planning system is one of many tools that can be used to help minimise 
vulnerability to all sectors of the community and provide resilience to the efects of climate change. The way in which we shape new and existing developments in Worthing can make a significant contribution to adapting (resilience to climate change impact) and mitigating the efects of climate change through carbon reduction (‘decarbonisation’) and sustainable design & construction. Green infrastructure will have a major role to play in this, helping to mitigate the impacts of high temperatures, reduce flood risk, and maintain / restore biodiversity. 
2.20 To respond to climate change, planning proposals must be accompanied by information proportionate to the scale of development proposed. For major development proposals, Sustainability Statements must be submitted to clarify how: 
• the development has taken measures to mitigate and adapt to the efects of climate change; Vision and Strategic Objectives 
• the development has considered the energy hierarchy and heating and 
cooling hierarchy; 
• sustainable design and construction measures have been incorporated into development design; 
• any potential flood risk will be mitigated. 
2.21 This strategic policy below is an overarching policy designed to ensure the impacts of climate change are fully considered at an early stage to ensure that development and associated infrastructure is future proofed and resilient to recover from extreme weather conditions. This policy should be read in conjunction with other relevant policies in this Plan. 
SP2 CLIMATE CHANGE  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
A comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing climate change will be 
taken, consisting of the following elements: 
Carbon Reduction 
a) Development proposals are expected to reduce the amount of energy used in construction and operation of buildings and improve energy efficiency, including retrofitting existing properties, to contribute to achieving zero carbon emissions. 
b) The Council will support and promote the creation of low carbon heating/ cooling networks and the delivery of renewable energy schemes. 
c) Developments should prioritise active travel such as walking, cycling and public transport to reduce reliance on the private car and facilitate car free lifestyles. d) Follow the waste hierarchy to minimise, reuse, and recycle waste during the construction phase and to encourage greater levels of recycling over the lifetime of the development. 
Maximising carbon sequestration 
e) Incorporate green infrastructure such as street trees and other vegetation into the public realm to support rainwater management through sustainable drainage, reduce exposure to air pollution, moderate surface and air temperature and increase biodiversity. 
f) Achieve an overall net gain for biodiversity commensurate with the scale of the development, including a positive contribution to the habitat network through habitat protection, creation and enhancement. 
g) Maintain the current level of tree canopy cover across the borough and seek opportunities to increase appropriate species of woodland cover. 
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation 
h) Development must be designed to adapt and mitigate the impacts of climate change and reduce vulnerability, particularly in terms of overheating, flood risk and water supply. 
i) Ensure buildings and infrastructure are designed to adapt to a changing climate, making efficient use of water, reducing impacts from natural hazards like flooding and heatwaves, while mitigating against and avoiding contributing to the urban heat island effect. This should include maximising opportunities for both natural heating and ventilation. 
j) The Council will seek adaptation and mitigation measures which improve the resilience of communities, reduce inequality and bring a range of social benefits. 
39  
    
 
  
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 2 
Healthy Communities 
2.22 There is strong evidence that inequalities in health and well-being are influenced 
by social, economic and environmental factors such as the design and quality of homes and neighbourhoods, the opportunities we have to exercise and access to health care facilities. For example, research has shown that external stressors such as light, air, pollution, noise, low or no provision of open space, or overheating can trigger a biological stress response which can impair the function of the immune response which in turn causes a range of diseases. 
2.23 To aid understanding of the relationship between the built & natural environment and health, researchers have devised the Health Map illustrated below. 
The Settlement Health Map (adapted from Barton and Grant, 2006) 2.24 A recent Health Equity study for England identified that inequalities in life expectancy have risen in the last decade especially in deprived areas. Rising child poverty, a housing afordability crisis, a rise in homelessness and inequities in money and resources are all contributing to health inequalities. And these outcomes, on the whole, are even worse for Black, Asian & Minority Ethnic (BAME) population groups and people with disabilities. The Covid-19 pandemic has been shown to disproportionately afect vulnerable groups especially those living in deprived neighbourhoods in poor quality and overcrowded housing. There is an urgent need to address place based poverty and inequality to support a higher quality of life, better health outcomes and health justice for all communities. 
Health and Well-being in Worthing 
2.25 Local Authorities now take responsibility for public health in their local 
communities. When doing so, it is important to understand the specific local health priorities in order to reduce health inequalities. Adur & Worthing Councils’ Public Health Strategy 2018 - 2021 ‘Start Well, Live Well, Age Well’ (2018) explains that there are significant health challenges and inequalities within the borough including: higher than average levels of obesity and alcohol misuse; low rates of physical activity; isolated older people and loneliness of all ages; early deaths from cancers; and high incidence of mental health issues amongst young people. 
2.26 The Public Health Strategy identifies five priorities for action which also contribute to the ambitions shared by the West Sussex Joint Health and Well-being Strategy (2019-2024) and the Well-being and Resilience Framework. These priorities are informed by evidence set out within the West Sussex Joint Strategic Needs Assessment. 
40  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 trategic Objectives Vision and S Strategic Objectives 
Public Health - Priorities for Action 
1. We all have the opportunity to enjoy good mental well-being and 
emotional resilience (at all life stages) 
2. We contribute to improve environmental sustainability 
3. We can all access and make positive use of our open spaces 
4. We all have the opportunity to enjoy a healthy lifestyle (diet, weight, smoking, physical activity, alcohol, drugs and sexual health) 
5. We can all enjoy good social connections via purposeful activity at all stages of our life. 
Role of the Local Plan 
2.27 The Local Plan is one of many mechanisms to promote health and well-being and thus address the wider determinants of health. Facilitating a healthy and active community provides numerous benefits, not just on a social level but also environmentally and economically. In addition, the Plan can encourage people to make positive behaviour choices towards leading healthy lifestyles such as the provision of safe and attractive   and walking networks, areas for community food growing and improving access and quality of public open spaces. 
2.28 Of increasing importance, is the role that Local Plans have with regards to addressing the public health impacts arising from climate change. With increasingly warmer summers being forecast, there is a need to protect communities, especially vulnerable groups, from heat stress. New buildings need to be designed with climate resilience in mind as well as the provision of multi-functional green infrastructure within public realm spaces to provide shading and urban cooling. Furthermore, communities vulnerable to repeated flood events are likely to experience anxiety which may impact on their mental well-being. 
2.29 Poor air quality is becoming a prevalent issue for public health as a result of heavy car centric lifestyles. Air pollution is the top environmental risk to human health in the UK, and the fourth greatest threat to public health after cancer, heart disease and obesity. Providing enhanced, safe and accessible active travel routes can also have a significant effect on health by encouraging participation in physical activity and promoting social interaction, in addition to reducing noise and air pollution. 
2.30 The borough’s parks, open spaces, sports / recreation facilities and green infrastructure help local communities to lead lifestyles with greater levels of physical activity, resulting in better physical and mental health, reduced stress levels and increased social interaction as well as reducing exposure to noise and air pollution. Easy, safe and improved equitable access for all to high quality open and natural space is therefore important especially within the context of climate justice. Research has shown that those people that frequently access 
41  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 2 
nature and open spaces are more likely to develop 
a connection thus resulting in ‘nature appreciation’ . This then facilitates ‘pro-environmental’ behaviours whereby people are more likely to behave in an environmentally friendly way. 
2.31 The design and quality of the built environment can have a significant impact on physical and mental health of how people perceive and navigate their environments. A high quality, inclusive and accessible environment should enable everyone at all stages of life and at all levels of ability to participate equally, confidently and independently in everyday activities and to easily interact with one another. Homes need to be constructed and designed in a manner so that they can adapt to changing demands and needs of all generations thus enabling people to live independently for longer. 
2.32 Sport England believes that being active should be an intrinsic part of everyone’s life pattern. Along with Public Health England they have published guidance on ‘Active Design’ which comprises ten design principles to encourage and promote sport and physical activity through the design and layout of the built environment. Related to these aims, Adur & Worthing Councils are currently preparing a Physical Activity Strategy which seeks to raise levels of physical activity 
42 across all areas of the community. 2.33 A healthy environment is essential for a healthy economy. Growth in the provision and quality of local employment opportunities is essential in supporting socio -
economic benefits. Provision of a range of varied jobs can ensure that local communities derive maximum economic benefits from those opportunities. The creation of employment opportunities need to be in accessible locations served by public transport links and walking and cycling infrastructure to encourage physical activity and also not to disadvantage those who do not have access to a car. 
2.34 The issues of food production, quality and security impact directly on the health and well-being of current and future generations. Involvement in community food growing projects can help people establish a healthier relationship with food and be more involved in outdoor activity thus helping to address the obesity epidemic. The Covid-19 pandemic highlighted the need for resilience in food security. As recognised within Adur & Worthing Councils ‘And Then…’ report, there is a need to develop a local food system so that it supports and expands local food production. Areas for food growing can be integrated into public spaces and shared spaces in residential and non-residential developments. 
2.35 The Strategic Policy that follows captures these objectives and highlights the relevant elements needed to provide the foundations for achieving health and well-being amongst the built and natural environment in Worthing. Health and well-being are cross cutting themes and this policy should be read alongside other policies in this Plan that seek to address the wider determinants of health. 
Health Impact Assessment 
2.36 Most developments have the potential to positively influence health and well-
being. The impacts of proposed development on the wider determinants of health must be assessed and considered by the applicant at the earliest stage of the design process. Health Impact Assessment (HIA) is a method of considering the positive and negative impacts of major development on the health of diferent groups in the population and identify any mitigation measures for any potential  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Vision and Strategic Objectives 
negative impacts as well as measures for enhancing any potential positive 
impacts, in order to enhance the benefits and minimise any risks to health. This should draw together the health benefits of the other application submission documents, including the design and access statement, design code, transport assessment and travel plan. This will allow schemes to be refined to maximise positive efects on health and well-being. When considering the health impact of individual developments, it is important that its surroundings are taken into account as well as its intended purpose. This includes uses involving vulnerable communities and sensitive uses, such as residential care homes, supported housing, schools, hospitals and health centres. 
2.37 Screening is a preliminary assessment of what health impacts might arise from a development proposal and informs the decision of whether the proposal would benefit from further assessment. The scope of a HIA will vary depending on the size of the development and its location. Further information on the application of HIA will be set out within a Supplementary Planning Document. 
SP3 HEAL THY COMMUNITIES 
a) New development must be designed to achieve healthy, inclusive and safe places, which enable and support healthy lifestyles and address health and well-being needs in Worthing, as identified in the Adur & Worthing Councils’ Public Health Strategy. 
b) In order to maximise opportunities to promote healthy lifestyles, where appropriate, new development must: 
i. improve the quality and quantity of open space, informal & formal 
recreation opportunities and multi-functional green infrastructure assets and networks; ii. protect and enhance safe and accessible active travel routes and Non-
Motorised User Routes to enable exercise and physical activity as part of everyday life; 
iii. provide high quality and energy efficient homes within an attractive 
environment, providing social connections through inclusive and accessible development layout and public realm design that meets the needs of all including those living with dementia; 
iv. improve provision of and / or access to education, employment and skills 
training recognising the clear links between income and health; 
v. improve environmental sustainability resilience and reduce contributors 
to poor health and mitigating their risks, such as those associated with climate change, flooding, hazardous uses, crime, noise and poor air quality to reduce inequalities and address climate justice; 
vi. support healthy eating and promoting healthy food choices, through 
increasing opportunities for sustainable food systems such as community food growing spaces and green infrastructure within development and public realm spaces to enable healthy lifestyles. 
c) The Council will support proposals for new and improved health services and facilities in locations where they can be accessed by sustainable transport modes; 
d) Major residential and major commercial development must set out how they address the requirements of a) i - vi) as part of the planning application. In order to satisfy this policy requirement, applicants will be required to undertake a screening for a Health Impact Assessment (HIA). If necessary, a full HIA proportionate to the development proposed, will need to be prepared to demonstrate the health outcomes on the health and well-being of communities. 
43 Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
44 45 
Worthing Local Plan 
Spatial Strategy 3 46 
Worthing Local Plan3 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 
3.1 The presumption in favour of sustainable development 
established in this Plan means that the Council must plan for and support sustainable growth that seeks to meet identified needs, particularly the needs for housing. However, the NPPF also requires local authorities to take account of the diferent roles and character of their area. When considering the most appropriate spatial strategy for Worthing, national guidance is clear in that: 
• the intrinsic character of the countryside should be recognised; 
• heritage assets should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance; 
• patterns of growth should be managed so that development is focussed in locations which are, or can be made, sustainable; 
• previously developed land should be reused efectively; 
• full account should be taken of flood risk and coastal change; 
• adequate infrastructure is delivered alongside development; 
• allocations of land for development should prefer land of lesser environmental value - this will help to conserve and enhance the natural environment. 3.2 Therefore, although national planning guidance places a very strong emphasis on meeting development needs within Local Plans, this must be balanced against other considerations. Ultimately, this informs the level of development that can be delivered in a sustainable manner. In turn, this ‘balance’ influences the overall spatial strategy. 
Sub-Regional Context 
3.3 The spatial strategy for Worthing also needs to respond to the sub-regional planning context. In this regard, a key document is the second version of the Local Strategic Statement (LSS2) which has been produced by the Coastal West Sussex authorities together with Brighton & Hove City Council to provide the sub-regional context for delivering sustainable growth for the period 2015-2031. The Statement, which was signed of by the Strategic Planning Board in 2016, sets out the long term strategic objectives and spatial priorities for the coastal authorities to be addressed through a coordinated approach across the area in terms of planning and investment. It sets the following strategic objectives for the area: 
Delivering Sustainable Economic Growth - to promote regeneration in the coastal towns and support the employment needs of the area; 
Meeting Strategic Housing Needs - by the constituent authorities working proactively together and with their partners to meet housing needs; 
Investing in Infrastructure - to address deficits in capacity and to facilitate growth; 
Managing Environmental Assets and Natural Resources - by managing growth, whilst at the same time protecting the designated ecological, and landscape assets.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 Spatial Strategy 
3.4 LSS2 sets out a number of spatial priorities for the diferent parts of the sub-region. 
Spatial Priority 4, that relates to Worthing, seeks to deliver infrastructure and transport improvements required to help stimulate and maximise investment opportunities in the town centre. Priorities include: regeneration of the seafront; improved levels of accessibility and connectivity; regeneration of key gateway sites; increased vitality of the town centre; and the delivery of new employment floorspace at Decoy Farm. 
3.5 Since the publication of LSS2 the ’geography’ of the Strategic Planning Board has been extended and it now represents the local planning authorities of Adur, Arun, Brighton & Hove, Chichester, Crawley, Horsham, Lewes, Mid Sussex, Worthing, together with West Sussex County Council and the South Downs National Park Authority. The Board is currently in the early stages of preparing the third revision to the Local Strategic Statement (LSS3) and there is a clear commitment from all authorities to develop a statement that will develop a long-term and ‘deliverable’ strategy for the sub-region over the period to 2050. The work being undertaken will explore options for meeting the area’s unmet needs for housing, employment and infrastructure. Whilst LSS3 will be a non-statutory strategic planning framework, it will influence all of the constituent Local Plans and will help to guide the future location and delivery of development across the sub-region. 
3.6 The Strategic Planning Board maintains a close working relationship with the Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP), particularly in relation to the LEP’s priorities included in the Strategic Economic Plan. This is achieved through joint working between oficers from the local planning authorities and the Partnership’s technical support groups. Similarly, there are close links with the Greater Brighton Economic Board, a partnership across the public and private sectors, which grew from the 2014 City Deal. The Greater Brighton City Region is a functional economic area, stretching from Crawley and Gatwick Airport in the north to Lewes in the east and Worthing in the west. The board’s ultimate aim is to attract investment to bring jobs and prosperity to the area. Local Context 
3.7 The spatial strategy has also been shaped by a wide range of local evidence including: 
• demographic projections and the need to provide for a variety and mix of homes that are needed to support and maintain sustainable communities; 
• the need to deliver sites to meet the needs of new and existing businesses and other essential uses; 
• the amount of land available and the level of development that could reasonably be built there; 
• infrastructure capacity; 
• environmental constraints – including flood risk, environmental designations and landscape quality, the historic environment and settlement character; 
• representations received during consultation periods; and 
• the Sustainability Appraisal of options and policies which also encompasses the Health Impact Assessment and Equalities Impact Assessment. 
4747 Spatial Strategy 3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Strategy for Worthing 
3.8 As previously highlighted, the most significant constraining factor when considering 
future development is land availability. Worthing is tightly constrained and there is little scope to grow beyond the current Built Up Area Boundary without merging with the urban areas of Ferring (to the west) and Sompting/Lancing (to the east) and without damaging the borough’s character and environment. Furthermore, the town is relatively compact and there are very few vacant sites or opportunity areas within the existing Built Up Area that could deliver significant levels of growth.  
3.9 Therefore, the reality is, that when compared to many other local authority areas, there are relatively few options for growth. As a result, in many respects, the spatial strategy taken forward in this Plan is similar to that incorporated within the Worthing Core Strategy (2011) which placed a strong emphasis on regeneration and transforming key previously developed sites within the urban area. This approach reflects the NPPF which encourages local authorities to make as much use as possible of brownfield sites to meet development needs. However, in response to the need to meet as much as possible of the housing need for Worthing, one key change has been the need to now look more positively at potential development options located around the edge of the borough. 
3.10 The spatial strategy seeks to achieve the right balance between planning positively to meet the town’s development needs (particularly for jobs, homes and community facilities) with the continuing need to protect and enhance the borough’s high quality environments and open spaces within and around the town. The overarching objective is therefore to maximise appropriate development on brownfield land and add sustainable urban extensions adjacent to the existing urban area. The core principles, set out in the policy below, take account of the characteristics of the borough and provide a clear direction for development in and around the town. The spatial strategy will help to steer new development to the right locations whilst at the same time helping to protect 
48 those areas of greatest environmental value / sensitivity. SS1 SPATIAL STRATEGY 
Up to 2036 delivery of new development in Worthing will be managed as follows: 
The Local Plan will: a) seek to provide for the needs of local communities and balance the impact 
of growth through the protection and enhancement of local services and (where appropriate) the safeguarding of employment sites, leisure uses, community facilities, valued green/open spaces and natural resources; 
b) help to deliver wider regeneration objectives, particularly in the town centre and seafront, through the allocation of key urban sites; 
c) seek to increase the rate of housing delivery from small sites. 
d) The strategy for different parts of the Borough is as follows: 
i) Land within the Built Up Area Boundary - development will be 
permitted subject to compliance with other policies in the Local Plan. Development should make efficient use of previously developed land but the density of development should be appropriate for its proposed use and also relate well to the surrounding uses and the character of the area. Within the existing urban fabric nine key regeneration sites are allocated for development. 
ii) Edge Of Town Sites - six edge of town sites are allocated for development. 
iii)Open Spaces / Countryside / Gaps - valued open space and landscapes 
outside of the Built Up Area Boundary are protected. This includes important gaps between settlements, the undeveloped coastline and the features which provide connectivity between these areas.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 
3.11 The principles established in the policy above helped to inform the related spatial 
policies that follow in this section of the Plan. These overarching policies are then supported by more specific policies set out in Chapter 4 (Development Sites) and Chapter 5 (Development Management Policies). 
Developing a Target for Housing Delivery 
3.12 Historically there has not been a strong relationship between housing targets set for Worthing within regional Plans and the need / demand for new dwellings in the borough. This is because previous targets took account of the development physical and environmental constraints faced by Worthing and were therefore strongly influenced by  the capacity of the borough to accommodate new development. 
3.13 However, the NPPF now requires that local planning authorities meet their full need for both market and affordable housing as far as is consistent with other policies in the Framework. The most up-to-date assessment of objectively assessed housing need (based on the standard method as set out in national planning guidance and the 2014 household projections published in September 2016) is 14,160 dwellings over the Plan period (2020 to 2036) which currently equates to 885 dwellings per annum. Further information as to how this figure has been calculated (and capped) is set out in the Housing Implementation Strategy. 
3.14 Worthing’s current minimum level of identified housing need for the plan period (885 dwellings per annum) is a much higher level of housing delivery than the borough has previously planned for or delivered. To put this into context, the Core Strategy (2011) set a housing requirement of 200 dwellings per annum and the average annual delivery rate since 2006 has been 306 dwellings (which includes a significant level of housing delivered on a large greenfield site at West Durrington). 3.15 In line with the NPPF, the Council has sought to plan positively to establish whether housing delivery could be increased significantly to help close the gap between the level of identified need and recent delivery levels. 
3.16 The Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) has provided the mechanism through which the quantity and suitability of land potentially available for housing development has been determined. In order to maximise the use of previously developed land the Government also requires all local authorities to publish a Brownfield Register annually and this has also helped to inform the Council’s development strategy. 
3.17 Broadly, there are two forms of site allocated for development. The first are previously developed sites within the urban area (brownfield sites). These nine allocations present the best opportunity to deliver positive change and renewal within the existing built-up area boundary as they are already well served by sustainable transport and infrastructure. The redevelopment of the majority of these sites, particularly those in the town centre, has been embedded with a range of documents and strategies over a number of years. Work to deliver these opportunities has gathered pace in recent times and their regeneration continues to be a corporate priority that also helps to meet some sub-regional objectives set out in the Local Strategic Statement. 
49   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
50 Spatial Strategy 3 
3.18 Given the levels of development needed and the requirement to plan positively 
to meet housing needs, brownfield sites alone are not suficient. Therefore, the other type of site allocated for development are those located on the edge of the town.  The Sustainability Appraisal together with associated evidence studies (including biodiversity, flood risk, accessibility, landscape and infrastructure capacity) were used to assess all potential sources including edge of town sites (most of which are greenfield). The conclusion of this comprehensive assessment has resulted in the allocation of six sites on the edge of Worthing which will contribute towards meeting some of the borough’s development needs. The proximity of these development sites adjacent to existing urban areas will allow for integration with existing communities and will provide access to nearby facilities, services, and public transport. The built up area boundary will be amended to incorporate these sites. 
3.19 Robust evidence has also demonstrated that there are areas on the edge of town that are not suitable for development and this has helped to inform the Spatial Strategy and associated Policies SS4 (Countryside and Undeveloped Coast), SS5 (Local Green Gaps) and SS6 (Local Green Spaces) below. 
3.20 In addition to the sites allocated in this Plan it is expected that small sites will play a greater role in housing delivery. As such, the Council supports well-designed new homes on small sites in order to: 
• increase the contribution of small sites (under 10 dwellings) to meeting Worthing’s housing needs; 
• diversify the sources, locations, type and mix of housing supply; 
• support small and medium-sized housebuilders; and 
• support those wishing to bring forward custom and self-build housing.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 
3.21 In addition to the allocations referred to above, housing land supply figures Other Development Needs 
include ‘windfalls’ which are sites that deliver development but that have not 3.22 Although the delivery of housing provides a key focus of this Plan, it is vital 
been specifically identified in the Local Plan. An explanation as to how this figure that other uses such as commercial, community and leisure facilities are not 
is calculated can be found in the Council’s Housing Implementation Strategy. overlooked. A number of the development sites listed in the policy below will help 
Other sources of supply include recent completions and commitments (sites with to contribute towards meeting some of these needs. Related policies in Chapter 5 
planning permission including developments that have commenced but not yet will also seek to protect and improve these uses. 
completed). These are summarised and incorporated within the table below: 
3.23 The strategy is to plan positively for sustainable economic growth, promoting and 
Commitments 909 enhancing the economic role of the town and guiding its role within the wider sub -
region. The Local Plan will help to achieve this by establishing a clear policy framework 
that facilitates growth and helps to meet quantitative and qualitative demand for all 
types of economic activity over the Plan period. The Council’s Economic Research and Employment Land Review (2016 & 2020 update), the Retail & Town Centre Uses Study 
SHLAA Sites (not including those incorporated as allocations) 139 (2017 & 2020 update) and other related studies have informed the policy context in 
this Plan and provide the robust evidence base in regard to sectors or locations where employment uses are to be promoted or protected. 
3.24 The research undertaken to inform this Plan has highlighted the need to retain employment premises and land in the borough. In addition, the study recommends planning to accommodate a minimum of 32,000 sqm (or 6.8ha) employment floorspace, with the need roughly split for ofice space (9,000 sqm) and warehousing and distribution (23,000 sqm). The Council’s Retail Study estimates a need to provide a maximum of 9,200 sqm of comparison floorspace (non-food) and 1,250 sqm of convenience retail (food) to 2026. As with housing, the lack of suitable development sites around the borough means that the delivery of the employment and commercial needs identified in these studies will be very challenging. However, a number of the development sites outlined below provide an opportunity for mixed use development and one site, Decoy Farm, provides an opportunity to deliver a significant extension to the town’s main industrial estate. SOURCES OF HOUSING SUPPLY (2020-2036) NUMBER OF DWELLINGS 
Windfalls 871 
Local Plan Allocations 1753 
HOUSING SUPPLY (From all sources 2020 - 2036) 3672 
ANNUAL TARGET (2020 - 2036) 230 
51 51 Spatial Strategy 3 
SS2 SITE ALLOCATIONS 
Adur
Arun
ALLOCATION SITE MAP - See page 68 for expanded view 
ArunAdurSouth Downs National Park 
Town Centre Borough Boundary 
Ward Boundaries Railway Station 
Arterial Roads Trunk Roads During the period 2020-2036 
a) a minimum of 3,672 dwellings (net) will be delivered in Worthing. 
The following allocations will make a significant contribution to this figure. 
b) a minimum of 28,000 sqm of employment floorspace (industrial and warehousing) and 10,000 sqm of commercial (retail and leisure) floorspace will be provided 
WLP Ref SITE DWELLINGS MAIN OTHER USES 
(APPROXIMATE FLOORSPACE) 
 
  
  
 
 A1 Beeches Avenue  90  N/A 
A27 
A27 
A24 
A259 
A2032 
A2031 
A259 15 
5 
11 1 
9 12 
4 
7 8 10 3 613 
2 
14 A2 Caravan Club, Titnore Way  100  N/A 
A3 Centenary House  250 10,000 sqm - Ofice space (part re-
provided) 
A4 Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Rd  0 7,000 sqm - Integrated health hub 
A5 Decoy Farm  0 18,000 sqm - Industrial / Warehousing 
A6 Fulbeck Avenue  120  N/A 
A7 Grafon  150 2,500 sqm – Commercial / Leisure / Retail 
A8 HMRC Ofices, Barrington Rd  250 Care home / Sheltered accommodation 
A9 Lyndhurst Rd 150  N/A 
A10 Martlets Way 0 10,000 sqm Industrial / Warehousing 
A11 Stagecoach, Marine Parade  60 2,000 sqm Commercial / Leisure 
A12 Teville Gate 250 4,000 sqm – Commercial / Leisure / 
Retail and 80 bed hotel 
A13 Titnore Lane  60  N/A 
A14 Union Place 150 700 sqm - commercial / 90 room hotel / 
cinema extension 
A15 Upper Brighton Rd 123 N/A 
TOTAL 1,753 52  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
53Spatial Strategy 
Overall Development Capacity Duty To Co-operate 
3.25 The delivery rates set out above indicate that a realistic housing capacity figure 3.28 The fact that not all of Worthing’s identified development needs will be met within 
for the borough from 2020 to 2036 is a minimum of 3,672 dwellings. This housing the borough places great importance on Duty to Co-operate considerations. For 
target is a ‘capacity-based’ / ‘policy-on’ figure based on the level of housing that this reason, the Council has been working with other local authorities across the 
can be delivered within the Plan period, having regard to the identified constraints sub-region to address key strategic matters. Whilst positive progress has been 
and development capacity. made, it is evident that currently only a very small proportion of the borough’s 
shortfall might be met elsewhere in the sub-region. 
3.26 Taking the above into account, the Plan sets an average minimum housing target of 230 homes per annum to be achieved by 2036. As explained further within 3.29 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) / Statement of Common Ground (SOCG) has 
the Housing Implementation Strategy, this is a target that is significantly higher been signed by all the authorities represented within the Sussex Coast Housing Market 
(15%) than the levels of growth planned for within the Worthing Core Strategy. Area (as well as the West Sussex authorities of Crawley, Horsham and Mid Sussex). This 
This, in part, reflects the positive actions taken by the Council to facilitate and commits the authorities to continue to engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing 
support development in the borough. This increase beyond previous targets basis with other local authorities and organisations to address sub-regional issues and 
represents a challenging but realistic level of housing development that takes a to work together to explore longer-term solutions for housing delivery. More information 
positive approach to the allocation of sustainable sites whilst also providing the can be found in the Duty to Co-operate Statement which accompanies this Plan. 
appropriate balance between meeting development needs and protecting the environment and character of the borough. Worthing Town Centre 
3.30 Significant constraints and limited options for growth requires a Local Plan response 
3.27 It is clear however that, despite taking a positive approach to development, the that maximises the opportunities for appropriate development within the most 
delivery rate for housing will fall significantly below the levels of housing need sustainable locations. Worthing’s main Town Centre and associated seafront ofer 
identified (14,160 dwellings). Approximately 26% of the overall housing need will one of the greatest opportunities for major redevelopment and change. The area 
be met and this would result in a shortfall in housing delivery over the Plan period incorporates a number of key regeneration sites that provide an opportunity to deliver 
of 10,488 dwellings. Whilst acknowledging that this is a very high level of unmet housing alongside identified floorspace needs for retail and other town centres uses 
need the Council has robust evidence to demonstrate how all options to reduce and experiences. For these reasons the Plan includes this specific Spatial Policy. 
this figure and increase the rate of development have been exhausted. Put simply, the tightly drawn boundary around the borough and lack of available land means 3.31 Worthing town centre is the largest area in a hierarchy of centres across the borough 
that that there is simply no way that a higher proportion of development needs serving the needs of our local communities. It provides a focus for retail, leisure, 
can be delivered in a sustainable manner. tourism, cultural and community activities and is an important economic driver providing employment and business opportunities. It also has a large residential population, located in a highly accessible location that helps to support sustainable modes of living and working. 
53   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 3 
3.32 The NPPF acknowledges that town centres are at the heart of communities 
and it advocates the ‘town centre first’ approach that requires planning policies to positively promote competitive town centre environments and manage the growth of centres over the plan period. At the sub-regional level the Coastal West Sussex & Greater Brighton Local Strategic Statement (LSS2) seeks to deliver infrastructure and transport improvements required to help stimulate and maximise investment opportunities in Worthing town centre. 
3.33 Town Centres and high streets have always faced challenges, but the scale and complexity of the issues and challenges faced over the last few years may have the most profound impact to date. The growth of internet shopping and general retail trends have changed the way we shop and therefore the role of our centres and high streets. That is without factoring in the impact of the recent Covid 19 pandemic along with recent changes to planning regulations that may make managing changes within our towns to meet local aspirations much more challenging. It could be argued the Covid 19 pandemic has accelerated these changes. 
3.34 Evidence demonstrates that, compared to similar towns, Worthing Town Centre has fared relatively well in recent years but it is now clear a step change is required to retain the centre as the ‘heart’ of the town. The Council has pro -
actively responded to the challenges presented and, for example, a significant amount of progress has already been made to improve public realm through the preparation of a public realm strategy to encourage a more ‘walkable’ town centre. In addition, there are plans to further enhance open spaces for public events to increase the level of activity within the Town Centre providing opportunities for a range of activities such as markets and entertainment that will draw people into the town. This Local Plan has a key part to play in achieving the corporate objectives to renew and reimagine our town centre. 3.35 Whilst retail is still a relevant and important element of any town centre strategy, evidence is clear that to be successful it now needs to ofer a much wider range of uses. The town centre has to become more multi-dimensional and to ofer an ‘experience’ for visitors who are increasingly seeking to combine retail and leisure activities as part of a single ‘going out’ trip, something that the internet is unable to match. This might include for example, specialist markets, independent cinemas, street food and seasonal events. It needs to be a genuine hub for the community and to ofer vibrant social, commercial and cultural destinations. In addition, town centre living not only provides much needed homes in a sustainable living location but it also helps increase vitality in town centres helping them to become more resilient. 
3.36 The Council’s corporate aspirations to support the renewal and reimagining of the Town Centre are set out within a number of key strategies and plans. Recently, in response to the Covid -19 pandemic, the Council has reafirmed its commitment to the Town Centre whilst also recognising that it needs to ‘act fast and diferently’ given the even greater challenges it now faces. Some of the overarching aspirations for the Town Centre are outlined in the list below. Some of the key elements are then incorporated within the graphic that follows: 
• Retail - continue to support retail as valuable use but as part of a wider mix of uses. 
• Encouraging alternative uses - support a mix of uses that support both daytime and evening economies to encourage activity and vibrancy throughout the day. 
• New Creative uses - support the creation of spaces for new business taking advantage of the attractions of the town centre location. 
54  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 
• A Place to Work - the town centre is home to a wide range of jobs and 
is a key economic driver for the borough. Support the provision of new flexible space and establish digital opportunities within the town centre to retain and attract new business and investment. 
• Town Centre Living - an aspiration to increase the amount of residential development will help increase vitality, activity and footfall and enable regeneration. Increasing densities in sustainable locations, as part of well designed schemes, will help ensure that the most eficient use of land is made. 
• A Smart Town Centre - to deliver digital opportunities within the Town Centre to benefit business, residents and visitors. 
• Seafront Attractors - to realise the ambition to improve linkages between the town’s main shopping area and the seafront. To deliver the Seafront Investment Plan which supports vibrant active uses that encourage people to stay and dwell. 
• Enhance Cultural ofer - build on the town’s wealth of cultural venues to create local distinctiveness and vibrancy. Maintain a strong support for cultural development of the town and the creation of new opportunities such as the proposed additional cinema provision for the Connaught Theatre. 
• Heritage - conservation and heritage assets, such as the iconic Pier, play a key role in creating the distinctiveness of the town centre. The approach seeks to protect and enhance and proactively promote the town’s history to improve the visitor experience. 
• Public Realm - a strategy of improvements to the public realm will help to enhance the town centre; promote its distinct ofer; encourage dwell time; and to increase activity and promote sustainable travel. • Community Uses - bringing community uses within the town centre is encouraged and supported. Current projects include an integrated health-hub and the transformation of the library into a community hub bringing together library, registration services and children’s & youth services. 
• A Place for Events - supporting a strong programme of events with regular markets/festivals etc will create a ‘draw’ to the town centre and provide more for visitors and residents to do and see throughout the day and the year. 
• Green and Open Spaces - retaining and enhancing valued greenspaces, promenade and beach to ofer space for people to enjoy nature, provide for active event spaces and play a key role in delivering a ‘livable’ town centre. 
• Visitor Economy - encouraging the provision of a wide range of visitor attractions and but also places people want to stay, to support both tourism and business. As part of the ‘Time for Worthing’ place brand the Council are actively promoting the area as an attractive place to ‘Invest, Live and Discover’ . 
• Family friendly - help ensure that the town centre is welcoming to all sectors of our community, providing a safe friendly environment that encourages all ages to visit. This will be achieved through improvements to the physical environment and by encouraging the right uses and activities. 
• Accessibility - aim to improve the accessibility and legibility in and around the town centre. Improve the experience of cyclists and users of public transport together with a car parking strategy to improve the quality of the town’s parking spaces. 
55 3 Spatial Strategy 
Railway Station Hospital 
1 1 
2 
Town Hall 
Theatre 
Museum 
2 4 
4 
3 
3 
St Paul’s 
5 
Christ Church 
6 
6 
7 
9 8 Splashpoint 
5 
Dome 
Pier 
Lido 
56 Spatial Strategy 
Development Sites 
1. A12 - Teville Gate 
2. A4 - Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Road 3. A14 - Union Place 4. A9 - Lyndhurst Road 5. A7 - Grafton 6. A11 - Stagecoach, Marine Parade Important Greenspaces 
Parking Upgrades Public Realm improvements 
Planned Projects Potential Future Projects 
Transport Links 
Arterial Road Walking and Cycling Network 
Key Town Centre Gateways 1 Character Areas 
1. Teville Gate 
2. Chapel Road North 3. High Street 4. Chapel Road Cultural & Civic Quarter 5. Chapel Road South 6. Warwick Street/Brighton Road 7. South Street 8. Montague Street 9. Rowlands Road 
57 Spatial Strategy 3 
Spatial Approach for the Town Centre 
3.37 Enabling our town centres to be places that people want to live in, work in and visit 
is more than just the collection of uses within them. It’s about creating places that encourage investors to invest and that people want to spend time in. This Policy therefore provides a spatial expression for the policies contained elsewhere in this plan and forms part of the overall approach to development within the Town Centre. It has a key role in supporting the delivery of those wider corporate and partner aspirations by seeking to manage and steer change, where possible, to the most suitable locations. 
3.38 The Policy sets out the key overarching development principles for the Town Centre and associated seafront, it is the starting point against which all proposed development in these areas will be assessed. In conjunction with other key policies it will ensure that the types of uses and activities that best meet the aspirations and vision for the Town Centre are realised. It seeks to maximise the opportunities presented by the town centre locations and supports the allocation of appropriate sites to deliver identified development needs. This will build on what’s already special about the town and exploit its ‘unique selling points’ including its seafront setting, historic and cultural assets, green spaces and burgeoning creative sector and digital sectors. In turn, this will strengthen the Town Centre as a location for shopping, leisure, community, culture, business and enhance its tourist appeal. This coordinated but flexible approach will ensure that the Town Centre is distinctive, safe, vibrant, green and colourful - a great place to live, work, do business, enjoy and visit. 
3.39 This policy helps to guide the interpretation of a number of the allocations that are located in or close to the main town centre (Chapter 4). In addition, it is also the starting point for applying the detailed Development Management policies in Chapter 5, particularly: 
DM12 
DM14   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
   THE VISITOR ECONOMY DM6 DM13 PUBLIC REALM 
RETAIL AND TOWN CENTRE USES DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
58 SS3 TOWN CENTRE 
a) To ensure that Worthing Town Centre continues to fulfil its sub-regional 
role, it is important to provide development that meets both quantitative and qualitative needs. New retail, leisure, office and other town centre use development will therefore, usually be directed to the Town Centre. 
b) Improving and increasing the mix of uses in the Town Centre particularly retail, employment, community, residential, leisure, recreation, cultural and tourist facilities through maximising development around key development sites and through the more efficient use of existing sites. 
c) Making it easier and more convenient to move around and spend time in the Town Centre by identifying key public realm enhancements, opportunities for new public spaces and improving sustainable movement patterns particularly pedestrian, cycle and public transport provision. 
d) Establishing a stronger Town Centre identity and structure by reinforcing and improving the interrelationship between key locations including the railway station, the shopping areas, and the seafront, and making the Town Centre more cohesive and legible. 
e) Ensuring that the Town Centre and seafront are one integrated and linked destination. Active and vibrant uses along the key Town Centre seafront area will be supported. 
f) Delivering development, which has high architectural, urban design and environmental performance and sustainability standards.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 Spatial Strategy 
Land Outside of the Built Up Area Boundary 
3.40 Although Worthing is primarily an urban area it does contain important open 
areas including the South Downs to the north, the undeveloped coast to the south, gaps between settlements to the west and east and a multi-functional green infrastructure network. As the population density of Worthing increases, the demand for and use of parks, open spaces and green infrastructure throughout the borough will increase. The Plan will protect and enhance these assets and provide new green spaces within development to promote health and well-being in our communities. 
3.41 The spatial strategy seeks to manage the pattern of development by identifying the Built Up Area Boundary within which development can be sustainably located. To ensure that the most valued and sensitive land/seascapes are protected, and that the existing character of Worthing is maintained, all land outside the Built Up Area Boundary will be designated as ‘countryside and undeveloped coast’ to protect landscape and coastal character including its environmental and recreational value. In addition some areas outside the Built Up Area Boundary are also designated as: 
• Local Gap - to preserve Worthing’s character and identity by preventing settlement coalescence; and/or 
• Local Green Space - to protect green areas of particular importance to the local communities they serve. 
3.42 The allocation of some edge of town sites will result in some parts of the previous Built Up Area Boundary (Core Strategy 2011) being amended. The Countryside 
3.43 A significant amount of land (24.1%) in Worthing borough falls within the South Downs National Park, all of which lies outside the Built Up Area Boundary. It is a nationally important resource because of its distinctive landscape, wildlife, cultural heritage, and opportunities for recreation. Whilst the South Downs National Park Authority took on planning responsibility for the Park in 2011, Worthing Borough Council must still consider whether development within the Worthing Local Plan area could adversely afect the National Park or its setting, including its status as an International Dark Skies Reserve. 
3.44 The South Downs National Park Authority is a statutory consultee for development which is likely to afect land in the National Park. The Council will continue to work with the Park Authority on issues that afect Worthing, particularly where development may impact on views, the setting of the Park or where opportunities exist to improve access to the South Downs. 
3.45 Outside of the National Park, there are small pockets of countryside that represent a very small and finite resource that is valued for its open space, respite from intense urban activity, and intrinsic character. Therefore, the countryside should be protected and enhanced, particularly in terms of the additional benefits it can ofer through agriculture, green infrastructure (for example to biodiversity and flood management/storage) and informal recreation such as cycling, walking, horse-riding and other Non-Motorised Users (NMUs). Given the limited amount of countryside in Worthing, it is important that the few uses that may be allowed in the countryside genuinely require a countryside location; cannot be located within the Built Up Area Boundary and maintain its rural character. 
59 Spatial Strategy 3 
The Undeveloped Coast 
3.46 Worthing’s coastline and beaches are valuable because the shingle beaches are 
sea defences that are important for shoreline management. The coastal waters and beaches contain important marine habitats including shallow reefs and areas of vegetated shingle. Furthermore, they are used for active pursuits, such as watersports, and for informal recreation. Any development on Worthing’s coastline and beaches is likely to jeopardise their function and value. They will therefore remain outside the built-up area. 
3.47 The coastal habitats are one of Worthing’s key environmental assets and opportunities to protect and enhance the area will be sought as part of any development proposals in the seafront area. Marine planning has important links and interactions with land use planning as the intertidal zone between high water and low water mark is covered by both planning systems. The South Marine Plan (which includes Worthing) was adopted in July 2018. Decisions that might or will afect the marine area will now need to take appropriate consideration of the relevant marine planning documents, including the South Marine Plan under the terms set out in the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 (section 58). 
3.48 The use of the beaches for sport and recreation is generally supported, however permanent built facilities required to support recreational uses should usually be located within the adjacent Built Up Area and be of a design appropriate to the character of the area. In considering any proposal for new recreation or ancillary facilities, flood risk and the need to maintain and improve sea defences will be taken into account. 
3.49 The coastline south of the Built Up Area Boundary, excluding that defined as countryside, will be defined as undeveloped coast for the purposes of this policy. SS4 COUNTRYSIDE AND UNDEVELOPED COAST 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 a) Outside of the Built Up Area Boundary land will be defined as ‘countryside 
and undeveloped coast’ . 
b) Development in the countryside will be permitted, where a countryside location is essential to the proposed use, it cannot be located within the Built Up Area Boundary, and it maintains its character and function for natural resources. 
c) Development to support recreation uses on the coast will normally be permitted subject to: 
i. built facilities being located within the adjacent Built Up Area Boundary; 
ii. the need to maintain and improve sea defences. 
d) Any development in the countryside and undeveloped coast should not 
result in a level of activity that has an adverse impact on the character or biodiversity of the area. 
e) Improvements to green infrastructure, including (but not restricted to) enhanced pedestrian, cycle, equestrian access, and better access for those with mobility difficulties will be supported. 
f) The setting of the South Downs National Park and the Designated International Dark Skies Reserve must be respected and opportunities to improve access to the National Park will be sought through joint working with other organisations including the Park Authority, West Sussex County Council, Highways England and landowners. 
60  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 
Local Green Gaps Local Gap in Worthing Borough South Downs National 3.50 The designation and protection of ‘Local Green Gaps’ helps to avoid coalescence Park 
and preserve the separate characters and identities of diferent settlements by 
Gap Between Settlements/Local 
ArunAdur Railway Station providing physical and visual breaks. This is particularly important given the 
Green Gap in Adjoining District compact nature of Worthing and how few and fragile the breaks in development Trunk Roads 
are on the coastal strip between Brighton and Chichester. Borough Boundary 
Arterial Roads 
ArunAdur
Location of Local Green Gaps in Worthing borough, and of designated gaps in 
Arun and Adur districts 3.51 Four areas are designated as ‘Local Green Gaps’- two between Worthing and 
Ferring to the west: 
• Goring-Ferring Gap; 
• Chatsmore Farm; 
and two between Worthing and Lancing/Sompting to the east: 
• Brooklands Recreation Area and adjoining allotments; 
• Land east of Upper Brighton Road (see Allocation A15). 
3.52 These areas are open and either undeveloped or a managed landscape for recreational use. They create a sense of travelling between urban areas and form a critically important component of Worthing’s landscape setting. The designation of these areas as ‘gaps’ has been informed by the Council’s evidence base (particularly the Landscape & Ecology Study) and supported by a high proportion of respondents at each consultation stage. The associated Topic Paper provides detailed information of the history of the gaps and how they have previously been protected through planning policy. 
3.53 Neighbouring authorities have similarly sought to protect these gaps. The western gaps are contiguous with gaps in Arun district which will be protected through Policy SD SP3 ‘Gaps Between Settlements’ of the Arun Local Plan (2018). The eastern gaps are contiguous with gaps in Adur district which are protected through Policy 14: Local Green Gaps of the Adur Local Plan (2017). At the sub-regional level the Coastal West Sussex & Greater Brighton Local Strategic Statement (LSS2) includes a strategic 
61  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spatial Strategy 3 
objective to protect and enhance the character and distinctiveness of individual 
settlements. Therefore, Worthing’s approach to protecting these areas is part of a strategic approach shared with adjoining authorities that are concerned to address the same issues of preventing settlement coalescence and protecting settlement identity. 
SS5 LOCAL GREEN GAPS 
The four areas listed below are designated as Local Green Gaps between the settlements of Worthing & Ferring and Worthing & Sompting/Lancing, and will be protected in order to retain the separate identities and character of these settlements. 
a) Goring-Ferring Gap; 
b) Chatsmore Farm; 
c) Brooklands Recreation Area and abutting allotments; and 
d) Land east of proposed development (site A15) at Upper Brighton Road. 
Development within these Gaps will be carefully controlled and will only be 
permitted in exceptional circumstances. Any development must be consistent with other policies in this Plan and ensure (individually or cumulatively): 
i) it does not lead to the coalescence of settlements; 
ii) it is unobtrusive and does not detract from the openness of the area; 
iii)it conserves and enhances the benefits and services derived from the 
area’s Natural Capital; and 
iv) it conserves and enhances the area as part of a cohesive green infrastructure network. Local Green Space 
3.54 The NPPF introduced Local Green Space designation as a mechanism for local communities to identify and protect green spaces which are of particular importance to them. It provides special protection equivalent to that aforded by the Green Belt. The designation should only be used where the land is not extensive, is local in character and reasonably close to the community it serves. It must also be demonstrably special, for example because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value, tranquillity or wildlife. 
3.55 There are three areas that the Council has designated as Local Green Spaces: Goring-Ferring Gap; Chatsmore Farm; and the Brooklands Recreation Area. 
3.56 The first two areas have been proposed for designation by the local community. Brooklands Recreation Area has been added as the area has recently attracted a growing and active ‘friends of Brooklands’ community group and there is considerable interest in the development of a long-term management plan for the park. All three areas were assessed by a landscape consultant on behalf of the Council to determine their potential for designation as Local Green Space (June 2018) and were found to fully meet the NPPF criteria for designation. A brief summary of each Gap is set out below - further detailed information on all aspects can be found within the associated Topic Paper. 
Goring-Ferring Gap 
3.57 The Goring-Ferring Gap, that comprises flat arable fields, provides a valued break 
in the coastal conurbation and a visual connection between the undeveloped coastline and the South Downs National Park to the north. The Goring Residents’ Association and the Ilex Conservation Group (with the support of the Ferring Conservation Group, Ferring Parish Council and Ward Councillors) presented information in support of its request to designate this gap as Local Green Space. It is valued for its historic associations, views, wildlife, (it is a designated Local Wildlife Site), and opportunities to bird-watch, stargaze and enjoy quiet recreation. 
62 ArunAdur
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 It is also recognised for the relative tranquility it afords in an otherwise heavily built 
up area. On the matter of landscape sensitivity, in the wider context it should be noted that this Gap covers 33 hectares in Worthing Borough and adjoins 29 hectares in Arun District. Of the sites assessed within Arun to support the development of their Local Plan this gap was shown as being the most sensitive in nature. 
Chatsmore Farm 
3.58 Chatsmore Farm, that covers 28 hectares in Worthing and 2 hectares in Arun, comprises 
arable fields with the Ferring Rife flowing east to west crossing the middle of the site. The Goring Residents’ Association’s request to designate the green space between Goring and Ferring included this area. The request highlighted its historic associations, wildlife and recreational value, and its ofer as a haven of relative calm within the urban area. In addition, the land is in the setting of the South Downs National Park and the Grade II* Registered Park and Garden ‘Highdown Garden’ which lie to the north. 
Brooklands Recreation Area 
3.59 The 30 hectare Brooklands Recreation Area, located on the eastern edge of 
Worthing, is a well-loved local amenity that comprises a lake, play areas, recreation facilities and extensive areas of semi-natural open space. It is designated as Local Green Space for its local significance to recreation, wildlife and beauty. The site also provides the wider ecosystem service benefits of drainage and flood protection relief. 
3.60 Brooklands has attracted significant levels of public support for the environmental improvements already made and those that are being planned. In 2017 a ‘friends of Brooklands’ community group was established, and in early 2018 local residents were consulted about plans to create a management plan for the park. More recently, the Brooklands Park Masterplan has been prepared which has taken account of feedback from the local community and the results of an ecological study. Forthcoming enhancements, a limited amount of built development and the implementation of the Masterplan proposals for a science adventure park will increase Brooklands’ recreation and wildlife value and enhance its scenic beauty. Spatial Strategy 
Local Green Space in Worthing Borough 
Adjoining Land in Arun District that could 
be designated as Local Green Space via the Ferring Neighbourhood Development Plan or the Arun Local Plan 
Borough Boundary 
ArunAdurSouth Downs National Park 
Railway Station 
Trunk Roads 
Arterial Roads 
Location of areas designated as Local Green Space in Worthing borough. 
63 SS6 LOCAL GREEN SPACE Spatial Strategy 3 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 The three areas listed below are designated as Local Green Space: 
a) Goring-Ferring Gap: 
The Goring Ferring Gap is designated as Local Green Space because the 
community value: its historic associations including important views that contribute strongly to a sense of place; wildlife; opportunities for bird-watching, stargazing, and quiet recreation; and the provision of relative tranquility in an otherwise unrelieved urban conurbation. 
i) Increased quiet and informal recreation would be compatible with this designation. However, additional formal recreation or structures to support informal recreation could damage the qualities for which the Goring-Ferring Gap is valued. Any proposal would have to demonstrate that it does not conflict with those values. 
b) Chatsmore Farm: 
Chatsmore Farm is designated as Local Green Space because the community value: its setting to the historic environment and the South Downs National Park; important views that contribute strongly to a sense of place; wildlife, especially along the Ferring Rife; and the offer of escape from the urban environment for relaxation and exercise. ii) Increased quiet and informal recreation would be compatible with this designation. Whilst some formal recreation space could be considered it would be important that it did not conflict with the qualities for which Chatsmore Farm is valued. 
c) Brooklands Recreation Area: 
Brooklands Recreation Area provides a mix of semi-natural open space and recreation/leisure facilities on a scale that is suitable to this area of open and managed landscape. The lake itself has three main functions providing drainage and flood prevention relief; leisure and amenity; and wildlife value. 
iii)Development in Brooklands will not normally be permitted unless it is 
for recreation and/or landscape enhancement; does not compromise the functions of the lake or its long term maintenance; is compatible with the park’s long-term management plan; uses the existing road access or a new access taken from Western Road; does not adversely impact on nearby residents significantly; and adequately investigates and takes measures to deal with contaminated land and potential for landfill gas emissions. 
iv) Land to the north of the managed park area, which is currently overgrown with scrub and mature trees, could benefit from management. Proposals that may be acceptable, subject to the above points, could include a more managed woodland area with the possibility of open green space and/or an additional recreational facility of suitable scale and materials that sits appropriately screened in the semi-natural environment. Enhancement of boundary and internal tree cover will be required to conserve the separation between East Worthing and Lancing including when viewed from the National Park. 
64 Spatial Strategy 
65 Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
66 67 
Worthing Local Plan 
Site Allocations 4  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Worthing Local Plan 4 
Site Allocations 
Introduction 4.4 
4.1 As already established in this Plan, a key part of the overarching strategy is 
to maximise development on brownfield land and create sustainable urban extensions adjacent to the existing urban area. This will be achieved, in part, through the delivery of sites that are allocated for development in this chapter. All sites included in this section have been assessed in detail through the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) and the Local Plan 4.5 
Sustainability Appraisal. Supported by these documents and other evidence, a conclusion has been reached that they should be allocated for development. 
4.2 The site allocations that follow are considered to be ‘deliverable’ . This means that they are viable, available and ofer a suitable location for development. Importantly, the Council is of the view that they are achievable with a realistic prospect that housing (and other uses) will be delivered on each site during the Plan period. An assessment has been made as to when these sites are likely to be delivered during the life of the Plan. To inform the Council’s five year housing land supply assumptions, an indication 4.6 
has been given as to whether a site is expected to be delivered in the first five years of the Plan or, if they are less advanced, within five to fifeen years. Whilst the Plan provides similar information on the expected level and type of development for all sites it is inevitable that there is more detail provided for the sites to be delivered in the short term and that there may be some degree of change for the sites that are expected to be delivered in the longer term. Further information on this and the approach to allocating sites can be found within the Housing Implementation Strategy. 
Approach to allocating sites with planning consent 
4.3 The site allocations in this Plan include some sites with current planning 4.7 
permission where development has not yet commenced. As there is no guarantee that sites with planning permission will be developed, particularly in the current economic climate, the general approach taken is that such sites are included in this Plan as allocations in order to establish the principle of development that will be 
68 acceptable should consented schemes not proceed. Whilst the allocations closely reflect the consented schemes they are not necessarily exactly the same in terms of their proposed uses and capacity assumptions. However, the allocation provides a clear indication as to what is considered to be suitable for the site and a slightly diferent use may be considered more appropriate in the future in the event that a planning permission is not implemented. 
Sites with planning permission where development has commenced are 
normally excluded from the final allocation list as they are no longer available for development. However for a small number of sites, where development has technically commenced but there does not seem to be any prospect of the consented scheme being fully developed, this site will be considered to be available for the purposes of this Plan. Such judgements are made on the merits of individual sites and planning consents. 
Overarching Development Principles 
There are certain general principles that will need to be applied to all development proposals in Worthing if sustainable development is to be achieved. These principles largely relate to ensuring that the Borough’s land and resources are used in an eficient and coordinated way, and that any negative impacts of development are appropriately addressed, with opportunities maximised for enhancing the lives of local residents. An attractive and well-planned environment can contribute to wellbeing and attract inward investment into the Borough. Therefore, new developments should be of a high quality to protect and enhance the distinctive character of the town and create successful new streets and spaces. 
As such, development of all allocated sites must contribute towards meeting the 
Vision and Strategic Objectives identified in this Plan. Delivery as proposed will contribute towards providing the housing, employment and leisure opportunities needed within the borough and will also help to address wider community infrastructure needs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 4.8 Site Allocations 
Proposals for development should be supported by robust evidence and must comply 
with national planning legislation, other related guidance and the Council’s Validation Checklist. Proposals will also need to comply with all related Strategic Policies (Chapter 2) and Development Management policies (Chapter 5) set out elsewhere in this Local Plan. In addition, proposals will need to meet (as a minimum) any site specific development requirements set out in the following policies. The use of masterplans may be necessary for some allocations to ensure that development is properly coordinated. 
Example Site Allocation page 
Example Allocation 4 Indicative capacity Current Land Uses(s) 
A4 Example 
Ward 
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Central 
0.7 ha Indicative Capacity Current Land Uses(s) Integrated Health Hub Surface car park 
Site Description 
Example of site description 
Description of the site Site and developable area 
4.9 The location of each site within the Borough and the proposed dominant uses are 
illustrated on the Allocations Map overleaf. 
For each allocation the Local Plan then sets out: 
The site constraints Site specific development requirements 
Example 
Site Constraints 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
• Example site constraint a) Example development requirement 
• Example site constraint b) Example development requirement 
• Example site constraint c) Example development requirementt 
• Example site constraint d) Example development requirement 
• Example site constraint e) Example development requirement 
f) Example development requirement 
g) Example development requirement 
h) Example development requirement 
i) Example development requirement 
4 5 
69 ArunAdur
A27 
A27 
A24 
A259 
A2032 
A2031 
A259 15 
6 13 
2 
98 5 
10 4 1 
7 11 14 12 3 Site Allocations Map4
70 70   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Borough Boundary 
Ward Boundaries 
ArunAdur
South Downs National Park 
Town Centre 
Railway Station 
Trunk Roads 
Arterial Roads 
Dominant Proposed Use 
Employment Developments 
Community Developments 
Residential Developments 
2 Mixed Use Developments 
Allocation Reference Number A1 Beeches Avenue p72 
A2 Caravan Club, Titnore Way p74 
A3 Centenary House p76 
A4 Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Road p78 
A5 Decoy Farm p80 
A6 Fulbeck Avenue p82 
A7 Grafon p84 
A8 HMRC Ofices, Barrington Road p86 
A9 Lyndhurst Road p88 
A10 Martlets Way p90 
A11 Stagecoach, Marine Parade p92 
A12 Teville Gate p94 
A13 Titnore Lane p96 
A14 Union Place p98 
A15 Upper Brighton Road p100 Site Allocations 
71 71   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Site DescriptionSite Allocation - A14
A1 Beeches Avenue 
Ofington 
2.8 ha 6+ years 90 residential units 
Site Area
Expected Delivery Current Land Uses(s)Ward Indicative Capacity
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Current Land Uses(s) Ward Indicative Capacity 
Paddock, grazing land 
and car repairers 
Site Description 
4.10 The site, which is located to the northeast of the 4.12 The landowner has promoted this site for 
borough, currently lies outside, but adjacent on residential development through the Council’s 
three sides to, the built up area boundary. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment. 
South Downs National Park (SDNP) lies adjacent to It was also proposed that this site could form 
the north of the site. Residential development abuts part of a more comprehensive development that 
the site to the south and the west (Charmandean would include the football ground (adjacent to 
Lane) and Worthing United Football Club lies to the the east). However, this would be dependent on 
east. A public footpath runs adjacent to the western the relocation of the Football Club and, at this 
boundary of the site which consists of dense linear stage, the Council is not satisfied that the Club 
scrub. The Council’s landscape study concluded that can be suitably relocated or that the resulting 
this site had a medium/high landscape, visual and loss of a playing field could be justified. If these 
ecological suitability for development. issues can be overcome in the future the Council 
will consider whether an alternative use might 
4.11 The current access to the site is from the south be appropriate here. This would be considered 
via an existing field access onto Beeches Avenue during any review of the Local Plan. 
which provides a direct route to the A27 via an existing priority junction. The transport study concluded that this junction would not provide a suitable access for any significant level of development and, as such, an alternative primary 
72 access arrangement would need to be sought. 
Site Constraints 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 Beeches Avenue 
• The site is adjacent to and visible from the South Downs National Park to the north.
• There is an existing car repairers on the site which will need to be relocated.
• The Worthing Air Quality Management Area abuts the site to the south east.
• Located within a groundwater Source Protection Zone 1, designated to protect
drinking water supplies. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide safe and suitable access from Lyons Farm that does not compromise ornegatively impact operations of the Football Club;
b) deliver improvements / links to the existing footpath network to improveaccess to the wider area and the SDNP, including a connection through the sitebetween the PRoWs at Charmandean Lane on the west of the site and throughto Lambleys Lane on the east. There is also an opportunity for development tocontribute to improvements on the existing PRoW to the east along the northernedge of the business park;
c) respond to the requirements of the Worthing Air Quality Action Plan and deliver apackage of sustainability measures to mitigate the impact of development.  Thisshould include a commitment to deliver a car club and enhancements to walking& cycling facilities.  EV charge points (with a power output of at least 7kW) shouldbe provided for all residential units, fitted ready for first occupation;d) be of a high quality that conserves and enhances the setting of the SDNP,ensuring a transition from the site to the SDNP, with lower density developmentcloser to the SDNP boundary;
e) incorporate planting of species native to this area of chalk downland to form arobust landscape boundary and bufer to the southern edge of the SDNP;
f) Provide a Sustainable Urban Drainage System that includes measures to protect groundwater quality for drinking water; 
g) give consideration to suitable relocation of the car repairers;
h) retain features of local value and where appropriate enhance these features andthe wider site through management and complimentary habitat creation. 
73   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Site Allocation - A2 4 
A2 Caravan Club, Titnore Way 
Ward Northbrook 
Site Area 2.70 ha 
Expected Delivery 6+ years 100 residential units 
Caravan Park Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Site Description 
4.13 This previously developed site is located on Titnore 
Way to the northwest of Worthing, adjacent to, but currently outside, the identified built up area boundary of the town.  West Worthing Tennis and Squash Club lies to the west, an area of woodland and lake lie to the north and an area of scrubland (See Site A6) lies to the east.  A priority junction access is located in the west of the site onto Titnore Way.  The site as a whole, which is ringed by mature trees, currently consists of approximately 80 caravan pitches and associated facilities. The majority of the site is mown grass with areas of hard standing but it also includes some pockets of well-maintained tree groups. 4.14 The site is owned by Worthing Borough Council and leased to the Caravan Club.  The Council and the Caravan Club are working towards the grant of a new long term lease to the Club for approximately 3 hectares of the northern part of the site.  This allows for the remainder of the site (the southern portion – 2.7 ha) to be allocated for residential development whilst at the same time ensuring that the existing use is retained and improved. 
74 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 Caravan Club, Titnore Way 
• Titnore & Goring Woods Local Wildlife Site borders the site to the north and west, this
includes a belt of Ancient Woodland running along the northern boundary.
• Lake lies to the north east of the site – a breach of the dam has previously causedflooding in the local area.
• North Barn Farm, an open windrow composting site, is located to the south west ofthis site (west of Titnore Lane).
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) retain and enhance boundary vegetation to maintain self-containment and limitviews of the site locally and from the National Park;
b) adopt the sequential approach so the most vulnerable uses are located in theareas at lowest risk of flooding; 
c) maintain a suitable bufer to the lake and demonstrate how flood risk will besafely managed across the lifetime of the development, taking climate changeinto account, and not increased elsewhere;
d) the design and layout of this site (along with neighbouring site at FulbeckAvenue) should avoid any potential impacts on the Local Wildlife Site;
e) deliver net gain in biodiversity and high quality green infrastructure to includethe internal tree groups which should be incorporated into the design of thenew development;f) development proposals should be informed by up to date ecological information; 
g) help to protect, and where possible, support the continued use of the land to thenorth as a caravan site; 
i) in line with the Waste Local Plan (Policy W2) proposals should give considerationto the continued safeguarding of the composting site located to the west;
j) provide a footway adjacent to the southern boundary of the site on Titnore Way;
k) deliver a package of sustainable travel measures including enhancements to walking & cycling facilities.  EV charge points (with a power output of at least7kW) should be provided for all residential units, fitted ready for first occupation;
k) ensure a suitable relationship with the site to the east (A6 – Fulbeck Avenue) interms of private amenity and overlooking.
75  
  
 
 Site Allocation - A3 4 
A3 Centenary House 
Ward Northbrook 
Site Area 3.88 ha 
Expected Delivery 6+ years Indicative Capacity 250 residential units & 
10,000 sqm employment floorpsace 
Current Land Uses(s) Ofice use / Police Custody Suite 
Site Description 
4.15 This previously developed site lies within the 
existing built up area and is currently in use as ofices occupied by West Sussex County Council (WSCC) services and Sussex Police.  The site is bound by the A2032 to the south, residential properties to the west & north and Durrington Lane to the east.  It includes a prominent 6-storey tower with other 2-3 storey buildings providing a total of 11,000 sqm of ofice space along with a large expanse of parking (300+ spaces).  A police custody suite, which is to be retained, is located to the west of the site.  The ofices are currently under-utilised, expensive to maintain and require significant investment.  Redevelopment provides an opportunity to make more eficient use of land, re-provide and enhance facilities for Sussex Police and WSCC (approx. 5,000 sqm) alongside the delivery of a multi-agency hub ofering integrated and co-located public services.  Redevelopment would also make use of surplus land for 
76 additional employment space (approx. 5,000 sqm) and new homes.  The site is currently accessed from Durrington Lane via a priority junction which has a ‘lef only’ restriction on vehicles leaving the site. 
4.16 The site forms part of the national One Public Estate Programme and is one of five West Sussex Partnership projects.  This is a national programme that brings public sector organisations together to improve public services, review and rationalise the public estate, free up land to meet development needs and support economic growth.  Funding was granted in 2017 to enable feasibility work to take place – this work is helping to influence the plans for the site and the timetable for redevelopment. It should be noted that the future requirements for ofice floorspace at this location are currently being reviewed in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and resulting changes to work practices. The outcomes of this review may influence the future mix of uses on this site. Site Constraints 
 
 
  
 
 
  Centenary House 
• Within an area considered to be at a high risk of groundwater flooding. 
• Within an area containing recorded archaeological remains. 
• Protection of existing employment uses. 
• A number of protected trees border the site. 
• The transport study indicates that, at peak times, the Durrington Lane north approach 
is operating over capacity. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) deliver a mixed-use community-led scheme with facilitating residential development; 
b) enhance boundary vegetation and incorporate the protected trees; 
c) respond to the findings of the Worthing Local Plan Transport Study and seek to improve the operational capacity and safety of Durrington Lane and associated site access; 
d) suitably address the prominent south-east corner of the site. 
77  
   
 
 
 Site Allocation - A4 4 
A4 Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Road 
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Ward Central Integrated Health Hub 
0.7 ha Surface car park 
0-5 years Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Site Description 
4.17 This centrally located site currently 
accommodates 187 car parking spaces for use by Council staf during ofice hours and for the public outside of ofice hours. The car park is bounded by a ‘civic hub’ comprising Worthing County Court, the Assembly Hall and Worthing Town Hall, the library, Worthing museum and Worthing Borough and Adur District Council Ofices (Portland House). NHS Sussex Community NHS Trust has a central clinic (providing emergency dental services) adjacent to the car park to the south. Outside of this ‘civic hub’ , the predominant land use in the immediate area is residential. 
4.18 The site currently has one point of vehicular access which is onto Stoke Abbott Road to the north of the site which links with the A259 Chapel Road to the east. The nearest bus stops to the site are located on the A259 Chapel Road approximately 175m to the east of the site. 4.19 The site is owned by Worthing Borough Council and, working with the NHS Coastal West Sussex Clinical Commissioning Group, plans are well advanced to deliver a new health hub to integrate with the other civic facilities in the surrounding area. 
78 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   Civic Centre, Stoke Abbott Road 
• Groundwater vulnerability – major. 
• Electricity sub-station located to the south of the site.
• The Town Hall, Assembly Room and museum are listed buildings.
• There may be a risk of contamination due to the existing use and this will need
investigating prior to development.Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide a modern purpose-built healthcare facility to deliver new models of care;
b) enhance permeability and provide an attractive and accessible pedestrian linkfrom the site;
c) ensure that the operational requirements of neighbouring uses are notcompromised; 
d) provide high quality design with particular attention to the height and massing.Due regard should be given to the established building line to the north of thesite along the frontage of Christchurch Road;
e) be sensitive to the surrounding Conservation Areas and ensure that carefulconsideration is given to the protection of the neighbouring listed buildings andother heritage assets;
f) provide suficient parking and amenity space;
g) comply with the requirements of policy DM17 (Energy) with regards to the delivery of district heat networks located within the identified opportunity clusters; 
h) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed and managed. 
79  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The sit
trategic
for boos
ormanc -
re ast
Sussex Strategic Ec
Deal with West Susse
e has been identified as 
ally important 
al West 
onomic 
x County Site Allocation - A5 4 
A5 Decoy Farm 
Ward Broadwater 
Site Area 7.3 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years Minimum of 18,000 sqm 
employment land 
Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Former landfill / scrub 
Site Description 
4.20 This developable site is located within the existing 4.22 The majority of the site is a plateau consisting
built up area boundary. The site is a former of open grassland.  The Teville Stream (a Waterbeing s 
landfill site that received domestic waste when Framework Directive waterbody) runs alongting employment 
active in the 1970’s.  Remediation of the site is due the western boundary and there are culvertedopportunities and economic 
to commence at the end of 2020 including the watercourses to the east and south.  Works are perf e in the sub 
removal of near surface soil to provide suitable now underway to re-route and enhance the Teville 
levels  to facilitate the delivery of a sustainable Stream.  There are also proposals to extend thegion in the Co 
development.  The delivery of new employment Cokeham Brooks Local Wildlife Site and deliver a 
floorspace (industrial / storage & distribution footpath/cycleway across the Worthing-SomptingPlan (2016) and the Growth 
/ research & development and possibly some Local Green Gap which is likely to end in the vicinity 
limited trade counters) will help to support the of this site. 
growth of local SMEs.  In addition, this site may 
represent an opportunity to relocate existing 4.23 The site has been identified as being strategically businesses which could include the Stagecoach important for boosting employment opportunities 
bus depot (see site A11). and economic performance in the sub-region in Council (2017). 
the Coastal West Sussex Strategic Economic Plan 
4.21 The site adjoins industrial estates to the west and the (2016) and the Growth Deal with West Sussex 
Local Green Gap (within Adur District) to the east. County Council (2017). 
To the south of the site is the household waste recycling site.  Current access for the site is from 
80 Deacon Way, which is accessed via Dominion Way. Site Constraints 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Decoy Farm 
• The site is known to be contaminated due to its use as a former landfill. The costs on 
any necessary remediation, and the impact this will have on viability, must be taken into account during the consideration of any development proposal. 
• In places, the site is between 2 and 4 metres above surrounding land. 
• Adjacent to the Local Green Gap (within Adur District). 
• The Teville Stream (partly culverted) and a number of watercourses run along the site boundaries. There are areas of Flood Zone 3 associated with these. 
• Directly adjoins the boundary of the Household Waste Recycling Site which is safeguarded through the West Sussex Waste Local Plan. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) ensure that contaminated land is appropriately assessed and where necessary appropriate remediation takes place.  Consider the implications of this to ensure appropriate sustainable drainage systems are provided; 
b) have careful regard to and protect and enhance the distinctive character of the Worthing-Sompting Local Green Gap (within Adur District); 
c) adopt the sequential approach so the most vulnerable uses are located in the areas at lowest risk of flooding and no built development is located in Flood Zone 3; d) demonstrate how flood risk will be safely managed across the lifetime of the development, taking climate change into account, and not increased elsewhere; 
e) working with Worthing Borough Council, West Sussex County Council and the respective landowner to the east, development should help to facilitate and deliver a connection to the public right of way that will be delivered in Adur District Council to provide a link to Sompting across the Local Green Gap; 
f)   minimise impacts on nearby residential properties; protect the continued operation of the adjacent household waste recycling site; 
g)   consultation with West Sussex and Worthing Borough Council to agree any mitigation for  ofsite trafic impacts on the local and strategic road networks; 
h) protect the Teville Stream providing an adequate bufer between the watercourse and any potential development, and seek opportunities to enhance and restore the watercourse including removing culverts 
i) development should be supported by a scheme to eradicate invasive species present on site; 
j) ensure layout is planned to ensure future access to existing water and/or wastewater infrastructure for maintenance and upsizing purposes.  Phase occupation of development to align with the delivery of sewerage infrastructure, in collaboration with the service provider. 
k) maximise biodiversity value on site through wildlife friendly landscape planting and design (SUDs etc) and compensate for residual habitat loss through of-site solutions. 
81  Site Allocation - A6 4 
A6 Fulbeck Avenue 
Ward Northbrook 
Site Area 0.85 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years 
Site Description 
4.24 This greenfield site is located to the north west of 
the town. It lies on the edge of the urban area but falls within the current built-up area. The Titnore Way Caravan Park (see Site A2) lies to the west and recent development along Fulbeck Avenue and the West Durrington Strategic Development now mean that the site is adjacent to residential development to the north and south. Somerset lake is situated to the north-west from which a stream flows through the southern part of the site and there is a flood storage facility to the north of the site. The Titnore & Goring Woods Local Wildlife Site borders the site to the north west. There is no current use of the site which is heavily vegetated, particularly along site boundaries. The southern part of the site consists of overgrown grassland and scrub. The northern part consists of an area of woodland important for flood management. Indicative Capacity 120 residential units 
Current Land Uses(s) Unmanaged scrub and 
woodland 
82 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fulbeck Avenue 
• A band of preserved trees runs along the north east boundary of the site. 
• Local Wildlife Site borders site to north-west. 
• Partly within an area with a high chance of flooding from surface water and at medium 
risk of groundwater flooding. The site would be at risk from a breach scenario at Somerset Lake and failure of the flood storage facility to the north. These have previously caused flooding in the local area. 
• Barleyfields Stream crosses the southern part of the site. 
• North Barn Farm, an open windrow composting site, is located to the west. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) deliver net gain in biodiversity and high quality green infrastructure to include the retention of mature trees, in particular some of the deciduous woodland in the northern part of the site to provide a natural habitat between the site and the West Durrington development and to limit views to the site from the National Park to the north; 
b) enhance boundary vegetation; 
c) adopt the sequential approach so the most vulnerable uses are located in the areas at lowest risk of flooding; d) maintain a suitable bufer to the lake and demonstrate how flood risk from all sources (including a breach scenario) will be safely managed across the lifetime of the development, taking climate change into account, and not increased elsewhere; 
e) be informed by up to date ecological information; 
f) protect the stream / watercourse and incorporate within the design of the open space to be provided as part of the development; 
g) ensure that the design and layout of this site (along with neighbouring site - the Caravan Club) avoids any potential impacts on the Local Wildlife Site; 
h) ensure a suitable relationship with the site to the west in terms of private amenity and overlooking; 
i) give consideration to the continued safeguarding of the composting site located to the west, in line with the Waste Local Plan (Policy W2); 
j) provide a new point of access from Fulbeck Avenue. 
83    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Site Allocation - A7 4 
A7 Grafton 
Ward Central 
Site Area 0.76 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years 150 residential units & 
2500 sqm commercial 
Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Car park, bowling alley, retail, service yard 
Site Description 
4.25 This previously developed seafront site is located 
within the urban area opposite the Lido. It is bounded by: Montague Street (a pedestrianised shopping area) to the north; Marine Parade (the seafront road) to the south; Augusta Place (a service road) to the west; and Knightsbridge House (Marks and Spencer on the lower floors with sea-facing flats above) to the east. 4.26 The site itself has a 430 space multi-storey car park, a ten-pin bowling alley, several retail units, a service yard at basement level and upper level access ramps to roof parking decks. There has been a long-term aspiration to redevelop this area with a mixed use scheme, that incorporates commercial, leisure, retail and residential uses, improves the public realm and integrates the seafront and town centre. This objective has been reflected in various strategies and funding initiatives including the Worthing Investment Prospectus (2016), the Worthing Town Centre Investment Strategy (2016) and the Seafront Investment Plan (2018). The site is accessible to vehicles from Augusta Place (a one-way street) which also provides egress onto Marine Parade through an existing priority junction. 
84 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 Grafon 
• The majority of the site is in Flood Zone 3. 
• Foul & surface water drains cross the site and wastewater and surface water pumping 
stations are currently located on the site. 
• The surroundings include several Conservation Areas, and the Lido (a Grade II Listed Building) is opposite the site on the seafront. 
• The multi-storey car park currently provides space for 430 cars. 
• There are complex access rights to neighbouring retail and residential areas. 
• Development proposals will need to address ‘Right of Light’ issues with neighbouring properties. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide a mix of high quality residential, retail and leisure uses and amenity space; 
b) adopt the sequential approach so the most vulnerable uses are located in the areas at lowest risk of flooding; 
c) demonstrate how flood risk will be safely managed across the lifetime of the development, taking climate change into account, and not increased elsewhere; 
d) reposition and maintain the network of service connections to existing properties (surface and foul water drainage and pumping station) and provide to new-build; 
e) ensure that a suitable gap is provided between the pumping station and any sensitive development (such as housing); 
f) provide a high quality public realm that enhances the town centre and provides an attractive setting to the historic environment, including the Grade II Listed Lido and surrounding Conservation Areas; 
g) address access arrangements for all users/ to all uses; this might include temporary arrangements during construction as well as long term solutions; 
h) create a new route linking the seafront and primary shopping area in a coherent and attractive way; 
i) ensure that daylight and sunlight implications are appropriately managed. 
85   
  Site Allocation - A8 4 
A8 HMRC Offices, Barrington Road 
Ward Goring 
Site Area 7.46 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years 250 residential units & 
provision of care home/ 
sheltered accommodation 
Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
HMRC Ofices and 
support facilities 
Site Description 
4.27 This previously developed site is located within 
the existing urban area, adjacent to Durrington railway station and in close proximity to a number of to a number of recent and proposed developments (including allocation A10 that lies adjacent to the west). The site currently comprises ofices occupied by HMRC which range from single story units up to a five storey section of one of the buildings. The accommodation floorspace extends to 20,830 sqm with 457 surface car parking spaces. Some of the more dated ofices are no longer occupied. 4.28 HMRC’s lease on the site comes to an end in 2021 at which point the site will become available for development. The majority of the HMRC operations will then relocate to a specialist regional hub located in a new town centre ofice block located opposite Worthing railway station. Despite this relocation, it is expected that HMRC will retain a presence in Durrington on the adjacent site (the more modern Durrington Bridge House) located to the east. 
86 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 HMRC Ofices, Barrington Road 
• Low to moderate risk of contamination / pollution. 
• Some areas of mature vegetation and trees lie within the site and along parts of the 
site boundary. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) deliver of mix of residential and employment uses with emphasis on encouraging the retention of Durrington Bridge House (to the east) and the delivery of employment uses on the western section of the site; 
b) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed and managed; 
c) retain high quality trees in and around the site; 
d) mitigate any impacts of noise and vibration resulting from the presence of the railway line to the north of the site; 
e) ensure that the development does not have an unacceptable impact on the amenity of neighbouring residents; 
f) not prevent (or negatively impact) the potential for development on land lying adjacent to the west of the site (Martlets Way); 
g) seek to improve access to and from Durrington Station; 
h) provide appropriate junction improvements at Barrington Rd / Shafsbury Avenue. 
87    
 Site Allocation - A9 4 
A9 Lyndhurst Road 
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Ward Central 150 residential units 
1.13 ha Former gasholder/ 
6+ years depot buildings /NHS 
car park Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Site Description 
4.29 This previously developed site located to the 
north east of Worthing town centre. It comprises a cleared site (formerly a gasholder), depot buildings and a temporary NHS car park for the nearby Worthing Hospital. The site is bounded by residential properties to the south, a supermarket to the west, Lyndhurst Road to the north and Park Road to the east. Worthing Hospital lies to the north-east of the site. Current access to the site is via Park Street. 4.30 There has been a long-term aspiration to develop this site. Subject to addressing the contamination issues, the site presents an opportunity for high quality residential within a highly sustainable location. 
88 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Lyndhurst Road 
• Significant levels of contaminated land. 
• Within an area containing recorded archaeological remains. 
• Evidence of potential ecological constraints. 
• Potential access issues. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide a high quality residential development; 
b) undertake detailed investigations of the contamination to assess the level of 
remediation required; 
c) deliver a surface water drainage scheme that ensures that surface water is not discharged through contaminated soils; 
d) undertake an assessment of the archaeological remains; 
e) undertake an extensive phase 1 habitat survey and desktop study and provide mitigation as appropriate; 
f) address provision for suitable access/egress on Park Road and Lyndhurst Road; 
g) enhance permeability and provide an attractive and accessible pedestrian link from the site to the High Street and town centre – this should include consideration of an improved footway / cycleway along the northern boundary. 
89  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Site Allocation - A10 4 
A10 Martlets Way 
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Ward Goring 10,000 sqm employment 
4.18 ha Vacant, former waste 
0-5 years water treatment plant/ 
former gasholder site Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Site Description 
4.31 This previously developed site, which is made 
up of three main parcels of land, lies adjacent to the Goring Business Park is located within the existing urban area. It is located in close proximity to Durrington railway station and a number of recently delivered and planned developments (including allocation A8 that lies adjacent to the east). The site, which is now cleared and vacant was, among other things, formerly used as a wastewater treatment plant and as a gasholder. The current access is from either Martlets Way or Woods Way and, with some improvement, it is considered that this access would be suitable for the employment development of the site (industrial / warehousing uses). 4.32 The site has the potential to deliver a quantum of employment floorspace (industrial / warehousing) as identified in the Employment Land Review, which would go some way to meet the identified employment floorspace need over the Plan period. However, there is scope for some residential development to be served via the HMRC site to the east (on the nib), if it can be demonstrated that this secures the delivery of employment floorspace at Marlets Way  and, in this context, does not prejudice the bringing forward of the former gasholder site. 
90 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Martlets Way 
• Current access arrangements from the west will require some improvement. 
• There is a risk with piecemeal development on parts of the site, although separate 
applications may be acceptable if supported by an appropriate planning strategy. 
• Previous site uses indicate likely contamination. 
• A line of mature established Ilex trees crosses the site. 
• Close proximity of residential development may afect any employment layout with a need for adequate screening. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide employment development accessed from the west; 
b) ensure that the development does not have an unacceptable impact on the amenity of neighbouring residents; 
c) promote a travel plan to improve the accessibility and sustainability of the site; 
d) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed and managed; 
e) protect mature Ilex oak trees that separate the former gas holder site from the former sewage treatment works (subject to appropriate assessment work); 
f) ensure that the layout and access arrangements for any development does not constrain or prevent the ability for development to come forward elsewhere within the site as a whole; 
g) provide an element of residential development accessed from the east (HMRC A8) but only if it can facilitate the delivery of employment floorspace at Martlets Way and provide for the former gasholder site to be brought forward. 
91   Site Allocation - A11 4 
A11 Stagecoach, Marine Parade 
Ward Central 
Site Area 0.69 ha 
Expected Delivery 6+ years 60 residential units & 
2000 sqm commercial 
Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Bus depot 
Site Description 
4.33 This previously developed site is located in a 4.34 There has been a long-term aspiration to 
prominent position on the seafront, just to the provide a mixed use development incorporating 
north east of the pier. The site sits adjacent retail, cultural, leisure and residential uses.  
to the Steyne Gardens and Warwick Gardens Development must be sensitive to the 
Conservation Areas and a Grade II* listed building surrounding area and help to integrate the 
- the Dome Cinema. To the north of the site lies seafront and the eastern end of the town centre. 
the retail and restaurant area of Warwick Street. This objective has been reflected in the Seafront 
Masterplan and the Council’s Investment Prospectus. To unlock this site the Council is continuing to work closely with its owners (Stagecoach) to help facilitate the relocation of the current bus station to a suitable alternative site. 
92 Site Constraints 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stagecoach, Marine Parade 
• Part of the site is within Flood Zone 2 and parts lie within Zone 3. 
• There may be a risk of contamination on this site due to the existing use and this will 
need investigating prior to development. 
• The whole site is bounded by Conservation Areas with a small part situated within the Steyne Garden Conservation Area. 
• The Dome Cinema is a Grade II* listed building. Other listed buildings in close proximity include the residential terrace of Bedford Row, the Chatsworth Hotel, houses fronting Steyne Gardens and Stanford Cottage. 
• Within an area containing recorded archaeological remains. 
• There are a number of preserved trees within and adjacent to the site. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide for a mixed development of residential and commercial uses (e.g. retail (comparison goods), cultural, leisure) that provides vibrancy and helps to integrate the town centre and seafront; 
b) use the sequential approach to site layout to ensure the most vulnerable types of development are located in the areas of lowest flood risk; 
c) manage flood risks so that development is safe across its lifetime without increasing flood risk elsewhere; d) consider the risks posed by contaminated land to ensure the site is safe for future occupants and that development does not pose a risk to water quality; 
e) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed and managed; 
f) be sensitive to the surrounding Conservation Areas, listed buildings and historic rights of way and ensure that the design of any new development helps to enhance their significance and setting; 
g) consider opportunities to enhance the Conservation Area by incorporating land in Bedford Row to the west (currently used for parking); 
h) enhance permeability and provide an attractive and accessible pedestrian link from Marine Parade to Warwick Street; 
i) consider whether there is there is an opportunity to re-open the historic twitten; 
j) undertake an assessment of the archaeological remains; 
k) incorporate the existing protected trees into any proposed design. 
93   Site Allocation - A12 4 
A12 Teville Gate 
Ward Central 
Site Area 1.47 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years 250 residential units & 
4000 sqm commercial 
Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 
Vacant site 
Site Description 
4.35 This previously developed, privately owned 
site lies in a highly sustainable and prominent location, linking the railway station with the town centre. It formerly comprised the Teville Gate Shopping Centre and multi-storey car park which have been demolished. In advance of redevelopment part of the cleared site is currently in use as a temporary surface car park (providing 66 spaces). 4.36 There has been an aspiration to redevelop this prime site for a number of years and various schemes have been proposed. The latest application seeks to deliver a mixed use scheme comprising three blocks of 378 residential units, an 80-bedroom hotel, a foodstore, and a gym. In addition, the proposal would provide retail, restaurant and cafe uses, service areas, 300+ parking spaces, public realm with associated hard and sof landscaping and private amenity spaces. 
94 Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  Teville Gate 
• There are areas of potentially contaminated land within the site. 
• The site is in an area with a high chance of surface water flooding and is at high risk of 
groundwater flooding. 
• Grade II Listed Worthing Railway Station site and the Grand Victorian Hotel are in close proximity to the site. 
• There are underground utilities services and a culverted watercourse running through the site. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) deliver a mixed use scheme with a minimum of 250 homes, retail and leisure uses, commercial uses and replacement public car parking spaces; 
b) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed, remediated and managed; 
c) ensure the development is made safe from surface and groundwater flooding taking climate change into account; and incorporate appropriate Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems to ensure flood risk is not increased elsewhere and where possible reduce flooding locally whilst protecting water quality including during flood events; 
d) protect and enhance nearby heritage assets and ensure no significant harm is caused to them or their settings; 
e) provide a high quality public realm with cycle and pedestrian links from the station to the town centre, and under the A24 to Morrisons, having regard to the Worthing Public Realm Study; 
f) protect the amenity of future occupants from unacceptable levels of rail and road noise. 
95   Site Allocation - A13 4 
A13 Titnore Lane 
Ward Northbrook 
Site Area 6.9 ha 
Expected Delivery 6+ years Indicative Capacity 60 residential units 
Current Land Uses(s) Two fields of arable land 
with a wide tree belt through the centre of the site. 
Site Description 
4.37 This greenfield site, located in the north west of 
the borough, abuts the South Downs National Park (SDNP) to the west and north. The site is bound by Northbrook Farm Caravan Club and West Worthing Tennis and Squash Club to the south. The site abuts parcels of Ancient Woodland, and is divided into northern and southern portions by a wide tree belt, which runs broadly east-west through the centre of the site. The woodland within and surrounding the site, forms part of the Titnore & Goring Woods Complex Local Wildlife Site (LWS). 4.38 The landscape study concluded that this site has medium landscape, visual and ecological suitability for development but would need to demonstrate no adverse impacts on the setting to the adjacent National Park, the adjacent Ancient Woodland, or the wider landscape. 
96 Site Constraints 
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Titnore Lane 
• Titnore & Goring Woods Complex LWS surrounds the site and runs through the centre 
of the site. 
• There is Ancient Woodland (an irreplaceable habitat) adjacent to the site to the north, north-east and south. 
• Setting of SDNP which abuts the site to the north and west. 
• The SFRA found small parts of the site were in areas considered to have a high risk of flooding from surface water, groundwater and rivers. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) provide safe and suitable access onto Titnore Lane. Internal access between the southern and northern parcels of the site should be located in the existing gap currently formed by the overhead pylon alignment; 
b) deliver links to the existing footpath network to improve access to the wider area and the SDNP, specifically routes to the east and south through neighbouring urban areas. These new connections would enable access through the local PRoW network to the National Park to the north of the A27 and south west of the site (including Highdown Hill); 
b) demonstrate there will be no loss or deterioration of Ancient Woodland following the Natural England and Forestry Commission standing advice for ancient woodland; c) provide a 20m bufer zone to Ancient Woodland. This should be free from development including any road construction, and all housing positioned along the Ancient Woodland should front onto it to minimise impact onto the sensitive habitat; 
d) ensure no loss and maintain the integrity of habitats associated with the Local Wildlife Site through the maintenance of suitable vegetated bufers, habitat linkages, and implementation of measures to minimise potential adverse indirect efects of development including recreational pressure; 
e) retain features of local value including the central tree belt, boundary tree line and vegetation along the stream. Where appropriate, enhance these features and the wider site through management and complimentary habitat creation using native species that reflect the local character of the surrounding woodland to form a new green corridor achieving a net gain in biodiversity. Any new trees removed should be replaced on a 1:1 basis; 
f) conserve the setting of the South Downs National Park by enhancing visual screening from Titnore Lane through creation of a landscape bufer; 
g) careful consideration should be given to the efects of artificial lighting within the development on the National Park, Ancient Woodland and Local Wildlife Site; 
h) adopt the sequential approach to site layout so the most vulnerable development types are located in the areas of lowest flood risk first, taking account of all sources; 
i) deliver a package of sustainable travel measures including enhancements to walking & cycling facilities. EV charge points (with a power output of at least 7kW) should be provided for all residential units, fitted ready for first occupation. 
97  
  
 Site Allocation - A14 4 
A14 Union Place 
Ward Central 
Site Area 1.12 ha 
Expected Delivery 0-5 years Indicative Capacity 150 residential units 
and 700 sqm leisure / commercial 
Current Land Uses(s) Cleared site and car park 
Site Description 
4.39 This previously developed site lies east of the Investment Strategy. Redevelopment also has the 
Connaught Theatre and west of the High Street. support of the Coast to Capital Local Growth Fund 
It comprises: a surface car park adjacent to the Local Economic Partnership. 
Connaught Theatre; a cleared site of unmade 
ground and footings to the former Police Station; 4.41 To help accelerate its redevelopment Worthing 
and an adjoining small area of car park along the Borough Council acquired Union Place in 2018 
High Street. It is close to Chapel Road (secondary before entering into a land-pool agreement with 
shopping area) and links to the central shopping government owned regeneration specialist LCR. 
area via the Guildbourne Centre. A Development Strategy has been prepared to deliver a mixed use scheme of housing, 
4.40 Large parts of this prime site have stood vacant commercial space, new public realm, a hotel and 
for many years and its redevelopment could act a cinema extension to the Connaught Theatre. 
as a catalyst for change, helping to revitalise the High Street and deliver new housing, amenities and jobs. As such, the site is identified as being strategically important in a number of key documents including the Worthing Investment 
98 Prospectus and the Worthing Town Centre 
Site Constraints 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  Union Place 
• Includes small areas with a medium or high chance of surface water flooding. 
• Includes large areas of potentially contaminated land – below ground conditions 
currently unknown. 
• Overlooking and ‘Right of Light’ issues associated with surrounding buildings. 
• Chapel Road Conservation Area (CA) lies west of the site, and the development would most likely be visible from Conservation Areas in the surrounding area. 
• There are a number of Grade II listed buildings in close proximity to the north and east of this site, and an Archaeological Notification Area lies to the west of the High Street. 
• Development of the site will need to take the amenity of nearby occupiers into account and address capacity for power, water and drainage created by the new scheme. Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) create a landmark development in the heart of the town centre which creates a sense of place and provides an attractive setting to the historic environment; 
b) ensure that careful consideration is given to the protection of the listed buildings and other heritage assets that are in close proximity to this site; 
c) provide a mix of uses including homes and commercial floorspace with the potential for restaurants and leisure uses; 
d) provide a high quality public realm and generate new retail / leisure circuits connecting to Chapel Road, High Street and South Street; 
e) introduce active usages along Union Place and the High Street (employing natural surveillance to design out crime); 
f) ensure that any contaminated land issues are appropriately assessed and managed; 
g) manage daylight and sunlight implications appropriately; 
h) provide an appropriate number of replacement car parking spaces; 
i) ensure that any archaeological assessment requirements are met; 
j) comply with the requirements of policy DM17 (Energy) with regards to the delivery of district heat networks located within the identified opportunity clusters. 
99   
 
 Site Allocation - A15 4 
A15 Upper Brighton Road 
Site Area 
Expected Delivery Ward Broadwater 
7.50 ha 
Parcel A = 6.18 ha 
Parcel B = 1.32 ha 
0-5 years 
Site Description Current Land Uses(s) Indicative Capacity 123 residential units 
Parcel A = 105 Parcel B = 18 
Arable fields / paddock 
4.42 This greenfield site is located on the north 
eastern edge of Worthing and to the north-west of Sompting.  It is adjacent to, but currently outside, the identified built up area boundary.  It is formed by two parcels of land split by Upper Brighton Road.  The larger irregular shaped area to the south (Parcel A) is currently in use as arable/ pastoral fields.  A footpath crosses diagonally through the north western part of this area.  The smaller area (Parcel B) is a rectangular arable field currently in use as a paddock that lies adjacent to the A27 to the north.  The developable area is 4.15 ha comprising of 3.53 ha for Parcel A and 0.62 ha for Parcel B. 4.43 The site adjoins housing to the west and south beyond which (to the south) lies a large industrial area.  Bramber Primary School is located adjacent to the south west and an area of land within the site is reserved for an expansion of the school to provide a playing field.  The boundary with Adur District Council runs along the eastern edge of the site and a small linear settlement designated as the Sompting Village Conservation Area lies adjacent to the north east. 
4.44 The eastern part of the site contributes to the landscape and visual setting of the National Park and contributes to the open ‘gap’ between Sompting and Worthing. 
100 Site Constraints  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 Upper Brighton Road 
• Cabling (and associated easement strip) to serve Rampion ofshore windfarm crosses the 
site diagonally and this restricts development in the eastern part of both land parcels. 
• In close proximity to the South Downs National Park boundary. 
• Sompting Conservation Area and Upton Farm House (Grade II listed building) lie close to the eastern boundary. 
Development Requirements - any future development proposals should: 
a) avoid coalescence with development to the east and ensure that development is located to the west of the easement strip for the windfarm cable (a small parcel of land to the east of the easement strip is designated as part of the Local Green Gap); 
b) deliver biodiversity net gains, provide high quality green infrastructure and enhance & strengthen hedgerows / linear scrub habitats along existing boundaries; 
c) be informed by up to date ecological information and create a range of habitats with high wildlife interest within areas of open space; 
d) integrate trees reflecting the landscape character of the site to mitigate visual impact from the South Downs National Park; 
e) retain and enhance existing waterbodies and/or create new wetland habitats; 
f) provide additional tree planting along boundaries; 
g) protect the setting of both the listed building and the Sompting Village Conservation Area; h) provide a safe and suitable vehicular access from Upper Brighton Road; 
i) help to support and not prejudice the wider aspirations of the Sompting Estate (within Adur District as well as Worthing) to develop necessary infrastructure for diverse local food production and for local supply; 
j) ensure that agricultural access (from A27 through Lower Lambleys Lane and across Upper Brighton Road into Church Farm) is maintained, and where possible, enhanced; 
k) provide non-motorised user access from the southern portion of site onto Bramber Road and improved non-motorised user facilities along Upper Brighton Road. 
l) Respond to the requirements of the Worthing Air Quality Action Plan and deliver a package of sustainability measures to mitigate the impact of development.  EV charge points (with a power output of at least 7kW) should be provided for all residential units, fitted ready for first occupation. 
Parcel A m) strengthen eastern boundary vegetation; 
n) provide playing field for Bramber First School; 
o) protect, or provide suitable diversion for, public footpath (3135) which should be enhanced to include improvements to surface quality and widening to allow for cycling; 
Parcel B p) provide a bufer of open space and then low density housing along the northern edge of the site nearest the A27 / National Park; 
q) maintain separation between the eastern edge of Worthing and the more rural in character settlement to the east by limiting development to the western half of the site. 
101 Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
102  Worthing Local Plan 
Development Management 
Policies 5   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Development Management Policies 5 
Social DM1 - HOUSING MIX 5.5 Shared accommodation, including well designed 
Policies 
 5.1 Development should provide an appropriate mix of 
housing types flexible enough to adapt to diferent local needs. This includes the delivery of specialist accommodation to deliver Lifetime homes and meet the demands of an ageing population. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.2 The NPPF requires Local Plan policies to deliver a wide choice of quality homes by planning for a mix of housing based on current and future demographic projections, market trends and the difering needs of the various sectors of the community. 
5.3 Delivering housing is far more than just a ‘numbers game’ . New housing must support the needs of the community as a whole by including afordable and market homes of the type, size and tenure needed by residents. However, housing mix can have implications, both for development feasibility and viability as well as for local character. Therefore, whilst it is important to manage the mix of housing provided on new developments, this should not be a formulaic exercise and a practical balance must be struck. 
5.4 Accessible, inclusive homes accommodate the needs of a wide range of households, such as young professionals, families, older people and individuals with disabilities – it is not ‘specialist’ housing for one group of people, but housing for all. Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs), play an important role in providing housing for people on low incomes, those on benefit payments and young professionals. They are ofen the only choice of housing for people who would otherwise be homeless. 
5.6 Self-build and custom-build housing is a significant part of the Government’s strategy to improve and diversify housing provision. The Council maintains a register of individuals and associations of individuals who have expressed an interest in self and custom build homes. 
Local Context 
5.7 The Strategic Housing Market Assessment (2020) for Adur and Worthing Councils recommends the mix of housing that should be sought. It indicates a mix for afordable housing which is set out in Policy DM3: Afordable Housing and the following mix of market housing: 
• 1 bed dwellings - 5-15% 
• 2 bed dwellings - 40-45% 
• 3 bed dwellings - 35-40% 
• 4 bed dwellings - 10-20%  
 
 
 
  
 
 Social Policies 
5.8 
5.9 How this mix is applied to individual development sites should take account of 
the nature and location of the site but family homes with 3 or more bedrooms should be prioritised especially on larger sites and greenfield land where a greater proportion of family homes would be expected. Higher density flatted schemes are more likely to be focused towards the delivery of smaller properties, but these should also include a proportion of larger units with 3 or more bedrooms. 
The Council will also support Build to Rent development in the right locations 
such as those within the existing urban areas that are in reasonably close proximity to public transport connections. 5.13 it can be adapted to households changing needs and therefore recommends there is suficient justification to require that new build dwellings should be delivered to Part M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable’ standards. 
The requirement for all new build dwellings to be designed to achieve M4(2) 
will also ensure they can be easily adapted to meet the needs of a household including wheelchair users. National planning guidance states that Local Plan policies for wheelchair accessible homes M4(3) should be applied only to those dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling (see also policy DM3). 
5.10 
5.11 
5.12 Where opportunities arise the Council will support proposals for high-quality self-
build and custom-build projects that are sensitive to the characteristics of the local area. On sites where more than one self or custom build dwelling is proposed, a design framework should be submitted as part of the planning application to help coordinate the development. 
Requirements of Specific Groups 
People aged over 65 represent 22.8% of the local population across Adur & Worthing and numbers are expected to grow significantly. Numbers of people aged over 65 are projected to increase by 10,700 (43%) in Worthing between 2016-36. Linked particularly to a growing older population, the number of people with health problems and/or disabilities are projected to increase significantly. In addition, it is forecast that the number of older people with dementia in Worthing is likely to increase by 54% from 2019 to 2036 and those with mobility problems projected to rise by 49% over the same period. 
Many older people continue to live in mainstream housing, it is therefore 
important that housing is designed so it can be adapted to a household’s changing needs and enable people to remain independently living at home for 5.14 
5.15 Given the ageing population and higher levels of disability and health problems 
amongst older people there is likely to be an increased requirement for specialist housing options moving forward. There may be a range of factors which may influence such moves, including issues related to loneliness, health, ability to maintain existing homes and/or care and support needs. Options include retirement living or sheltered housing (housing with support), extra care housing or housing with care (both classed as C3 dwellings), and residential care homes and nursing homes (care bed spaces). 
Provision of housing with care (C3 use class) is an alternative to care/nursing 
home bed spaces and can help to reduce costs associated with care by supporting people to remain as independent for as long as possible. These can also support not only older people but also those with a lifelong disability. In addition, they can be integrated well into local communities and also as part of larger developments. The Strategic Housing Market Assessment suggests that in the period to 2036 Worthing has a need for 1,601 additional market and afordable dwellings to provide housing with support or housing with care and a maximum of 435 additional care bed spaces. 
longer. The evidence suggests that it would be sensible to design housing so that 
105  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.16 
5.17 Worthing is a registered Dementia Friendly Community and is working towards 
improving inclusion and quality of life for people with dementia. The Council will therefore encourage the design of new homes to have regard to the guidance contained within the ‘RTPI: Dementia and Town Planning’ (September 2020). 
Retaining Existing Homes 
Given the limited amount of land available for new residential development it is important to retain existing housing especially larger family homes (3+ bedrooms) given the level of need identified, and residential accommodation, including Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs). There is also a need to ensure a range of dwelling types and sizes to meet the identified housing needs, facilitate housing choice and achieve mixed and balanced communities. 5.21 improves the appearance of the area. The Adur and Worthing Empty Property Strategy aims to reduce the number of empty properties through the use of positive actions and interventions to return properties into use. 
Converting Existing Homes 
Conversions from houses to high quality flats or HMOs can provide a useful addition of smaller dwellings to the housing stock. However it is important that conversions provide a high standard of accommodation and promote and retain housing choice. When considering proposals for conversion the Council will consider the impact on the mix of dwellings locally, the character of the area and on the amenity of adjoining dwellings. 
106 5.18 
5.19 
5.20 Loss of existing housing may be justified in cases where this is the only way to raise 
the standard of poor quality accommodation such as where a loss is necessary to meet the required housing space or access standards. Other exceptions include where proposals would result in a net gain of afordable housing, a loss would be the only way to preserve a building of special architectural or historic interest, or where the loss could facilitate provision of a community use to meet an identified need. All exceptions will need to be clearly justified and accompanied by suitable supporting information. 
Applications for the conversion of flats or Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO) 
back to family sized homes will be considered on their merits taking account of other considerations including, for example, amenity considerations and evidence regarding the need for family homes. 
This policy will help to ensure that measures aimed at delivering additional 
residential accommodation, including through renovation and repair, are not undermined through losses to the existing housing stock. Bringing empty properties back into residential use helps to meet local housing demand and 5.22 
5.23 
5.24 To balance the loss of and demand for family accommodation, conversions 
should provide for at least one unit suitable for family occupation. To ensure the quality of any new accommodation is high and that it supports a good quality of life it is important that proposals are consistent with the space standards set out in Policy DM2 (Density) for both internal and external space. For HMOs, applications will need to demonstrate compliance with minimum bedroom sizes and that the communal living space and cooking and bathroom facilities provided are of an appropriate size to meet the needs of the expected number of occupants. 
The Council will continue to monitor the provision of HMO accommodation 
throughout the period of the Plan and, if necessary, further guidance will be published. 
Live/Work Units 
Live/Work space is defined as property that is specifically designed for dual use, combining both residential and employment space. Live/Work is distinct from conventional ‘home working’ which usually comprises a residential unit with ancillary and ofen temporary or informal work areas. Live/Work is a distinctive and formal division of residential and workspace floorspace which does require planning permission. The NPPF states planning policies should allow for new and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Social Policies 
flexible working practices. It is anticipated that due to the Covid-19 pandemic and 
rise in people working from home the demand for live/work units may increase. The Council’s preferred format would be for communal workspace provision such as a cluster of work units or a shared workspace. However where proposals come forward with individual live/work units the workspace should be designed to be functionally separate from the dwelling(s) to which it relates and the division within each unit clearly marked on submitted floorspace plans. The Council may impose conditions on any planning permission granted to secure a continuing ratio between workspace and living space. The impact of introducing business premises in generally residential areas on amenity must also be addressed. 
5.25 Live/work units will be required to comply with the space standard requirements under Policy DM2: Density and afordable housing provision under Policy DM3: Afordable Housing 
DM1 HOUSING MIX 
a) In order to deliver sustainable, mixed and balanced communities, the Council will expect all applications for new housing to consider the most up -
to-date evidence of housing needs and demands. 
b) The Council will support proposals for high-quality self-build and custom-build projects that are sensitive to the characteristics of the local area. 
c) Housing developments should provide flexible, socially inclusive and adaptable accommodation to help meet the diverse needs of the community and the changing needs of occupants over time. The Council will expect all new build dwellings to meet the optional higher Building Regulations Standard M4(2) for Accessible and Adaptable dwellings. d) To meet the needs of older people, housing with support and housing with care should be prioritised over care bed spaces. These should be in both affordable and market tenures in accessible and suitable locations close to local services. 
e) The Council will seek to resist any net loss of existing residential accommodation (Use Class C3). Planning applications that result in the loss of residential accommodation will not be permitted unless one or more of the following exceptions apply: 
i) it can be demonstrated that the accommodation cannot be renovated to 
achieve satisfactory housing standards; 
ii)  the proposal would result in a net gain in units of affordable housing; 
iii)  the loss would enable residential units to be enlarged to meet residential space standards; 
iv) the proposed change of use will provide a local community service/ 
facility that meets an identified need; 
v) it can be demonstrated that a proposed change of use is the only practicable way of preserving the special architectural or historic interest of a listed building or other building of heritage significance; or 
vi) applications for the conversion of flats or Houses in Multiple Occupation 
(HMO) back to family sized homes will be considered on their merits taking account of other considerations including, for example, amenity considerations and evidence regarding the need for family homes. 
f) When considering proposals for the conversion of dwellings into smaller units of self-contained accommodation, the proposal must provide a high standard of accommodation that complies with internal space standards 
107  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
and requirements for private outdoor space. In addition, the Council will 
consider: 
i) the impact on the mix of dwellings locally 
ii) the impact on the character of the area 
iii) the impact on the amenity of adjoining dwellings 
iv) the quality of the accommodation. Applications for the change of use 
to a C4 use, a mixed C3/C4 use or to a sui generis HMO use should also demonstrate that the communal living space and cooking and bathroom facilities are provided appropriate in size to the expected number of occupants 
v) At least one unit of the accommodation provided is suitable for family occupation unless it can be demonstrated that: 
● A different mix of units is essential to preserve the character of a 
listed building or building with heritage importance; or 
● The proposal is specifically for people with special housing needs. 
DM2 - DENSITY 
5.26 Land is a scarce resource in Worthing and there are competing demands for its use. Given the need for additional homes it is important that the limited amount of land available is used eficiently when considering proposals for new residential development. As such, the density of new residential development (and other uses) should be maximised, subject to being built at a density appropriate to the character of the area. 
108 What the policy needs to do 
5.27 The NPPF indicates that local planning authorities should support development that makes optimal use of each site and refuse applications which they consider fail to make eficient use of land. 
5.28 Densification is ofen associated with tall buildings, large flatted developments and/or smaller living spaces that lack adequate outdoor space and privacy. Other negative impressions relating to increased trafic, noise and pollution and overstretched infrastructure and parking services means there is a tendency for this type of development to be resisted, especially in areas which have traditionally been built to much lower densities. Despite these negative perceptions, densification delivered through taller buildings, the use of airspace above buildings, in-fill developments and lower level apartment blocks can all help to support urban consolidation whilst delivering high quality living environments. Limiting development to a compact area helps to contain urban sprawl, protects open spaces and ensures that developable land is not being underused. 
5.29 Furthermore, densely populated areas ofen attract a wide range of businesses and services, which in turn increases the social and cultural ofering of an area and attracts more people, creating vibrant and diverse centres. For many, there is the opportunity to live closer to employment, leisure, health and educational opportunities which reduces the reliance on private transport and encourages active travel, lowering both individual and collective carbon footprints. Building at higher densities also reduces energy consumption, as the higher the density, the lower the per capita cost of services. 
5.30 The success of densification initiatives is dependent on a number of interdependent variables. High density environments should be walkable, cyclable or have a good public transport system in place to reduce the need for private transport. It is also essential that good quality social and economic infrastructure capable of supporting the local population is provided prior to the occupation of new development.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 109 Social Policies 
5.31 The appropriate density for a new development will depend on a number of 
factors, including the location of the site, access point/s, local road network and characteristics of the surrounding area. The optimum density for a site should be based on an evaluation of its attributes, its surrounding context and the capacity of surrounding infrastructure (particularly public transport services). Suficient external space around and between new homes is an important factor in the creation of a pleasant residential environment contributing to the character, identity and appearance of an area. It is also important to ensure adequate privacy and daylight to both existing and new homes. This is particularly important within the context of the Covid-19 pandemic which has resulted in changing work / live patterns. 
Local Context 
5.32 To help steer the right level of densification to the right locations the Housing Implementation Strategy identifies a range of urban density thresholds and options that reflect the accessibility and potential of diferent character areas in and around the borough. 
5.33 Although the Council aims to deliver a significant uplift in the existing average density in most parts of Worthing this should not be to the detriment of the quality of the environment. Applicants will also need to ensure that development on one site does not unnecessarily constrain what can be achieved on other potential development sites. As such, it will be important that a design led approach, which considers the context and character of the site and local area, as well as the capacity of surrounding infrastructure, is adopted in order to ensure that the proposed development and its density is both suitable and appropriate. 
5.34 As a general guide the Council would expect densities in the borough to be a minimum of 35 dwellings per hectare when applied to edge of town allocations and developments of family housing. In town and district centres or sites well served  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
by public transport and walking and cycling facilities, significantly higher densities 
would be expected. The density of recent residential development in these areas has ofen been well in excess of 100 dwellings per hectare and, depending on the characteristics of the site in question, it is expected that this trend will continue. 
5.35 There may also be exceptional cases when a lower density would be appropriate, for example, within a Conservation Area where a higher density could have an adverse impact on its unique and special character. 
Space Standards 
5.36 Whilst higher density housing can help to meet housing needs and regenerate 
an area it is vital that greater intensification of development still provides a good living environment for both existing and future residents. A lack of living and storage space can compromise basic lifestyle needs and can have profound impact on an occupant’s health and well-being. Therefore, in providing new homes, it is important that they are designed and constructed to a high quality with good standards of internal space. 
5.37 In 2015 the government introduced a nationally described internal space standard. Given the limited opportunities for edge of town growth it is inevitable that densities within Worthing (particularly within the town centre) will significantly increase. To ensure this pressure for greater intensification continues to deliver suitably sized accommodation the Council will require that, as a minimum, all new development should be in accordance with these nationally described standards. 
5.38 There is an acknowledged need in the borough for emergency accommodation to meet the needs of people who find themselves in unexpected and desperate housing need. Ofen this demand is from individuals who require temporary one bed accommodation until a longer term solution can be found. Whilst, in general, the nationally described standards will apply to this form of accommodation 
110 the Council accepts that in exceptional circumstances there may be a degree of flexibility applied but only when a social or charitable housing provider is able to demonstrate the home to be provided would meet temporary emergency accommodation needs and that there is a clear and robust move on strategy and carefully considered ongoing site management. 
5.39 The Council’s local standards will continue to apply for external space as this is not covered with the national standards and it is important that occupiers have access to some private or at least, semi-private outdoor space. For houses, this can most usually be provided in the form of a private enclosed garden. In the case of flats, accommodation for families should usually be provided on the ground floor so that access to a garden can be provided. For other flats, balconies may take the place of a garden but easily accessible communal areas will ofen be required. 
5.40 Further details on density, space standards and the related evidence base can be found within the Housing Implementation Strategy. This work will inform updates to related Supplementary Planning Documents. 
DM2 - DENSITY 
a) Development proposals must make the most efficient use of land, which will usually mean developing at densities above those of the surrounding area. The optimum density of a development should result from a design-led approach to determine the capacity of the site. Particular consideration must be given to: 
i) the site context and character of the surrounding area in which it is 
located, and including consideration of any nearby heritage assets or important landscape; 
ii) its current and future level of accessibility by walking, cycling and public transport;  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Social Policies 
iii) the need to achieve high quality design; 
iv) the need to minimise environmental impacts, including detrimental 
impacts on the amenities of adjoining occupiers; 
v) and the capacity of surrounding infrastructure. 
b) Residential development of family housing should achieve a net density of a minimum of 35 dwellings per hectare. In exceptional cases, lower densities will only be acceptable if it is demonstrated that this is necessary to ensure the development is compatible with its surroundings, development viability would be compromised, or to secure particular house types to meet local housing needs; 
c) Higher densities, in excess of 100 dwellings per hectare should be achieved in most mixed-use developments, flatted developments and developments located in the town centre and in areas close to public transport interchanges and local services. 
Space Standards 
d) New dwellings across all tenures will be expected to meet as a minimum, the 
nationally described space standards (or any subsequent Government update) for internal floor areas and storage space. These standards will apply to all open market dwellings and affordable housing, including those created through subdivision and conversion. The Council’s local standards will continue to apply for external space. 
e) The Council will only consider any variation to the requirements set out above in exceptional circumstances, for example when a social or charitable housing provider is able to demonstrate that the homes it is seeking to deliver meets an identified need for supported housing and temporary emergency accommodation and that there is a clear and robust ‘move on’ strategy and site management in place. DM3 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
5.41 The Council is committed to helping to support, enable and sometimes enforce the right conditions for people to have a secure and safe home. The provision of afordable housing plays an important role in this process as it helps to prevent homelessness and ensure that those who are unable to aford market housing have access to suitable homes to rent and buy. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.42 Afordable housing is housing for sale or rent, for those whose needs are not met by the market (including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or is for essential local workers). The term ‘afordable’ as defined in the NPPF includes afordable rented housing, discounted market sales housing and other afordable routes to home ownership such as intermediate housing and shared ownership. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. 
5.43 The NPPF requires Local Plan policies to identify the type and tenure of homes required by those who require afordable housing. The provision of afordable housing should be met on site unless of-site provision or an appropriate financial contribution in lieu can be justified. 
Local Context 
5.44 The Strategic Housing Market Assessment has found that 1,164 households in Worthing are currently in afordable housing need (i.e who are unlikely to have suficient income to aford private rented housing). In addition, around half of newly-forming households will be unable to aford market housing (i.e. private rented housing) together with another 131 existing households each year, who will through changing circumstances, find themselves in need of afordable housing. This results in a substantial need for additional afordable housing with a total need for 490 dwellings per annum in Worthing. 
111   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
    
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.45 In response, the Council is committed to taking all opportunities to deliver high quality 
afordable housing for people who are unable to access or aford market housing as well as helping people make the step from social or afordable-rented housing to home ownership. To achieve this aim the Council will continue to work with public bodies and Registered Providers to maximise development of afordable housing on sites. However despite the eforts to maximise housing delivery, the lack of land available means there will still be a significant shortfall in the ability to meet the needs identified. 
5.46 Given the lack of opportunities for large scale development in Worthing it is particularly important that smaller medium sized residential developments contribute towards meeting the very significant afordable housing needs. Therefore, the policy requires afordable housing to be provided for all liable residential developments of 10 or more dwellings. It must be noted that the Government has recently consulted on changes to temporarily lif the small sites threshold, below which developers would not need to contribute to afordable housing, to 40 or 50 dwellings. This has not yet come into force, however if it is enacted the Council will use this threshold, unless there is scope for local exemptions. 
5.47 In assessing the appropriate level of afordable housing to be delivered by major developments (10 or more) the Council has had regard to the viability of diferent development types and whether development involves greenfield or previously developed land.  This review has identified that there are significant viability challenges with flatted schemes on previously developed land and therefore the requirement would be for 20% afordable housing  for that type of development with a 30% requirement for housing schemes. Mixed use schemes on previously developed land will be required to deliver the equivalent requirements (e.g. 20% for the flatted element and 30% for housing). On greenfield sites, where both land value and construction costs are lower, a higher requirement of 40% is considered appropriate to respond to the Council’s afordable housing needs. 5.48 The NPPF expects at least 10% of homes to be available for afordable home ownership, unless this would exceed the level of afordable housing required in the area, or significantly prejudice the ability to meet the identified afordable housing needs of specific groups. The analysis found 85% of the afordable housing need in Worthing is for rented afordable homes, and within this provision of homes at social rent levels which are afordable to those on lower incomes (including lower income working households) with the greatest relative needs and who do not have access to other housing options; and the Councils have a statutory duty to address homelessness. Therefore to most efectively meet the borough’s housing needs, the Council will therefore prioritise rented afordable homes at social rent levels (or at local housing allowance levels) by requiring that the total provision of afordable housing should consist of a split of tenures of at least 75% social / afordable rented housing to meet the identified needs and 25% intermediate housing including for afordable home ownership. 
5.49 The need for afordable housing of diferent sizes may vary by area and over time. In considering the mix of homes to be provided within specific development schemes, this information should be brought together with details of households currently on the Council’s Housing Register and the stock and turnover of existing properties. Similarly, on individual sites, the preferred afordable housing mix will be determined through negotiation and informed by up to date assessments of local housing needs and site / neighbourhood characteristics. The SHMA recommends the following mix of social/afordable rented housing (social rented; afordable rented; and afordable private rented homes) in Worthing of: 
• 1-bed properties: 40-45% • 3-bed properties: 20-25% 
• 2-bed properties: 25-30% • 4+-bed properties: 5-10% 
5.50 And the following mix of afordable home ownership: 
• 1-bed properties: 30-40% • 3-bed properties: 15-25% 
• 2-bed properties: 35-45% • 4+-bed properties: 0-10% 112  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Social Policies 
5.51 In addition the SHMA estimates that 3% of households need to meet the needs of 
a wheelchair user. National planning guidance states that Local Plan policies for wheelchair accessible homes (M4(3) should be applied only to those dwellings where the local authority is responsible for allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. 
5.52 The Council will require afordable housing to be provided on site, unless of-site provision or a financial contribution of broadly equivalent value can be robustly justified and the agreed approach contributes to the objective of creating mixed and balanced communities. Further information relating to afordable housing requirements and contributions is set out within the Council’s Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document. 
DM3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
a) New residential development (including conversions and changes of use) with the capacity to provide 10 or more self-contained units will be expected to provide an appropriate mix of affordable housing according to the following site size thresholds: 
i) Sites on previously developed land involving the development of flats 
there will be a requirement for 20% affordable housing; 
ii) For all housing schemes on previously developed land there would be a requirement for 30%; 
iii) For all development on greenfield sites there would be a requirement for 40%; 
b) Affordable housing should be delivered on-site. In exceptional circumstances a financial contribution may be accepted by the Council in order to provide affordable housing off-site where the other sites may be more appropriate to provide affordable housing than the site of the proposed development. 
c) Affordable housing should incorporate a mix of tenures and sizes prioritising rented affordable homes at social rent levels. The exact tenure split and size of units on each site will be a matter for negotiation, taking account of up-to-date assessments and the characteristics of the area. However to most effectively meet the borough’s housing needs the Council will require the following mix of tenure as a minumum: 75% social / affordable rented housing and 25% intermediate housing. 
d) Where there is an identified need for a wheelchair accessible dwelling, the provision of affordable homes constructed to Building Regulation Standard M4(3) Category 3: Wheelchair Accessible Standards, will be a matter for negotiation taking account of suitability and viability of the site. 
e) Affordable housing should be appropriately distributed throughout a new development and should be designed to a high quality, with the same or a consistent external appearance as for market housing. 
f) Where a developer states that exceptional development costs mean it is not possible to meet the full requirements for the delivery of affordable housing the onus will be on them to demonstrate this to the Council and this must be supported by robust financial viability evidence (through an open book approach). 
113  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
DM4 - GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING 
SHOWPEOPLE 
5.53 Meeting the identified housing needs of all sections of our community, including 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople is a key objective of this plan. To achieve this the Council has assessed the accommodation needs of the local community and considered the needs of people residing in or visiting a borough with respect to sites for caravans. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.54 The NPPF and subsequent legislation requires Councils to identify sites to meet the accommodation needs of all communities within their area. This includes the needs of the Gypsy and Traveller community and Travelling Showpeople. The Government’s overarching aim is to ensure fair and equal treatment for Travellers, in a way that facilitates the traditional and nomadic way of life of travellers while respecting the interests of the settled community. Councils are also required to set out criteria by which any relevant application will be assessed. 
Local Context 
5.55 Local planning authorities must use robust evidence to establish accommodation needs when preparing Local Plans and making planning decisions. As such, the coastal West Sussex Authorities of Adur, Arun, Chichester and Worthing commissioned consultants to undertake the Coastal West Sussex Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA). This meets the requirements of the Housing Act (1985), the Housing and Planning Act (2016), the NPPF (2019) and Planning Policy Guidance (2014) as amended by Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (2015) (which included a change to the definition of Traveller for planning purposes). 
5.56 The main objective of the GTAA is to assist the respective authorities in determining an appropriate level of pitch and plot provision for the area to 
114 inform the policies and proposals of their respective Local Plans and related Development Plan Documents. It provides the Councils with robust, defensible and up-to-date evidence about the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople during the period up to 2036. 
5.57 This study identified that there were no existing sites within Worthing and no identified current or future need. As a consequence, no new sites are required to be allocated. Whilst the evidence has not identified a need, and therefore no requirement to provide sites, there is still a requirement to include a criteria based policy to provide a basis for decision making in the event that relevant applications do come forward. 
DM4 - GYPSIES, TRAVELLERS AND TRAVELLING SHOWPEOPLE 
a) Proposals for new Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites will be permitted provided that the following criteria can be satisfied: 
i) the potential occupants are recognised as Gypsies, Travellers or 
Travelling Showpeople (as defined in Planning Policy for Travellers Sites 2015); and 
ii)  the proposal helps meet the identified need; 
iii) the site would have safe access to the highway network and provision for parking and turning; 
iv) the site would be well related to the existing settlement where local services and community facilities (including schools and health services) can be accessed by foot, cycle and public transport as well as by car;   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Social Policies 
v) development should be of a scale that is sympathetic to the local 
environment and should not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the amenities of both residents of the site and occupiers of nearby properties, particularly in respect of noise and disturbance from vehicular movements, on-site business activities and other potential sources of noise; 
vi) the site would be served, or be capable of being served by an adequate mains water supply, and electricity, drainage and sewerage connections; 
vii) the site would not be located in an area of high flood risk (Flood Zone 3), on contaminated land, near refuse/landfill sites, wastewater treatment works, electricity pylons or be adversely affected by noise and odour in order to protect the amenity, health and well-being of residents; and 
viii) there is adequate provision for storage and maintenance of equipment, where required for Travelling Showpeople. 
b)  In assessing applications for Gypsy and Traveller or Travelling Showpeople sites, best practice guidance published by the Government and other relevant bodies will be used. 
c) Any new site/s that may come forward during the Local Plan period will be safeguarded. DM5 - QUALITY OF THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT 
5.58 The quality of the built environment helps to determine how a place is perceived, experienced and enjoyed. It encompasses the setting, the street pattern, the buildings and walkways, the parking, green spaces and public squares. A good environment meets the needs of all its users and will also incorporate natural space for people and wildlife to move through, supporting both well-being and biodiversity. Places that have a good quality built environment are successful places - socially, economically and environmentally. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.59 The NPPF seeks to secure high quality design and makes clear that poor design that fails to take the opportunities available for improving the character and quality of an area and the way it functions should be refused. Local Plans are also required to include policies that promote healthy communities and sustainable travel measures, and create safe and accessible environments where crime and disorder and the fear of crime do not undermine quality of life or community cohesion. 
5.60 The quality of new design plays an important part in creating successful developments – well-designed developments relate well to existing buildings and spaces around them, are pleasant to use and take account of local distinctiveness without necessarily replicating what is already there. Good design is a key aspect of sustainable development. It encompasses architectural design, form, height, scale, siting, layout, density, orientation, lighting, materials, parking, street design, connectivity and green infrastructure / open space. Green infrastructure and biodiversity features can enhance the built environment helping to achieve well designed, high quality places which in turn can attract businesses and inward investment as well as providing positive benefits for health & well-being and climate change adaptation. 
115   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.61 Design has an important role to play in both preventing and reducing crime and 5.64 The relatively compact form of the borough and the constrained nature of the 
ensuring people using and moving through spaces feel safe. Measures to ‘design surrounding areas means that pressure to build upwards is likely to continue. 
out crime’ should be considered early on in the design process and incorporated Whilst this form of development can contribute towards meeting housing needs 
into all new development, taking into account the principles contained in it is acknowledged that tall buildings can be assertive and dominant due to their 
Government guidance on ‘Safer Places’ and the Oficial Police Security Initiative visibility. In response to this, the Council has published a Tall Building Guidance 
‘Secured by Design’ . Good use of ‘natural surveillance’ , natural and artificial Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) which helps to lead taller buildings 
light, and careful siting of buildings and street furniture can improve the layout to the most appropriate sites and sets out the criteria by which the quality of 
of an area and reduce perceived and actual crime, as well as opportunities for developments will be assessed and controlled. 
anti-social behaviour. Well designed security features that safeguard people 
and property without compromising the quality of the local environment, and 5.65 Lighting can add character and highlight elements of architectural quality. 
well defined pedestrian, cycle and vehicular routes that limit opportunities However, it is important to ensure that light shines on its ‘target’ and does not 
for concealment also help to provide a safe environment for those that are waste energy or contribute to ‘skyglow’ , which detracts from the night sky’s 
particularly vulnerable to harm (Contextual Safeguarding), and make an area natural state and is a form of visual pollution. In this context it should be noted 
more pleasant to use. that the South Downs National Park is an Internationally Designated Dark Skies Reserve. The South Downs National Park Authority is a statutory consultee for all 
Local Context applications afecting the Park. 
5.62 As well as being well-designed, new development should integrate well into Worthing’s landscape and townscape, contribute positively to its varied 5.66 Private residential gardens within the built up area are now excluded from 
character and distinctiveness, and where possible improve connections the definition of previously developed land. Inappropriate development 
between places (including to the downs and coast). Development should of residential gardens will be resisted but their development in some 
respect, preserve and enhance the significance of heritage assets and their circumstances may be acceptable. Applications for development of private 
setting, promote the beneficial use and enjoyment of heritage assets and where residential gardens will be considered carefully and each case will be 
appropriate, use Conservation Area Appraisals and other historic character tools determined on its own merits. A range of issues, including the size and shape 
to determine the appropriateness of the design. Open spaces are important of the garden, impact on neighbouring dwellings, biodiversity, density, and the 
features which can contribute to making the built up area pleasant and character of the area, will all be taken into account. 
attractive. Where open spaces contribute to the quality of the townscape their loss will be resisted. 5.67 Extensions and alterations to residential properties or ancillary development such as new freestanding buildings and garages should have regard to scale, design and 
5.63 To ensure that development delivered is of high quality the Council will seek to materials in relation not only to the property concerned, but also any predominant 
ensure that the quality of approved development is not materially diminished characteristics in the area, including garden size. The impact of any proposal on 
116 between permission being granted and the construction of the development. the street-scene and on neighbouring property must also be acceptable.  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Social Policies 
5.68 Residential annexes can provide a suitable solution for accommodating a relative 
or dependent within the curtilage of the main dwelling house. Where a totally independent dwelling is not acceptable, (for example where there is a lack of separate curtilage, inadequate parking or a general unacceptable intensity of use), permission may be granted for an annexe subject to conditions or planning agreements limiting occupation to a relative or dependent, and requiring conversion of the accommodation to a use in association with the main dwelling, when it is no longer required for the relative or dependent. Such annexes should be ancillary to the main dwelling both in scale and range of accommodation and facilities, and must not assume a detached or independent identity by design or sub-division of the curtilage of the main dwelling. 
5.69 Whilst the most efective and eficient use of land and buildings is positively encouraged this must not be at a cost of unacceptable loss of amenity for existing and future residents, for example through noise, vehicular movement, visual intrusion or loss of important open space. 
5.70 Consideration must be given to both the internal and external design of properties in order to allow suficient space for both general waste and recycling provision and to provide adequate and safe access for waste storage and collection. 
5.71 Best practice guidance published by the Government, the Council and other bodies will be used when assessing applications. Design codes, planning briefs and masterplans will be developed for key sites where appropriate. The Council has adopted the following documents which provide guidance on design: 
• Guide to Residential Development SPD (2013) 
• Tall Building Guidance SPD (2013) • Space Standards SPD (2012) 
• Extending or altering your home SPG (1998) 
5.72 Although some aspects have been superseded by national policy and other policies in this Plan, they all have parts that remain relevant. The Council is committed to updating these documents and will schedule this work in its forthcoming Local Development Scheme. In the meantime applicants are advised to discuss with the Council about how this guidance should be used. 
5.73 The Council will also have regard to a range of other best practice documents, standards and principles, such as: 
• Building in Context Toolkit (Historic England/CABE, 2001); 
• Secured By Design Guidance (Various); 
• Buildings for Life 12 (Design Council CABE, 2015); 
• Tall Buildings Advice Note 4 (Historic England, 2015); 
• Active Design Checklist (Sport England/Public Health England, Oct 2015); 
• Dementia and Town Planning (RTPI, September 2020); 
• National Design Guide/Design Planning Policy Guidance (MHCLG, 2019) 
• Secured By Design Homes (SBD, 2019) 
• Building for a Healthy Life (Homes England, 2020) 
117 Development Management Policies 5 
DM5 - QUALITY OF THE BUIL T ENVIRONMENT Social Policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 a) All new development (including extensions, residential annexes, alterations, 
ancillary development, change of use and intensification) should: 
i) be of a high architectural and design quality and respect and enhance 
the character of the site and the prevailing character of the area. This will include consideration of proportion, form, design, context, massing, siting, layout, density, height, size, scale, materials, detailed design features and landscaping; 
ii) enhance the local environment by way of its appearance and character, with particular attention being paid to the architectural form, height, materials, density, scale, orientation, landscaping, impact on street scene and layout of the development; 
iii) make a positive contribution to the sense of place, local character and distinctiveness of an area; 
iv) respect, preserve and enhance heritage assets and settings; 
v) be well built, accessible, fit for purpose, and adaptable to changing lifestyle, demography and climate; 
vi) include a layout and design which: take account of potential users of the site; create safe conditions for access, egress and active travel (walking and cycling) between all locations; provide good links to integrated public transport; and have acceptable parking arrangements (in terms of amount and layout); 
vii) make a positive contribution to creating a safe and secure environment by integrating measures for security and designing out opportunities for crime; viii) not have an unacceptable impact on the occupiers of adjacent properties, particularly of residential dwellings, including unacceptable loss of privacy, daylight/sunlight, outlook, an unacceptable increase in noise or vehicular movements or loss of important open space; 
ix) respect the existing natural features of the site, including landform, trees and biodiversity and contribute positively to biodiversity net gain; 
x) ensure that lighting incorporated into developments provides the minimum for public safety, is energy efficient and avoids light pollution. 
Residential Annexes 
b) Residential annexes must be designed as ancillary to the main dwelling and 
be capable of satisfactory conversion for use in association with the main dwelling when it is no longer required by a relative or dependant. 
Ensuring Approved Plans are Delivered 
c) To ensure that the quality of approved development is not materially 
diminished between permission and completion, where appropriate, the Council will use Planning Conditions to prevent incremental changes being made to approved plans that would impact negatively on the design and quality of the scheme proposed. 
118 DM6 - PUBLIC REALM Social Policies 
 
 
 
 5.74 The public realm is the space around, between and within buildings that is 
publicly accessible, including streets, squares, parks, open spaces and pedestrian and cycle routes. These spaces are dynamic elements that have a distinct and unique identity, whether they are spaces to move through or spaces to gather in. The quality and design of the public realm has a significant influence on quality of life because it afects people’s sense of place, security and belonging, as well as having an influence on a range of health and social factors. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.75 The NPPF requires Councils to support the vitality of town centres and, with the public realm in mind, states that Local Plans should identify priority areas for infrastructure provision and/or environmental enhancements to build sustainable economic growth. It promotes the use of planning policies to ensure that the arrangement of streets and spaces help to create places that are safe, accessible and that establish a strong sense of place. 
5.76 The public realm should be multi-functional, attractive and accessible for people of all abilities. It should contribute to the highest possible standards of comfort, security and ease of movement and enable everyone to participate equally, confidently and independently in everyday activities. This will help to create attractive and inviting environments that people want to live and work in. 
5.77 Green infrastructure features can enhance the built environment helping to achieve well designed, high quality places which in turn can attract businesses and inward investment. Sensory gardens and landscaped spaces supported by accessible street furniture adds social value to the public realm and provides health and well-being benefits. Of increasing importance is the need for climate resilience within public realm spaces. Green infrastructure, such as street trees can provide shading and urban cooling. 
119   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
Local Context 
5.78 Improvements to the public realm provide an opportunity to enhance the quality, 
character and distinctiveness of Worthing, and form an important part of a wider strategy for regeneration and renewal, particularly in the town centre and seafront. Significant improvements to the public realm have been delivered in partnership during recent years including enhancement to parts of the seafront, a public realm upgrade in Montague Place and improved cycling and pedestrian access. However, it is accepted that the current condition and quality of the public realm in some other areas is poor. For example, the streetscape around the seafront area is overwhelmingly dominated by car parking spaces and a wide carriageway which creates severance from the town centre. Elsewhere, in parts of the town centre, the public realm is lacking in cohesion and legibility, with many examples of mismatched materials and landscaping in poor condition. The Local Plan and supporting strategies seek to address these issues. 5.81 
5.82 To provide a coordinated approach, the Public Realm Strategy was prepared in 
parallel with a Seafront Investment Plan which provides a comprehensive plan and delivery strategy for revitalising and renewing the town’s seafront. It seeks to build on recent improvements in the area to help create several new public spaces and amenities and provide a high quality setting for new development. A key part of the strategy will be to enhance accessibility and improve the public realm with proposals to reduce vehicular dominance of the seafront through extended footways, new crossings, trafic reconfiguration around Steyne Gardens and an upgraded promenade with enhanced street furniture and new lighting. 
When considering proposals for the public realm, the Council will also have regard to 
local guidance and a range of other documents such as, ‘Building in Context toolkit’ (CABE) and ‘Building for a Healthy Life’ (Homes England). 
120 5.79 
5.80 The delivery of development sites and the intensification of uses in and around 
the town centre will help to transform the look and feel of the town over the next decade. To support these changes it is vital that the spaces and connections that link these sites are improved. An enhanced public realm will add value to the town’s quality of place, sense of arrival and ease of movement. 
To support these aspirations the Council, in partnership with West Sussex County 
Council, commissioned consultants to prepare a Public Realm Strategy. An Options Appraisal identified eight target areas and a number of public realm interventions for each of these. The areas were selected as they each had the potential to contribute towards creating a high quality public realm, drawing people from the train station “gateway” to the hub of visitor and business activity in the heart of the town and along the seafront. Portland Road, Railway Approach and South Street have been identified as Phase 1 priority projects and funding has been secured through the Adur & Worthing Growth Deal. The preliminary design work for Portland Road is now complete and initial design work for Railway Approach to the south east of Worthing train station has commenced. 5.83 
5.84 Shopfronts can have a significant impact on the streetscene. The design and 
materials of shopfronts should respect the character of the area and the building of which they form a part. Advertisements can also form part of the public realm and need to be designed sensitively. Careful consideration needs to be given to the suitability (or not) of illumination and the positioning of advertisements with regards to preventing trip hazards and minimising ‘clutter’ within the public realm. It also must be ensured that accessibility is not compromised. 
The Council’s Public Art Strategy provides guidance and direction on the 
opportunities for future investment and commissioning of public art. Public art can highlight what is unique or locally distinctive about an area and has the potential to become a cultural asset that defines the identity of a place. As well as enhancing visual amenity, public art can help people navigate the locality and encourage increased engagement with the public realm. The policy below requires public art to be provided, in some form, as a part of major developments; it will also be encouraged on smaller sites.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Social Policies 
DM6 - PUBLIC REALM 
a) The enhancement of the public realm in Worthing, particularly in the 
town centre and seafront, is an integral part of the strategic objectives for the town. Opportunities should be taken to improve the public realm through new development, integrated sustainable transport initiatives or regeneration schemes. 
b) Proposals must ensure that the public realm is safe, accessible for all, inclusive, attractive, well-connected, easy to understand and maintain, and that it relates to the local and historic context. It is expected that new development will incorporate the highest quality design, landscaping, green infrastructure, street furniture and surfaces. 
c) Proposals for improvements to the public realm that are in line with the Council’s Public Realm Strategy and Seafront Investment Plan will be supported. 
d) New shopfronts will be permitted where the design and materials respect the character of the area and of the building of which they form part. 
e) Express consent will only be granted for advertisements which respect the character and appearance of the surrounding area, and do not create a danger or hazard to public safety. Where an illuminated advertisement is acceptable in principle, such advertisements should be either externally illuminated or have internally illuminated individual lettering with a solid or opaque background. 
f) The Council will support the delivery of public art that helps to enhance the public realm. Public art should be incorporated as part of any major development proposal. DM7 - OPEN SPACE, RECREATION & LEISURE 
5.85 High quality open spaces and opportunities for informal and formal sport and recreation make a valuable contribution to the health and well-being of communities and are also important for climate change resilience, wildlife and biodiversity. Easy, safe and improved access for all residents and visitors to high quality open and natural space is therefore important. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.86 The NPPF sets out that access to high quality open spaces and opportunities for sport and recreation can make an important contribution to the health and well-being of communities. For that reason, it is important to safeguard existing open space, sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing fields, from development unless certain policy tests can be met. Furthermore, the NPPF requires planning policies to protect and enhance public rights of way and access, including taking opportunities to provide better facilities for users, for example by adding links to existing rights of way networks. 
5.87 Open space, which includes all open space of public value, can take many forms, from formal sports pitches to open areas within a development, linear corridors and country parks, and registered Town and Village Greens (TVG). In addition to the social benefits, they can also have an ecological value, contribute to multi-functional green infrastructure and form an important component of the landscape. 
Local Context 
5.88 The coastline to the south and South Downs National Park to the north provide an expanse of natural/semi natural open space for Worthing’s residents and visitors. Within the borough, Highdown Gardens, Field Place and Beach House Park have been awarded the Green Flag Award. There are three registered Town & Village Greens: Broadwater Green, Worthing Green (between Allington Road and Bramber Road), and the Greensward along Goring-by-Sea. 
121  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.89 Communities value a connected network of Public Rights of Way, Bridleways and 
access routes to the countryside and the wider South Downs National Park. Where appropriate, major development on the edge of town should provide connectivity with at least one multi-user access route around the fringe of Worthing to allow existing and future residents to access the wider countryside. 
5.90 Work on the England Coast Path, a new national trail around all of England’s coast, ongoing. As part of this programme, Natural England have set out proposals for improved access to the coast between Chichester and Shoreham by Sea and the route along the promenade / seafront in Worthing will become part of the national trail. 
5.91 The borough’s parks, open spaces and sports / recreation facilities help to enable local communities to lead lifestyles with greater levels of physical activity, resulting in better physical and mental health, reduced stress levels and increased social interaction as well as reduced exposure to noise and air pollution. These spaces provide a vital natural resource in which people of all ages, gender and abilities can play, learn, exercise, relax and enjoy the natural world. Easy, safe and improved equitable access for all residents and visitors, particularly for children and young people, the elderly and people with disabilities to high quality open and natural space is therefore important. The provision of parks and green spaces should be prioritised in areas with lower socio-economic groups given the disproportionately high level of benefits that these groups derive from parks and green spaces. The Covid-19 pandemic heightened the value and appreciation of open spaces and, as recognised within Adur & Worthing Councils ‘And Then…’ report, it is important to build on the new habits people have formed around their use of open spaces for exercise and social interaction. 
5.92 Worthing has a wide variety of outdoor sports facilities run by the public, private and third sectors. They include traditional play equipment, Multi Use Games Areas (MUGA), play walls, skateboard facilities, basketball and outdoor/ 
122 Gym style equipment. 5.93 Indoor facilities at Worthing Leisure Centre, Davison Leisure Centre, Splashpoint Leisure Centre, Field Place and the Fitness Centre at Worthing College are all operated by South Downs Leisure Trust. In addition, many of Worthing’s schools and community centres provide the public with the opportunity to use their indoor recreation/sports facilities. Future growth will place an increased demand for indoor sports facilities, in particular swimming facilities (the swimming pool at Splashpoint Leisure Centre which opened in 2013 is now at capacity). 
5.94 To assess current provision and identify specific needs (in terms of quality or quantity) in order to accommodate the demands arising from future growth the Council commissioned a Joint Sport, Leisure and Open Space Study which comprise of three components: 
• Open Space Study (2020) 
• Playing Pitch Strategy (2019) 
• Indoor / Built Sports Facility Needs Assessment Report (2020) 
5.95 In summary, the studies concluded that the extent of the urban area and pressures for development mean that the protection of valued high quality open spaces and sport and recreation facilities is a key priority in Worthing and they should only be developed for alternative uses in exceptional circumstances. Additional key findings for additional need over the Plan period include: 
• Indoor swimming pooIs - 81.64 sqm extra waterspace by 2036 (68.98 sqm by 2028); 
• Sport Halls - 2+ courts by 2036 (1+ courts by 2028); 
• Adult football – 4 pitches; Social Policies 
• Youth football 11v11 – 4 pitches; 
• Youth football 9v9 – 2 pitches; 
• Mini football – 3 pitches; 
• Cricket – 2 pitches in Adur & Worthing; 
• Rugby – 3 pitches in Adur & Worthing; 
• 3G FTPs – 2.5 pitches; 
• there is a deficiency in at least one type of open space in every ward in the 
borough. 
5.96 Where significant development sites are promoted applicants will be required to incorporate appropriate leisure and recreational facilities to help meet these identified needs. In addition, the Council will promote delivery by reviewing its own estate. 
5.97 Worthing Leisure Centre located in Durrington is in need of substantial refurbishment or replacement in the future and the Council will continue to work towards delivering this objective. The Joint Indoor / Built Sports Facility Needs Assessment identifies that the ‘New Build (on-site)’ option appears to be the best option (replace the current building and replace with something better suited to contemporary and future needs and demands). 
5.98 A joint Adur & Worthing Physical Activity Strategy is being prepared which seeks to raise levels of physical activity across all areas of the community and many of the themes / recommendations therein are also linked to the Sport, Leisure and Open 5.99 The Open Space Study (2020) sets minimum provision standards for diferent open space typologies in Worthing. In terms of quantity and access, the local standards are as follows (all quantities are hectares per 1000 population): 
5.100 Table 1: Worthing Minimum Provision and Access Standards for Open Space 
TYPOLOGY QUANTITY STANDARDS 
FOR EXISTING 
PROVISION AND NEW 
PROVISION 
(ha/1000 population) ACCESS STANDARD 
(Distance in metres and walk time) 
Allotments 0.20 720m / 15 min 
Amenity Green Space 
(sites >0.15 ha) 0.60 480m / 10 mins 
Park & Recreation Grounds (public & private combined) 0.80 720m / 15 min 
Play Space (Children) 0.06 480m / 10 mins 
Play Space (Youth) 0.06 720m / 15 mins  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 5.101 New residential development will be required to provide on-site open space in 
accordance with the standards. The exceptions to this approach will be where the site or development is not of suficient size in itself to make the appropriate provision feasible, or where it is preferable to seek contributions towards a specific facility in the locality. The potential to make of-site provision will be considered 
Space Study. on a case by case basis. 
123   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.102 Where a development is unable to provide sufficient on-site provision of 
open space to mitigate the impact of that development, Worthing Borough Council can collect contributions that could be put towards off-site provision / enhancement. 
5.103 Contributions towards the provision or improvement of offsite open space are set out in the Open Space Study and calculated using the capital cost of provision using the assumption of an average household size of 2.2 persons/ household. The cost calculator factors in the number of bedrooms per dwelling. Where the number of bedrooms are not known, the total number of units can be inputted. The same charges apply to both provision of new facilities and the upgrading/improvement of existing facilities (where related to new development), which will normally include at least some new provision. Contribution per person is taken to be a reasonable approach to calculating the amount of money required and it ensures contributions are ‘in scale’ , as required by the CIL Regulations. 
DM7 OPEN SPACE, RECREATION AND LEISURE 
a) Schemes of 10+ dwellings will be required to provide open space on site in accordance with the Council’s adopted standards. Where it is not possible to provide open space on site, contributions will be sought to provide or improve open space off-site within the ward or nearby ward to which the development is located. 
b) Proposals incorporating leisure/recreation facilities should use the findings of the Sport, Leisure and Open Space Study to inform the types required. c) The loss of existing open space, or sports and recreation buildings/ facilities will be refused unless: 
i) the development is for alternative sports and recreational provision, 
the need for which clearly outweighs the loss; or 
ii) an assessment has been undertaken which clearly shows the open space, buildings or land to be surplus to requirements and not required to meet any other shortfalls in open space types; or 
iii) the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or improved provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location. For open space, there should be a net gain in provision. 
d) Proposals for built sports facilities and formal sports provision will be supported where they are in accordance with policies in this plan. 
e) Sites which have significant nature conservation, historical or cultural value (such as Registered Town and Village Greens) should be afforded protection, even if there is an identified surplus in quality, quantity or accessibility in that local area. 
124 Social Policies 
 
 
 
 DM8 - PLANNING FOR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES / 
COMMUNITY F ACILITIES 
5.104 Communities need a range of education, health, social, community and cultural 
facilities and services to support their health and mental well-being. These are provided by a variety of service providers. It is important that these are accessible to all and respond to the needs of diferent ages and groups, particularly those with disabilities, those with limited mobility and more deprived members of the community. Locating these services close to the communities they serve, helps reduce the need to travel as well as creating strong inclusive neighbourhoods. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.105 The Policy needs to plan positively for the provision and use of shared space, community facilities (such as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship) and other local services to enhance the sustainability of communities and residential environments. 
5.106 The NPPF encourages Local Planning Policies to guard against the unnecessary loss of valued facilities and services, particularly where this would reduce the community’s ability to meet its day-to-day needs. Policies should also help to ensure that facilities and services are able to develop and modernise in a way that is sustainable. The NPPF also requires Local Planning Authorities to take a positive and collaborative approach to enable development to be brought forward under a Community Right to Build Order, including working with communities to identify and resolve key issues before applications are submitted. 
Local Context 
5.107 There is limited space within Worthing for new development and, as such, there is great pressure on all available land. It is therefore vital that, in general, existing community facilities are protected and that proposals for appropriate new or improved / expanded existing facilities are supported. 
125   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.108 The Local Plan is supported by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which provides an 
overview of existing education, health, social, community and cultural facilities and their current quality and capacity. It highlights the additional infrastructure required, as identified by infrastructure providers, to support forecast growth and how this will be delivered throughout the life of the Plan. Facilities may be provided in isolation or as part of more extensive developments. In addition, and as explained further within Policy DM9, planning obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy can be used to help fund and support the delivery of essential community facilities. 
5.109 The Local Plan also plays a role in facilitating the delivery of essential social infrastructure required by service providers on suitable sites. Where appropriate, new facilities should be designed in a way to help facilitate shared use. 
5.110 The Community Right to Bid aims to keep valued land and buildings (that are on the Assets of Community Value register) in community use by giving local people the chance to bid to buy them, if and when they come onto the market. If an owner wants to sell property or land that is on the list, they must inform the Council. If the nominating body is keen to develop a bid, they can then call for the Council to trigger a moratorium period, during which time the owner cannot proceed to sell the asset. 
DM8 PLANNING FOR SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES / COMMUNITY 
FACILITIES 
a) The Council will support improvements to health, education, social, community and cultural facilities to ensure they meet the needs of local communities where it is demonstrated that there would be no unacceptable impact on the occupiers of adjacent properties. 
b) The provision of multi-purpose facilities and the sharing or extended use of facilities that can be accessed by the wider community will be encouraged. 
126 c) The Council will work with service providers to deliver appropriate facilities in accessible locations. Proposals by service providers for the delivery of facilities in appropriate locations to meet the needs generated by new development and existing communities will be supported in principle. 
d) The Council will seek planning obligations to secure new and improved community facilities and services to mitigate the impact of developments. The Council may also fund improvements to community facilities using receipts from the Community Infrastructure Levy. 
e) Development which would result in the loss of community facilities will normally be resisted and will only be permitted where: 
i) an accessible replacement facility of a similar nature is provided that meets 
the needs of its current and intended users, as well as the local community; 
ii)  it can be demonstrated the existing premises are no longer required or viable in their current use and the premises have been appropriately marketed for an alternative community use. 
DM9 - DELIVERING INFRASTRUCTURE 
5.111 The retention of existing essential infrastructure and the provision of additional facilities and services to support new development is a key objective of the planning system. Therefore, in order to promote sustainable future growth, infrastructure must be provided in a timely and efective way to address the demands arising from existing and new communities.   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Social Policies 
5.112 
5.113 What the policy needs to do 
The NPPF requires Local Planning Authorities to work with other authorities and 
providers to assess the quality and capacity of infrastructure and its ability to meet forecast demands. Informed by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) the policy must plan positively for the development and infrastructure required in the borough. 
The term ‘infrastructure’ includes a wide range of items comprising of social, 
physical and green infrastructure, such as: utilities; green infrastructure (including open space); sports facilities; play areas; roads; public transport; education; libraries; health facilities; community facilities; flood defence; water supply; drainage; waste and recycling; and public art (this is not an exhaustive list). 5.117 Future residential and employment growth in the borough together with projected demographic changes will place increased demand upon the capacity of infrastructure. Investment to improve existing infrastructure and the provision of new infrastructure and services will be necessary in order to support sustainable development. The Council’s Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document will be updated following the adoption of this Plan to clarify how and when contributions towards strategic infrastructure (e.g. health and transport) will be sought . The Council expects developers to fund or provide the necessary improvements so as to mitigate or compensate for the impact of their proposal. Government guidance allows the Council to ask for developer contributions to make sure these things are provided. These can be secured in a number of ways: 
5.114 
5.115 
5.116 
Local Context 
In liaison with infrastructure providers, the Council has updated its Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP) to establish the quality and capacity of existing infrastructure and what additional infrastructure is required to support future growth within the borough. The IDP, which is a ‘live’ document, also provides information as to how and when the required infrastructure will be delivered and a broad indication of phasing, costs and funding mechanisms. 
The Council will work with infrastructure providers to facilitate the timely provision of 
infrastructure needed to support development. This may involve suitable phasing of development in order to ensure that essential infrastructure is in place when needed. 
As significant parts of the town’s infrastructure are not actually provided by the 
borough council, it is important that the council continues to work closely with West Sussex County Council and other utility and service providers (such as water providers, communication companies etc.) to ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in place for the lifetime of the Plan. Delivery of major infrastructure will ofen require a multi-agency approach and partnership working. Management agreements can also be 5.118 • on large sites, a developer may be required to build or provide land for new facilities, such as schools; 
• a legal agreement can be used to secure financial contributions towards specific improvements that are directly related to the development (known as Planning Obligations / S106 Agreements - see below); 
• through a set standard charge (the Community Infrastructure Levy) that will be collected from certain types of development and used to fund projects across the borough. 
As outlined below, Planning Obligations and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) are currently the two main mechanisms used by the Council to collect developer contributions towards infrastructure provision. Information on these mechanisms and an explanation of the relationship between them is set out within the Developer Contributions SPD. The SPD also provides greater detail on the Council’s afordable housing requirements. 
required to ensure that efective arrangements are in place to look afer infrastructure. 
127  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Social Policies 
5.119 Although CIL will be the principle mechanism for collecting developer 
contributions, the reality is that some developments will be liable to pay both CIL (‘general’ infrastructure) and planning obligations (site specific measures / afordable housing). In addition, where appropriate, the Council will negotiate with developers to secure additional community and environmental benefits. 
Planning Obligations 
5.120 Planning obligations, also known as Section 106 (S106) agreements, are private agreements 
made between the Council and developers. Planning obligations will be used, where required, to ensure that land is used in the most appropriate and efective manner, to reduce the negative impacts of developments, and to ensure that developments are integrated and coordinated with their surroundings. In summary, they can be attached to a planning permission to make acceptable development which would otherwise be unacceptable in planning providing the requirements of the obligations are: 
a) necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms 
b) directly related to the development; and 
c) fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development 
5.121 Planning obligations may be sought from any development, irrespective of size, that 
has an impact requiring mitigation (either on-site provision or financial contributions for of-site facilities). However, it is inevitable that the more significant developments in the borough will place the greatest additional demands on service and facilities. As a consequence, for all major developments in the Borough an assessment will be made on what potential impacts there may be on a range of infrastructure needs. Financial contributions towards ofsite improvements may be required where it can be shown that there is a specific need arising from the development that can’t be provided on site. An assessment of need and the level of contribution that may be required will be calculated using the Council’s evidence base, the IDP and the Council’s Developer Contributions 
128 SPD (and any subsequent updates). 5.122 As an example, where a major development is unable to provide suficient on-site provision of open space to mitigate the impact of that development, Worthing Borough Council can collect contributions that could be put towards of-site provision / enhancement. This is an example of how S106 agreements can be used alongside CIL. 
Viability 
5.123 The planning obligation requirements set out within the Local Plan have been 
subject to plan-wide viability assessment. It is however recognised that there may be site-specific circumstances where the cumulative efect of policy requirements and planning obligations would compromise development viability for particular schemes. Where a developer considers that the proposal has been made unviable by the level of infrastructure required, the Council will work with the developer and will suggest how this may be resolved. The developer will need to demonstrate how this would threaten delivery of the development. If full mitigation measures and contributions are not able to be delivered the development will only be permitted where: 
a) the applicant has submitted a viability appraisal that has been produced in 
accordance with national guidance, and has been assessed by the borough council as appropriate and based on reasonable assumptions; 
b) the value of the planning obligations has been maximised having regard to likely viability; 
c) where appropriate, a clawback mechanism has been incorporated into a legal agreement to ensure that additional mitigation is provided if final development viability is better than anticipated in the viability assessment; and 
d) if following a viability assessment process the benefits of the development outweigh the lack of full mitigation for its impacts, having regard to other 
material considerations.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Social Policies 
Community Infrastructure Levy 
5.124 The Council has adopted the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) which 
is a mechanism that allows the Council to raise funds from some forms of development. The council will charge developers CIL on appropriate development, in accordance with the council’s adopted CIL Charging Schedule and the CIL Regulations (2010), as amended. 
5.125 CIL is a fixed rate charge on the net additional increase in floorspace that is collected as a financial contribution, although in some cases it may be more appropriate to transfer land or infrastructure (‘in-kind’). Unlike planning obligations, the CIL does not have to directly relate to of-setting the implications of an individual development, but instead relates to the overall cumulative efect of development on infrastructure needs in Worthing. The CIL charge is non-negotiable. However, mandatory exemptions and relief from CIL include social (afordable) housing relief, self build housing and some developments by charitable institutions, if the correct processes are followed. Further information relating to exemptions and other discretionary matters is set out on the Council’s CIL Webpage. 
5.126 The Council has the responsibility for prioritising the spend of CIL and funds may be pooled, allowing the forward-funding of vital infrastructure required to support a particular development. The prioritisation of strategic projects is listed in the Infrastructure Investment Plan (IIP) which sets out the infrastructure projects that the Council intends will be, or may be, wholly or partly funded through the Levy. Additionally, in line with legislation, 15% of all CIL receipts must be spent in the neighbourhood where the development has taken place. Further governance arrangements are currently being put in place in relation to all other ‘pots’ of CIL money. 
5.127 There will be competing demands on funding from CIL from a variety of service providers and it is not expected that the Levy (alongside Planning Obligations) will generate enough funds to completely cover the cost of new infrastructure needed to fully support planned development. As a consequence, the Council will continue to request and apply for funding from other sources to help ensure that infrastructure in the borough can support growth. 
DM9 - DELIVERING INFRASTRUCTURE 
a) Development will be required to take into account existing infrastructure and to provide or contribute to the provision (and where appropriate, maintenance) of facilities, infrastructure and services made necessary by development, or where it gives rise to a need for additional or improved infrastructure. 
b) The Council will work with partners including infrastructure and service providers and stakeholders to ensure that the necessary physical, economic, social and environmental infrastructure is provided to support communities. 
c) Infrastructure should be provided at the appropriate time, prior to the development becoming operational or being occupied. Larger developments may need to be phased to ensure that this requirement can be met. 
d) Ensure that layout is planned to allow future access to existing water and / or wastewater infrastructure for maintenance and upsizing purposes. 
e) Proposals by service providers for the delivery of utility infrastructure to meet the needs generated by new development and by existing communities will normally be permitted. 
129  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic 
Policies DM10 - ECONOMIC GROWTH AND 
SKILLS requirements of diferent sectors. This includes 
making provision for clusters or networks of knowledge and data-driven, creative or high 
5.128 Worthing has an ambition to build on its current technology industries; and for storage and 
economic strengths, help local businesses to distribution operations at a variety of scales and in 
grow and equip the town’s workforce to be ready suitably accessible locations. 
for future challenges and emerging sectors. The strategy is to plan positively for sustainable 
Local Context 
economic growth, promoting and enhancing 5.131 Worthing’s local economy has a strong base 
the economic role of the town, and guiding and, overall, evidence demonstrates a moderate 
its role within the wider sub-region. The Local performance when compared to other local 
Plan will help to deliver sustainable economic authority areas in the sub-region. There is a strong 
development by establishing a clear policy manufacturing base as well as a significant service 
framework that helps to meet quantitative and sector, led by large public sector employers and 
qualitative demand for all types of economic financial firms. There is also a growing digital and 
activity over the Plan period. creative sector. However, the town has recorded 
What the policy needs to do relatively low levels of economic activity, wage earnings, employment growth and business start -
5.129 The NPPF states that planning policies and ups. 
decisions should help create the conditions in which businesses can invest, expand and adapt. 5.132 This Local Plan together with other key local and 
Significant weight should be placed on the need sub regional strategies and plans and working in 
to support economic growth and productivity, partnership with other authorities in the region, will 
taking into account both local business needs ensure that Worthing is a place that businesses wish 
and wider opportunities for development. The to invest in. Adur & Worthing Economic Strategy 
approach taken should allow each area to build (2018 -2023) and Platforms for our Places set out 
on its strengths, counter any weaknesses and ambitious plans for how Worthing will achieve ‘good 
address the challenges of the future. growth’ and deliver a number of improvements that would allow the town to significantly enhance its 
5.130 It also requires planning policies and decisions attraction and competitiveness. Good growth will 
to recognise and address the specific locational balance economic success with quality of life whilst  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Economic Policies 
sustaining natural assets and the environment. More recently, and in response to the 5.136 The scarcity of both new and second-hand industrial buildings has impacted on 
economic disruption caused by Covid-19, the Councils has published “And Then…” to demand with take-up falling to its lowest level for five years and relocating companies 
present the interventions that the Councils will take to enable communities to thrive struggling to find anything suitable across the market. The shortage of industrial supply 
and be resilient following the pandemic. A particular focus will be on jobs and skills, has impacted on rental values which have peaked recently. 
promoting confidence in our places to trade and attracting investment together with a 
number of other measures to help ensure that businesses get the best opportunity and 5.137 Demand for industrial space in Worthing is mainly localised and comes from a mix 
support to thrive and survive. of industrial sectors (i.e. particularly warehousing and small-scale logistics), with most premise requirements ranging up to 10,000 sq f (930 sqm), however, there are 
5.133 The Worthing Investment Prospectus (2016) sets out a broad vision for the town centre occasionally larger enquiries up to 50,000 sq f (4,650 sqm) indicating some demand 
and identifies a number of key development site opportunities that are expected for larger industrial units. Market intelligence reports strong occupier demand across 
to come forward. Supported by this Plan, the delivery of these sites provides an the market during 2019 and the first quarter of 2020. Since the Covid-19 pandemic 
opportunity to improve the town’s identity, enhance the public realm, add vibrancy there has been a significant decrease in demand, however, it is expected that there 
and improve connectivity. will be some rebound in the market later in 2020. Overall, the market is in need of new, modern stock across new developments that ofer a good range of small to medium 
5.134 Whilst there is a focus on supporting the consolidation and growth of existing business industrial and warehousing units. 
this Plan also ofers flexibility to the newly emerging sectors which in some cases compete for the same space as existing and more traditional businesses, but in other Ofices 
cases require more a bespoke product. Where necessary and relevant conditions or 5.138 Worthing is not viewed as a particularly strong ofice location, with limited levels of 
legal agreements will be attached / applied to relevant developments to ensure that demand and take-up. The ofice market is relatively localised, and its limited demand 
any change of use can be properly managed to meet identified needs. generally comes from local Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) operating across a range of business service sectors and requiring good quality, small and modern 
Industrial premises (5,000 sq f/565sqm). Evidence in the local market suggests there is some 
5.135 Demand for industrial space in Worthing remains strong and very low levels of scope for new ofice developments, but mainly related to small, modern and flexible 
vacancy reflect a limited supply of industrial space in the market (particularly modern, units that can meet the needs of local SMEs of around 1,000 sq f (993sqm). There is 
good quality space). Development of new industrial space has been very limited in currently insuficient demand to warrant speculative development in the borough and 
recent years, with much of the borough’s existing stock relatively dated and in need this is unlikely to change. 
of refurbishment. This level of development activity coupled with the shortage of availability means that existing firms within Worthing struggle to accommodate any 5.139 Very limited amounts of ofice development have occurred in Worthing in recent years 
expansion and relocation plans in the borough, particularly those with medium to with most of the remaining stock comprising 1970s to 1980s premises. A significant 
large spatial requirements. In addition, limited availability of industrial supply locally amount of the borough’s older stock of ofice premises has already been eroded over 
makes it dificult to encourage new businesses to relocate in the borough. recent years, primarily due to Permitted Development Rights (PDR) for change of use 
131  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
5.140 to residential. Given these impacts it is therefore essential to carefully monitor future 
losses of ofice space to determine whether stronger measures may be required to protect existing ofice space or plan for additional provision, particularly if Worthing’s better quality provision becomes at risk. 
Worthing’s ofice economy still has a role to play, but the future health of the ofice 
market relies upon providing small scale, good quality and flexible space to meet the needs of local SMEs. The provision of new high grade workspace would also allow existing ofice occupiers to relocate from outdated space and into purpose built accommodation. 5.143 The Council will plan positively to meet this need to ensure that the indigenous growth potential of Worthing (i.e. from its resident workforce) is not constrained by a lack of capacity. However, the ability to provide this level of employment floorspace must be considered in the context of the constrained availability of land in Worthing and the competing pressures on the sites that are available. As a consequence, there are only a limited number of new sites specifically for identified employment use that will help to meet the identified need. The primary focus is therefore to protect and enhance existing employment land and buildings through reinvestment, intensification and redevelopment. 
Skills 
132 5.141 
5.142 Identified Employment Need 
The Economic Research and Employment Land Review Study (2016 and update 2020) provides an understanding of the existing economic situation in Worthing and explores the employment growth potential of the local economy. Whilst its primary focus of the study was on the specific floorspace needs for ofice/light industry it also addresses the floorspace requirements to meet the needs of other employment uses (e.g. retail/leisure use) within the borough. 
Following national guidance, the study looked at a range of growth scenarios 
and translated this into floorspace requirements. In the context of the NPPF requirement to plan positively for growth, the evidence recommended planning to accommodate at least the labour demand (job growth) based requirement to ensure that business growth potential is not constrained by lack of spatial capacity in future. These requirements reflect recent trends in both economic and property market terms and provide the most appropriate balance between positive planning and significant capacity constraints. Therefore, this plan seeks to accommodate, as a minimum, 32,560 sqm (6.8 ha) employment floorspace over the Local Plan period. This includes approximately 9,800 sqm for ofice space, and approximately 24,000 sqm of warehousing/distribution space. 5.144 
5.145 Whilst the Local Plan aims to provide the right physical conditions, a further 
aim is to help ensure that the local population has the right skills to meet the needs of local businesses so that they are able to invest and grow. The Adur & Worthing Economic Strategy seeks to address the need for an appropriately qualified and skilled local labour force, to ensure it meets the needs of its economy. Furthermore, ‘Platforms for Our Places’ commits the Council to working with education providers, local businesses and sub regional partners to strengthen local skills by developing quality apprenticeships. The Council will work with employers and partners to exploit skills led growth and productivity gains through the use of digital technologies to inspire young people and promote pathways for employment and learning. 
Worthing is also a significant centre of learning with a strong further education 
sector. In particular, building on past achievements in the fields of science and technology, Worthing can be a place which supports industries that are seeing significant investment at a global level e.g. advanced engineering, electrical engineering, creative, digital and bio-science nanotechnology data. The Council will continue to work with key partners to identify trends to improve the workforce skills necessary to support local business, particularly in Science, Technology, Education and Maths (STEM) and digital skills in order  
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Economic Policies 
to attract and grow higher value, more knowledge and technology-intensive h) supporting the development of tourism, 
businesses. Creating the right conditions for these sectors will encourage the leisure, sporting and creative industries with 
relocation of businesses from Brighton and further afield. particular emphasis on the town centre and 
seafront locations; 
i) supporting the improvement of digital 
DM10 - ECONOMIC GROWTH AND SKILLS infrastructure through the provision of digitally enabled sites, premises and 
The Local Plan will support, promote and enable the continued development of facilities; 
a strong, sustainable and diverse local economy by: 
j) ensuring major development proposals 
a) identifying sufficient sites and premises in sustainable locations to meet demonstrate how they will contribute 
identified needs of business; to addressing identified local skills 
b) ensuring the availability of sufficient and suitable workspaces in terms of type, size and cost, to meet the needs of current and future businesses, including start up / serviced and incubator space; shortage set out in corporate strategies. Opportunities should be taken to support local employment, skills development and training. The Council will negotiate on a case 
c) requiring supporting infrastructure and suitable environments for larger by case basis and where appropriate, secure 
employers and small and medium sized enterprises; such opportunities by use of a S106 legal agreement; and 
d) promoting a ‘town centre’ first approach to new office space; 
k) applying conditions or legal agreements (where 
e) supporting the reinvestment, intensification and redevelopment of key relevant and appropriate to do so) to any new 
employment areas to allow for upgraded and new floorspace; development in order to control the proposed 
f) identifying employment renewal opportunities for under-utilised and vacant premises; uses and allow for a managed approach to future proposals for change of use. 
g) making more efficient use of existing, underused and accessible 
employment sites; 
133  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
DM11 - PROTECTING AND ENHANCING EMPLOYMENT 
SITES 
5.146 Having a range of sites and premises across the borough to suit the diferent 
needs of businesses for space, location and accessibility is vital to improving the competitiveness of Worthing and the wider sub regional economy. To achieve this, the Council needs to plan for additional growth and ensure that existing employment land is protected and used more efectively and eficiently. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.147 The NPPF states that significant weight should be placed on the need to support economic growth and productivity, taking into account both local business needs and wider opportunities for development. It also expects that planning policies and decisions will promote an efective use of land in meeting the need for homes and other uses. In order to understand the demand for employment uses councils are required to undertake land availability assessments. 
Local Context 
5.148 Existing employment space in Worthing is both in high demand and under threat from other uses. Furthermore, a lack of development opportunities severely limits options for future employment growth. It is therefore important to ensure that there are long term plans to allow for the growth of businesses and that appropriate sites (i.e. suitable for continued employment use) are not released in the short term. 
5.149 The Worthing Economic Research and Employment Land Review (2016 and update 2020) assessed current provision of employment land and relates this to future demand. The work has shown that there is a reasonable mix of sites of difering conditions and type within the borough. Generally, the range of employment sites comprises good quality, well-maintained stock 
134 with low vacancy levels. While there is also evidence of some poorer quality sites and premises, often characterised by poor access, these sites are still predominantly occupied. No evidence has been found to suggest that the existing employment sites assessed in the study no longer have a reasonable prospect of continuing to be used for employment uses over the plan period. As a result, the evidence is clear that employment land in the borough needs to be retained. To achieve this, the Plan seeks to protect the borough’s key industrial and business areas and provide a level of protection to employment uses outside of those key areas. 
5.150 Whilst the Council needs to take this protective approach it is acknowledged that the economy is always changing and adapting to new technologies and trends. Therefore, it is essential that there is flexibility in approach to allow for new forms of economic activity and employment. However, it is also important for business that when making business and investment decisions, that there is a level of commercial certainty. It is therefore considered appropriate that, where it would not undermine the wider economic strategy objectives, change should be ‘managed’ (subject to a clear criteria based approach). However, in acknowledging the need for greater flexibility of uses in diferent locations the detailed findings of the study will be used to help determine any relevant applications. 
5.151 Using planning policies to retain employment sites and manage change is particularly important as there has been a significant loss of employment space within Worthing in recent years. This has mainly been as a result of changes made to national planning guidance which has allowed for greater flexibility to move between use classes (e.g. from ofice to residential uses). Further recent changes made to the use class order may exacerbate these impacts. The Council will continue to monitor this and, if necessary, will consider applying an Article 4 Direction (i.e. the removal of certain permitted development rights) to increase its ability to protect key ofice sites, in particular ofice clusters in and around Worthing town centre which provide a key focus for regeneration and economic renewal over the coming years.  
 
  
       
 
      
  
    Economic Policies 
5.152 The Council’s Sustainable Economy Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 
(2012) will be updated to reflect the new policies contained within this Plan. It will remain a core consideration document of the decision-making process for employment sites in Worthing and continue to provide appropriate guidance on protecting employment sites in the borough. 
5.153 This policy applies to all sizes of employment floorspace including ancillary uses, however the level of evidence required will be proportionate to the size of the space within each proposal. For the purpose of this policy ‘employment uses’ are defined as uses that fall within the following use classes; Storage & Distribution (B8), General Industrial (B2), Ofice (Class E(g)(i)), Research and Development (Class E(g)(ii)) and Light Industrial (Class E(g)(iii)). 
DM11 - PROTECTING AND ENHANCING EMPLOYMENT SITES 
a) Existing premises, sites or floorspace which are used for, or last used for, 
employment uses, which is suitable for continued business use and that provides local employment opportunities will in general be protected against loss to other uses. 
b) Protected Employment Areas 
i) The following key industrial estates and business parks will be protected: 
● Broadwater Business Park 
● Northbrook Business Park 
● Northbrook Trading Estate ● Canterbury Road (including Garcia Trading Estate) 
● Downlands Business Park 
● East Worthing Industrial Estate 
● Faraday Close 
● Goring Business Park 
● Ivy Arch Road 
● Meadow Road Industrial Estate 
● Yeoman Way 
ii) The following key office locations will be protected: ● Liverpool Terrace/Liverpool Gardens 
● Chatsworth Road 
● North Street/High Street 
● Railway Approach 
● Crescent Road 
● Farncombe Road 
c) The primary focus in these ‘protected’ employment areas will be for 
employment uses appropriate to their location. Only in exceptional circumstances (using the principles of the Sustainable Economy Supplementary Planning Document) will a site protected under this Policy (above) be considered for alternative uses. 
135  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
d) Outside the protected employment areas listed above, existing premises and 
land or floorspace which is used, or was last used, for use employment uses will be protected unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that the site (or part of the site) or premises is genuinely redundant and is unlikely to be re-used for employment uses within the Plan period, having regard to the following factors: 
i) the primary focus is to be protect existing employment uses however, greater flexibility will be given to other employment generating uses which cannot reasonably be located elsewhere; and 
ii) if the introduction of any non-employment uses will not negatively impact on the operation of the remaining or neighbouring uses; and 
iii) if the site, with or without adaptation, would not be capable of accommodating an acceptable employment development; 
iv) if no effective demand exists or is likely to exist in the future to use the land or buildings for employment use. Consideration should include the length of time the property has remained vacant, the attempts made to sell/let it and the demand for the size and type of employment premises in the area; and 
v) if the loss of a small proportion of floorspace would lead to a significant upgrade of the remaining employment floorspace; 
vi) if the existing use conflicts with neighbouring uses. DM12 - THE VISITOR ECONOMY 
5.154 Tourism and the visitor economy are vital to Worthing as the economic activity generated by them contribute to many different sectors of the economy, contributing to local growth, jobs and prosperity. As such, creating the right conditions for the sector to thrive is a key objective. A successful visitor economy is, in part, dependent on the quality of the cultural heritage, natural and historic environment, visitor attractions and facilities and the variety of places for visitors to stay. For the sector to remain viable and relevant to attract visitors and make Worthing a destination of choice it needs to ensure that the historic and natural assets that give the town its distinctiveness are conserved and enhanced in a sustainable way. In addition, visitor attractions and facilities will need to expand and improve to respond to changing visitor choices. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.155 The NPPF recognises the importance of creating the right conditions in which business can invest, expand and adapt. It encourages the use of planning policies to help create a strong sense of place so that each area builds on its strengths. 
5.156 At the national level prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, the tourism sector had great ambitions for growth with initial forecasts for 2020 expected to set new records in terms of visitor numbers and spend. However, the impact of the Covid 19 crisis has been felt very hard in this sector as it has elsewhere in the economy. The tourism and hospitality sectors are facing an extremely challenging time but indicators do point to an eventual market recovery with related expectations that there will be a growth in the ‘staycation’ trend. 
136  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Economic Policies 
Local Context museum and theatres; projects to help increase the event/cultural offer; 
5.157 Worthing has a long history of being a seaside resort with its iconic award winning and activities to ‘extend the day’ and the season, such as the successful 
pier, popular promenade, theatres and cultural venues. It is home to a vibrant arts Worthing Observation Wheel (WOW) and the Donkey Bike scheme. Recently 
community, a growing creative and digital sector and also a large and growing the town centre has been awarded a ‘Purple Flag’ that signifies the town is a 
kitesurfing and watersports community. The borough has natural assets that can destination for a safe and vibrant night out. 
help to promote and encourage sustainable tourism such as the coast and the 
South Downs National Park and a wealth of historic assets that help create the 5.161 To support these initiatives and promote the town to relevant markets a 
town’s distinctiveness. The town centre and seafront area is a particular focus for place brand titled ‘Time for Worthing’ has been developed. In addition, the 
many of the visitor attractions and places to stay within the borough. ‘Discover Worthing’ website is used to improve the visitor experience and provide information about ‘what’s on and where to go’ . 
5.158 The visitor economy is of significant importance to Worthing’s local economy with total direct expenditure in 2018 by visitors to the borough estimated 5.162 In recognition of the recent impact of the pandemic the Council is also 
to have been in the region of £190 million. In that year, approximately 3.7 proactively looking at ways to support the sector including proposals to 
million tourism day trips were made and tourism related expenditure is bring forward key aspects of public realm work ahead of schedule and to 
estimated to have supported 3,664 jobs (including part time and seasonal deliver cycling and walking route enhancements, including a series of ‘pop 
jobs). up’ opportunities that will help to make for a safe, attractive and inviting environment for people to want to visit. 
5.159 Despite its existing importance it is recognised that there is potential to enhance this sector and, as such, the Council is taking a proactive approach 5.163 The Adur and Worthing Hotel and Visitor Accommodation Study (2013 
to achieve this through this Plan and other strategies such as the Seafront and update 2016) indicated that overall hotel performance has gradually 
Strategy. Collectively, this will help to ensure that the infrastructure strengthened. It also noted that the range of visitor accommodation has 
needed to support the sector is either in place or being planned for. The restructured to comprise a more significant proportion of budget/limited service 
overarching aims are to promote and widen the ‘local offer’ , address issues hotels and smaller stock of full service 3 star hotels. It is anticipated that future 
of seasonality, support regeneration objectives, enhance the public realm growth in demand in the next few years is likely to come from contractors involved 
and support and grow the cultural sector. There is also the opportunity to with the development of major sites as well as from events and visits by family 
enhance the evening/night-time economy, further develop ‘active tourism’ and friends. Evidence still confirms that there is an ongoing market demand for a 
and capitalise on the town’s proximity to the South Downs National Park. variety of new visitor accommodation in Worthing and that the policy approach whilst ofering flexibility should, in general, seek to protect the existing stock. 
5.160 A significant amount of work has been undertaken to ensure that the sector has the investment it needed to grow and thrive. This includes: work to promote the seafront experience for visitors; improvements to the 
137  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
5.164 Since the last update to that study, the borough has seen a new Premier Inn 
open, some investment in existing stock and more recently a proposal for a new 83-bedroom hotel as part of the mixed use Teville Gate regeneration site. However, there has also been a number of hotel and guest house closures and a significant growth in private room and entire home lettings through Airbnb and other online booking platforms. Whilst this new model of provision adds to the variety of accommodation available to visitors it can negatively impact on the viability of existing accommodation providers, more specifically guesthouses and B&Bs, as unlike Airbnb type accommodation they are subject to more stringent regulations and additional costs. This policy recognises this particular challenge and will consider the individual circumstance of each proposal at the time when an application is submitted. 
5.165 A number of key policies in this Plan support the wider corporate aspirations to deliver public realm improvements, cutting edge digital infrastructure, a vibrant multidimensional town centre and an ambitious programme of events throughout the year to ensure that people want to visit. 
5.166 This policy supports these wider objectives and plays a key role to support, maintain and improve this sector of the local economy. The aim is to build on the town’s strengths to develop and enhance existing and new visitor attractions and visitor accommodation to meet current and future needs. It will do this by encouraging and supporting the provision of new visitor infrastructure (particularly in the town centre and seafront), protecting existing viable infrastructure and assets whilst allowing for the flexibility to adapt to changing demands. 
5.167 In order to support this and other relevant policies within this Plan the Sustainable Economy Supplementary Planning Document will be updated. Evidence required to support proposals that would not accord with the policies in this Plan will need to be proportionate to the proposal in question. DM12 - THE VISITOR ECONOMY 
a) The Local Plan supports the provision of tourism facilities, in particular those that would help to extend the tourist season; improves the quality of the visitor economy; meet the needs of visitors and the local community and are acceptable in environmental and amenity terms. 
b) Existing visitor attractions, facilities and accommodation should be retained unless it is demonstrated that the use is no longer required and the site is unlikely to be reused or redeveloped for visitor purposes. To demonstrate these requirements, the Council will apply tests included in its Sustainable Economy Supplementary Planning Document including the following: 
i) evidence of marketing actively conducted for a reasonable period of 
time; 
ii) that alternative visitor uses have been fully explored; 
iii) an appraisal indicating that the use is no longer viable; 
iv) evidence that the site has not been made deliberately unviable; 
v) evidence of the suitability of the site to accommodate the alternative visitor use; and 
vi) evidence that a reduction of floorspace or bed spaces in the case of visitor accommodation is the only way of improving the standard of the existing tourist facility. 
c) The Council will have regard to changes in the market, the economy and supply of visitor accommodation at the time of assessing an application. 
138 DM13 - RETAIL AND TOWN CENTRE USES Economic Policies 
 
 
 5.168 Town centres, and the hierarchy of local centres help to define places and 
add local distinctiveness. They can help to reduce the need to travel and can contribute to sustainable local communities. They also support local economies providing opportunities for independent businesses, employing and ofen owned by local people. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.169 The NPPF seeks to ensure the vitality of town centres, emphasising that planning policies and decisions should support the role that town centres play at the heart of local communities. Policies should define a network (the pattern of provision) and hierarchy (the role and relationships in the network) of town centres and promote their long term vitality and viability by allowing them to grow and diversify in a way that can respond to rapid changes in the retail and leisure industries, allows a suitable mix of uses (including housing) and reflects their distinctive characteristics. Plans should define the extent of the centre and the primary shopping areas and the range of use that will be permitted within them. A range of suitable town centre sites to meet identified needs for retail, leisure, ofice and other main town centre uses over at least a ten year period should be allocated and regular reviews undertaken. 
5.170 To help repurpose town centres and high streets, the Government has made a number of recent changes to national planning guidance and to the use classes regulations (2020). Whilst these provide greater flexibility for landowners and developers to react to changing demands and consumer behaviours this may also result in a reduced ability to manage change that could deliver unintended consequences that undermine local communities’ aspirations for their areas. 
139  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
5.171 To help repurpose town centres and high streets, the Government has made a town centre the approach is one that encourages a greater mix of uses within the 
number of recent changes to national planning guidance and to the use classes lower order centres but with retail still playing a key role. 
regulations (2020). Whilst these provide greater flexibility for landowners and 
developers to react to changing demands and consumer behaviours this may 5.175 As mentioned above, changes made at the national level have, in efect, increased 
also result in a reduced ability to manage change that could deliver unintended the ability for changes to be made between use classes within the town centres. 
consequences that undermine local communities’ aspirations for their areas. As a result the ability for the Council to control development and manage change is reduced. Despite this, the Council feels that it is important that a clear strategy 
Local Context for Worthing is provided. Where appropriate, planning policies will continue to be 
5.172 Worthing town centre, and the hierarchy of local centres, still remain at the heart used to manage change but, where this is no longer possible, it is hoped that a 
of our communities and they still ofer significant opportunities for the future. clear and robust strategy will help to influence decisions so that the right uses are 
The role of the Local Plan, alongside other strategies, is to help to ensure that steered to the right locations.. 
our centres remain vital and vibrant to serve the communities in which they are located and beyond. A separate Topic Paper sets out in greater detail the evidence Identified Floorspace Need 
and justification for the policy approach taken. 5.176 The Retail Study (2017 and 2020 Update) which forecast retail growth for convenience (food) and comparison (non-food i.e. household, fashion) goods 
5.173 The traditional role of the high street with its primarily retail focus, has changed recommends planning for 1,250sqm (net) for convenience goods floorspace 
significantly over recent years. Challenges from competition posed by online and 9,200sqm (net) for comparison goods floorspace up to 2026 (time period 
shopping, multi-channel retailing and out of centre developments will continue, as recommended by the NPPF). In addition, the evidence has identified the 
along with the more recent challenge of the Covid-19 pandemic which has further potential for new or enhanced leisure uses such as an enhanced cinema 
exacerbated the situation. In response, town centres need to have a compelling, provision. The Local Plan will support such provision provided it can be located 
diverse ofer in order to efectively compete. More positively, there is a growing within the Primary Shopping Area (PSA) or can demonstrate strong linkages and 
demand for shared leisure & retail experiences and the emergence of ‘click and integration with the PSA in order to increase the overall vitality and viability of 
collect’ is now one of the most significant drivers of growth, increasing footfall as the town centre. 
customers visit centres more frequently to pick up orders. To respond to these changes the Local Plan needs to provide the flexible framework to ensure that the The Hierarchy 
town centres continue to thrive. 5.177 To guide policies and strategies, the Local Plan defines a network and hierarchy of centres. Worthing has a wide variety of shopping centres which include the main 
5.174 The Worthing Retail and Main Town Centre Uses Study (2017 and update 2020) Worthing town centre, 3 district shopping centres and 23 local centres (8 medium 
recognises that there is an opportunity to consolidate and enhance the retail scale and 15 small scale centres). The policy approach is one that supports 
ofer in the town centre, whilst continuing to support and build upon the recent development within these centres that responds to change and is appropriate to 
140 progress in delivering better quality restaurants, cafes and bars. Outside of the their role and function.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Economic Policies 
5.178 Future changes to the role and function of these centres and the defined frontages will leisure areas. However, some of the identified floorspace needs could also be met by an 
be reviewed at regular intervals to ensure that the centres remain responsive to future improved trading performance of the existing floorspace. This could be enabled through 
changes and trends. In addition, the completion of key development sites in and the preparation of a town centre investment prospectus/town centre strategy, continued 
around the town centre may require a reconsideration of frontages / boundaries. investment in the environment and public realm, a growing collaboration between town 
centre partners, businesses and the local community, and consequent enhanced footfall. 
Worthing Town Centre 
5.179 Worthing town centre is a sub-regional centre, which performs a key economic, 5.182 When considering proposals for any new development, careful attention will need 
strategic and cultural role and is home to the main civic institutions of the borough. to be given as to how it will relate to the wider strategy for the town centre and how 
It provides the main hub for the borough’s retail and food & drink establishments the proposed uses could help to reinforce and support the identified character areas 
along with cultural activities. It is also an important location for employment uses (see below). The role of the Local Plan is to actively support the change required, 
and has a substantial residential population. In recognition of the key role that encouraging a flexibility of uses managed in a way to ensure that the right uses are 
Worthing Main Town Centre has for both the local economy and the well-being of directed to the right locations to support the overall strategy for the town centre. 
the town a Spatial Policy (SS3) for the Town Centre is included in Chapter 3. That policy captures the strategic approach for town centre uses and how the Local Plan Town Centre - Primary Shopping Area 
will work alongside other key strategies to ensure it can adapt and build resilience. 5.183 The Primary Shopping Area (PSA), where the retail uses are concentrated, is separated into Primary Shopping, Secondary Shopping Frontages and also the Town Centre 
5.180 Challenges for the town centre are to: aspire to a better quality of retail and leisure Seafront Area. The approach is justified by evidence and seeks to clarify where certain 
operator; enhance the comparison retail provision; support the specialist / niche uses are best located. The focus in the Primary Shopping Frontage (PSF) will be to 
retail ofer and café culture; and achieve stronger linkages with, and usage of the retain a significant quantum of units (65%) in retail uses and resist those uses that 
seafront. The Council has developed strategies and programmes to improve the may undermine the strategy for this area. The Secondary Shopping Frontage (SSF) is 
public realm and seafront area and is working with partners to produce a creative where a greater diversity of use is encouraged where ‘other’ uses support the wider 
programme of events and activities to bring people to the town and stay for longer, aspirations for the town centre. 
‘extending the day’ . In addition, the Council’s Investment Prospectus is being used to help promote Worthing town centre as an investment opportunity. 5.184 WIthin the Town Centre Central Seafront Area the evidence recognises the importance of this area to both the wider town centre aspirations for an active vibrant seafront and 
5.181 The town centre benefits from a number of well-positioned regeneration sites which to ensure that the seafront and town centre are one integrated and linked destination. 
can be used to address some of these challenges, including diversifying the range of The policy approach seeks to resist the loss and encourage the introduction of those 
main town centre uses, and introducing new dwellings and added vitality. This includes uses that support the Council’s wider aspirations such as: retail, drinking and eating 
three allocations (Stagecoach, Grafon and Union Place) that form the focus for new establishments, and appropriate cultural and leisure uses. Uses with closed and 
/ additional floorspace and an opportunity to create an improved retail / town centre inactive street frontages that can detract from the vibrancy of the seafront area and 
circuit taking into account the key gateways, seafront and core retail shopping and undermine the local aspirations for this important area of the town will be resisted. 
141  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
Town Centre - Character Areas 
5.185 In addition to the town centre zones summarised above the following character 
areas have been identified as part of the evidence review. An understanding of the roles played by these diferent areas of the town centre (summarised below) will assist in ensuring that any application for new development within these areas will be considered against the specific function of the character area in which development is proposed. 
• Teville Gate: Town centre gateway and a focus for non-retail ‘other’ town centre uses including hotels, health clubs, ofices and car parking. Teville Gate to remain ‘out-of-centre’ . 
• Chapel Road Cultural and Civic Quarter: Retention as cultural and civic quarter, located outside but on the edge of the Primary Shopping Area. 
• Chapel Road South / Guildbourne / Union Place South: Key town centre retail anchors, mainstream anchors, larger floor plate units, extended cinema provision and food and beverage leisure operators. To be located within a revised Primary Shopping Area following implementation. 
• Warwick Street / Brighton Road: café cultural, food and beverage, specialist/niche/independent retailing. Located within the Primary Shopping Area. 
• South Street / Montague Street / Grafon Site: Aspirational high end retailing, food and beverage, and commercial leisure quarter anchored by a leisure / entertainment ‘destination’ . Strong links between ‘Commercial Heart’ and Seafront, and located within the Primary Shopping Area. 
• Rowlands Road: Specialist / independent / niche retailing, and a local retail services ofer. Located within the Primary Shopping Area.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 Economic Policies 
5.186 Town Centre - Evening and Night-time Economy 
Bars, restaurants, cafes and similar uses can have an important role to play in the long-term success of the town centre as they can broaden the daytime attraction as well as supporting a vibrant evening economy (particularly during the ‘twilight’ period afer retail outlets close). It is a sector that is becoming increasingly important and the desire to see it improved has been reflected in a number of the Council’s strategies. . to a District Centre, but which combined, help to meet the needs of the local residents, particularly the less mobile and elderly. One of the outcomes of the Covid-19 pandemic has been a renewed appreciation for the role that local centres play within their communities. Therefore, the policy’s focus in these centres is to encourage convenient and accessible local shopping facilities to meet the day to day needs of residents and contribute to social inclusion. 
5.187 
5.188 
5.189 In general, the Council will be supportive of proposals that seek to expand operations 
beyond the usual daytime economy into evening / night-time economic opportunities. However, careful consideration will be given as to the appropriateness of certain types of activities and operational hours. The over-concentration of such uses in a centre can create significant problems. It will be important to ensure that such development cumulatively does not harm the character and function of a centre, undermine its vitality and viability, or lead to significant problems of crime, disorder and noise that would unacceptably impact on the amenity of those living and working in the area. A careful balance is required between the needs of (and impacts on) local residents with the economic benefits of promoting an enhanced evening and night-time economy. 
District Centres - Broadwater, Goring and West Durrington 
The District Centres can be described as a large group of shops, together with appropriate supporting non-retail facilities and services, which collectively form a coherent shopping centre. They are all underpinned by an important retail function, and whilst some greater flexibility can be applied to the range of uses which can be supported within these centres, it is vital to ensure that they continue to meet local residents’ essential day to day shopping needs and assist in promoting sustainable patterns of shopping in the borough. The approach is one that seeks to retain at least 50% of the units in retail uses whilst also encouraging other appropriate uses that support the role of these centres. 
Local Centres 
Local centres are made up of ‘medium scale local centres’ and ‘small scale local centres’ that ofer smaller scale convenience stores and a smaller range of facilities compared 5.190 
5.191 
5.192 
5.193 
5.194 The focus for Medium Scale Local Centres is to retain retail use but greater flexibility 
and support is given to other uses that can support the role and function of the centres and where they will enhance the vitality and viability, generates footfall and retains a shopfront display. 
Medium Scale Local Centres: Findon Valley / Tarring Road / South Farm Road / The 
Strand / Thomas A. Beckett / Ham Road / Rowlands Road / The Mulberry 
The approach for Small Scale Local Centres is one that seeks to retain a level of retail to 
meet day to day shopping needs of the local community in which the centre is located. Whilst other uses may be acceptable the key assessment will be whether the proposed use would cause harm to the function of the centre’s ability to meet day to day shopping needs. 
Small Scale Local Centres: Aldsworth Parade / Boxgrove / Broadwater Street East / 
Limbrick Corner / Lyndhurst Road / Manor Parade / Selden Parade / Alinora Crescent / Broadwater Road / Salvington Road / South Farm Road (North) / South Street Tarring / Brighton Road / Dominion Road / Downlands Parade 
Applicable to all Centres 
Drinking establishments (A4) and takeaway establishments (A5) Applications for uses such as drinking establishments and takeaway establishments in any District or Local level of centre will need to be carefully considered on their merits, taking into consideration: any negative cumulative impact of such uses; whether such uses add to the vitality and viability of the centre; and the impact on residential amenity. 
143   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
Upper floor Uses 
5.195 The eficient and efective use of the upper floors within the centres can add to 
the vitality and viability of the centres. Appropriate main town centre uses will be considered, particularly retail and residential uses. However, consideration will be given to the nature of the proposed use, hours of operation, intensity of use, accessibility and impact on nearby uses. The assessment will include a consideration as to whether the change of use of the upper floors would undermine the viability of the unit at ground floor level. 
Sequential and Impact tests 
5.196 Worthing’s Primary Shopping Area and the three sequentially preferable sites 
(Stagecoach / Union Place / Grafon sites) are the preferred locations for any retail development and other town centre uses. Any applications for retail and other main town centre uses proposed on sites not within the defined frontages would need to demonstrate compliance with the sequential and impact tests. 
5.197 The sequential test and the impact test will be applied when considering relevant proposals as set out in the NPPF. Local evidence recommends a specific local threshold to ensure that edge and out-of-centre retail development proposals are required to undertake a full and detailed impact assessment for schemes of above 500 sqm (gross). Planning applications for main town centre uses need to be accompanied by an appropriate level of information so as to enable the council to determine whether their impact on existing centres would be acceptable. There may also be need to control the type of activities, hours of operation etc. on any permitted out of centre development to ensure there is no adverse impact on existing centres. 
5.198 The Council will continue to carefully monitor the change in all the centres across the borough and where it is considered necessary and appropriate to protect the integrity of the centres and the hierarchy of centres it may consider the removal of 
144 permitted development rights (through the use of Article 4 Directions). DM13 - RETAIL AND TOWN CENTRE USES 
a) The Local Plan will support the vitality and viability of Worthing’s town centres by seeking to meet the identified floorspace needs for retail and other town centre uses up to 2026. 
The Hierarchy 
The Council will work with organisations and the local community to identify, 
protect and enhance the following hierarchy of vital and viable town, district and local centres. 
b) Changes of use and redevelopments within town, district and local centres 
will be carefully controlled to ensure that they support, rather than detract from, the successful functioning of the centres and their ability to meet local needs. All such proposals will be required to: 
i) Make a positive contribution to the vitality, viability and diversity of the centre; 
ii) Not unacceptably impact on daytime footfall; 
iii) Maintain a strong role for the centre in providing a varied range of 
convenience goods and meeting other day-to-day needs; 
iv) Positively restore and/or enhance the character and appearance of the frontage; 
v) Maintain the continuity of active frontages; and 
vi) Be of a scale and type of use appropriate to the size and function of the centre, or part of the centre concerned;  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Economic Policies 
vii) Ensure that any proposal will cause no significant adverse effects for the 
occupiers of neighbouring properties; 
viii) Ensure that that there will be no severe negative impact on existing parking arrangements; 
ix) Retain or re-provides ancillary facilities within individual premises, (such as loading, storage, staff or administrative facilities), unless it is demonstrated that these are no longer necessary for appropriate suture use of the premises. 
Worthing Town Centre 
c) Proposals for development in the Town Centre will be assessed against 
policy SS3 - Town Centre. 
d)  Primary Shopping Area (PSA) - a wider range of main town centre uses will be encouraged to bring people into the town and generate footfall throughout the day. In considering the most appropriate locations for proposed uses, the following ground floor frontages within the ‘Primary Shopping Area’ will apply: 
i) Primary Shopping Frontage (PSF) - will be the focus for retail uses within the 
centre and the loss of retail uses will be resisted to ensure that the centre retains its role as a sub-regional shopping centre and meets the shopping needs of the towns population. Uses such as Drinking Establishments (A4) and takeaways (A5) together with other uses that would detract from the overall shopping function of the frontage will be resisted; 
ii) Secondary Shopping Frontage (SSF) - a wider range of uses will be supported provided they are active uses with active shop fronts that will enhance the vitality and viability and complement existing uses. However, uses such as takeaways (A5) and uses with closed and inactive street frontages will be resisted. iii) Town Centre Seafront Area - proposals that help to maintain and enhance an active and vibrant seafront will be supported. Eating, drinking and shopping together with appropriate cultural and leisure uses will be retained and encouraged. However, uses such as takeaways (A5) and uses with closed and inactive street frontages will be resisted. particularly where they cause or contribute to an over-concentration of such uses. 
e) The identified Town Centre Character Areas will help guide development in the town centre to the most appropriate locations by assessing applications against the specific role and function of the character area in which development is proposed. 
f) Proposals that help develop and enhance the evening and night-time economy will be supported in the town centre where the operation of such activities can be controlled to address residential amenity implications and can demonstrate that such uses will add to the vitality and viability of the centre. 
District Centres and Local Centres 
g) The policy approach seeks to encourage convenient and accessible local 
shopping facilities that are of a scale appropriate to the role and function of the centre to meet day to day needs of residents, and contribute to social inclusion. The following approach will be applied: 
i) District and Medium Scale Local Centres - seek to retain a core of retail 
uses of at least 50% of the units in the whole centre, to ensure the role and function of the level of centre is maintained. Allow for uses such as financial and service and restaurant and cafes of an appropriate scale for the role and function of the centre. Other uses will be supported where it can be demonstrated that the use will enhance the vitality and viability of the centre in which it is proposed, generates footfall and retains an active shopfront with a shopfront display. Consideration will be given to 
145  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
applications for other ‘main town centre uses’ of an appropriate scale within the defined centres on their individual merits; 
ii)  in Small Scale Local Centres seek to retain primarily retail use and resist the introduction of other uses where they will cause demonstrable harm to the centre’s ability to meet day to day shopping needs of the local community. Applications for other ‘main town centre uses’ are generally not encouraged due to the primary role and function of these local centres and as such will be resisted. 
iii) in all District and Local Centres drinking establishments (A4) and takeaways (A5) uses will be considered on their merit, taking into consideration any negative cumulative impact of such uses on the centre, whether such uses add to the vitality and viability of the centre and the impact on residential amenity. 
Applicable to all Centres 
h) Conditions will be applied to any new development where it is relevant and 
appropriate to do so, in order to control the proposed uses and allow for a managed approach to future proposals for change of use, in line with the Council’s aspirations and strategies for the area. 
Upper Floor Uses 
i) The efficient and effective use of the upper floors that add to the vitality and 
viability of centres will be encouraged subject to: 
i) the proposed use of the upper floor will not undermine the viability of 
the unit on the ground floor particularly those retail uses; ii) consideration will be given to the nature of the use, its appropriateness to the centre in which it is proposed, hours of operation, intensity of use and impact on nearby uses. 
Sequential and Impacts Tests 
j) Where development of main town centre uses is proposed on the edge of 
or outside of centres, the sequential approach as set out in the NPPF will be applied. 
k) Where retail, leisure or office development is proposed outside centres, an impact assessment will be required when development is above the following thresholds: 
● retail, or a use that could change to retail without planning permission, 
over 500 sqm (gross); 
● leisure and office uses will be subject to the NPPF threshold - 2500sqm.
 l) Where necessary conditions and / or legal agreements will be applied to any permission accepted out of defined centres, including defining the nature and extent of the proposed use to ensure no significant adverse impact on existing designated centres. 
146  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Economic Policies 
DM14 - DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
5.199 High quality digital infrastructure is crucial to successful business locations and 
also plays a vital role in enhancing the provision of local community facilities and services. Well connected places attract modern businesses and can create the conditions for new clusters of digital and creative businesses to emerge. Access to high quality digital infrastructure can also facilitate social inclusion, enabling everyone (providing they have the necessary skills and equipment) to take up employment, education and social opportunities, as well as access a wide range of services that are increasingly provided online. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.200 The NPPF recognises that digital infrastructure is important for economic growth and social well-being. Local Planning Authorities are required to support the expansion of electronic communications networks, including next generation mobile technology and full-fibre broadband connections and through the Local Plan, should set out how high quality digital infrastructure is expected to be delivered and upgraded. 
5.201 The Covid-19 pandemic has shown that digital connectivity is critical to societal resilience and business continuity in times of crisis. It has been demonstrated that a large percentage of the population can work from home and it is expected that this will become more commonplace going forward. As more people communicate, shop, learn and work online, it is important that our digital infrastructure is capable of supporting this increased demand for broadband, mobile and wireless technologies. 
5.202 As of February 2018, 95% of UK premises had access to superfast broadband. This has a download speed of at least 24 megabits per second (Mbps) and is mainly delivered through part-fibre, part-copper Fibre-to-the-Cabinet (FTTC) technology. Whilst superfast broadband is suficient for most individual needs, as the demand for data services grows, national policy focus has shifed towards rolling out gigabit-capable, full fibre broadband, which also supports the delivery of high capacity mobile broadband networks such as 5G. Full-fibre technology, also called Fibre-to-the-Premises (FTTP) or Fibre-to-the-Home (FTTH) is capable of download speeds of over 1 gigabit per second (Gbps) and is currently the fastest and most reliable broadband technology. 
5.203 In March 2020, the Government stated their intention to amend Building Regulations to require all new build developments to have the physical infrastructure to support gigabit-capable connections. At the time of writing, Building Regulations remain unchanged; however, the Local Plan policy has regard for this. Adopting this approach will also prevent the need for fibre retrofitting programmes in the future which ofen has significant cost implications. 
Local Context 
5.204 The Council is working with business and Government partners to drive investment in digital infrastructure. There are a number of projects, strategies and plans that the Council supports which aim to ensure that the digital infrastructure in the region is fit to drive growth. This includes the development of gigabit capable full-fibre infrastructure that will help to future-proof broadband services and support the delivery of 4G and 5G mobile technology. 
5.205 The Council is currently working in partnership with West Sussex County Council to install full-fibre technology to Adur and Worthing Council assets as part of the Gigabit Coast Project. This supports the Coast to Capital strategic priority to ‘Improve Network Digital Connectivity’ and will create eighty new public access points which will help to enhance the digital public realm, improve visitor experience and increase town centre footfall and dwell time. 
5.206 The Digital Infrastructure policy seeks to strike a balance between protecting the borough’s environment and ensuring Worthing has the transformational infrastructure needed to deliver continually improving digital connectivity. Whilst some telecommunications work requires planning permission, most fall within 
147  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
the category of ‘permitted development’ where only prior approval is required, 
a less prescriptive process where the local planning authority can only consider the siting and appearance of the apparatus. The relevant parts of this policy will therefore be applied to the consideration of full applications and prior approval applications as appropriate. Any works that are subject to Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 (as amended) will be subject to the limitations and conditions specified. 
DM14 - DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
a) The Council supports the expansion and improvement of digital infrastructure. 
Applicants will be required to actively demonstrate that they have considered broadband and mobile connectivity within their proposals for new housing, employment and retail developments. 
Fibre to Premises 
b) All residential developments and all new employment generating 
development will enable Fibre-to-the-Premises (FTTP) at first occupation. 
c) All new dwellings, including those provided via building conversions must be designed and constructed in a way that enables them to meet or exceed the Government’s Building Regulations relating to provision of high speed FTTP infrastructure in the home or any subsequent national equivalent standard should the Building Regulations and/or national policy be reviewed in the future. 
d) Where it can be demonstrated that FTTP is not practicable due to demonstrated special circumstances, then alternative technological options (for example Superfast Fibre to the Cabinet or Fixed Wireless Access) would need to be provided. For such schemes the Council’s expectation is that provision in the form of ducting and other necessary infrastructure for the future delivery of FTTP will be provided, where practicable. 
Telecommunications Infrastructure 
e) All residential developments and all new employment generating development 
should consider mobile telecommunications requirements of the development proposals to ensure and demonstrate that there is sufficient coverage. 
New Telecommunications Infrastructure 
f) Relevant proposals should demonstrate that: i) the installation is the minimum required for the efficient operation of the  network; 
ii) all opportunities to make the most efficient use of existing 
telecommunication site have been explored fully such as: mast sharing, use of existing buildings or structures; 
iii) no other suitable sites are available. 
g) All relevant proposals (including prior approvals) will need to submit: 
i) evidence that the proposal is the least environmentally harmful option; 
ii) a statement that self-certifies that the cumulative exposure will not exceed 
the guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionising Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). 
h) The location and appearance of the proposed apparatus and associated structures should seek to minimise impact on the visual amenity, character or appearance of the surrounding area/host building. 
i) Conditions or planning obligations may be used to secure landscaping as well as restoration of the site if operation ceases. 
148 DM15 - SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT AND ACTIVE TRAVEL Economic Policies 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 5.207 Road congestion and related pollution (air and noise) is already a significant 
problem in the borough so it is vital that a shif to active travel modes is achieved, sustainable transport measures are promoted and the potential impacts of new development are mitigated. To achieve this, the Council will promote opportunities for walking and cycling and seek to improve connectivity through the delivery of a more integrated and sustainable transport network. 
What the policy needs to do 
5.208 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to consider transport issues as part of the plan-making process to ensure that the potential impacts of development on transport networks can be addressed and that opportunities to promote accessible walking, cycling and public transport modes are identified and pursued. 
5.209 The Government has made considerable progress on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the UK following adoption of the Climate Change Act 2008. However, in the last 10 years, transport has become the largest greenhouse gas emitting sector, representing over a quarter of emissions. These emissions need to be reduced urgently to ensure that the UK meets its targets to tackle air pollution and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve this, developments are encouraged to provide charging infrastructure for electric vehicles. 
5.210 The Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to improve facilities for walking and cycling. The Department for Transport recorded significant increases in bike use and acknowledged that this is a real opportunity to deliver a lasting long term transformative change towards sustainable and safe active travel.  The Government is clear that local authorities should monitor and evaluate any temporary measures they install, with a view to making them permanent, and embedding a long-term shif to active travel as we move from restart to recovery.  The Local Plan seeks to build on this impetus with new development afording priority to establishing and improving walking and cycling networks. 
149   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 Development Management Policies 5 
Economic Policies 
Local Context 
5.211 The Council’s economic strategy seeks to deliver reliable, afordable, eficient 
transport that supports growth and productivity.  To achieve this aim the policy also needs to respond to the key outcomes of the Worthing Local Plan Transport Study and reflect: the West Sussex Transport Plan (2011-2026); the West Sussex Walking & Cycling Strategy (2016 - 2026); and the Adur and Worthing Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan (2020). 
West Sussex Transport Plan 
5.212 The West Sussex Transport Plan (2011-2026) provides strategic direction for 
transport planning within Worthing, focusing on the objectives of promoting economic growth; tackling climate change; providing access to services and improving safety, security and health.  It identifies a number of key issues for Worthing which are summarised below. 
5.213 Road congestion during peak periods afects many parts of the highway network throughout the borough, disrupting journey times and causing poor air quality.  Particular problems are on main routes into the town centre (A259 and A24) and along the A27, where the lack of safe crossing points causes community severance. In addition, level crossings on the West Coastway railway line contribute to the levels of congestion, especially during peak periods, disrupting journey times and increasing trafic pollution.  
5.214 The negative impact of car-centric lifestyles reduces opportunities for social and inclusive interaction as well as impacting on health and wellbeing.  It is essential that accessibility issues are recognised and addressed through the provision of safe, inclusive and connected transport routes.  
5.215 There is a reasonably good public transport network throughout the borough, although there are some limitations with the current rail services reaching 
150 capacity during peak times.  There is a need for improved services and increased opportunities for interchange between the public transport network and all other modes of transport. 
5.216 The West Sussex Transport Plan aims to tackle the identified transport issues as and when funding becomes available.  Overarching objectives are to ensure that all new developments support the use of sustainable modes of transport (‘smarter choices’) and that the eficiency of local transport networks is improved.  Among a number of initiatives, the Transport Plan highlights the following key aims: 
• to work with Highways England and other partners to develop and deliver a package of major improvements to the A27 to reduce congestion, improve safety and enhance community cohesion; 
• to increase public transport capacity and quality, particularly on key north-south and east-west arterial routes; 
• to work with rail operators to improve integration with other modes of transport; 
• manage existing Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) by developing and implementing Action Plans while managing trafic and development pressures to avoid declaration of further AQMAs; 
• ensure parking provision at new development provides enough spaces to accommodate the expected number of vehicles and cycles at the site. 
Sustainable Transport & Active Travel 
5.217 A key action of ‘Sustainable AW’ is shifing to sustainable transport and improving air quality.  To achieve this, the Local Plan seeks to locate and design development and supporting infrastructure, to facilitate active and sustainable travel, to minimise the need to travel by car.  This policy seeks to ensure that sustainable forms of transport are considered in the first instance, with the provision of  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Economic Policies 
facilities that will encourage walking and cycling to be the natural choice for 
shorter journeys. Government’s Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy (2017) and more recently the Adur and Worthing Local Cycling & Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP).  
5.218 
5.219 
5.220 
5.221 Worthing Borough Council supports the aims to encourage the use of sustainable 
transport alternatives to the car that are established within the West Sussex Transport Plan and West Sussex Walking and Cycling Strategy.  Meeting these objectives will help to reduce congestion, improve health and wellbeing, and deliver economic benefits.  Rather than restrict car use, the aim is to promote and enhance sustainable transport options to help achieve a shif in people’s travel behaviour. 
Whilst this is an aspiration for all local authorities, the relatively compact and flat 
nature of the borough combined with the presence of the England Coast Path National Trail and National Route 2 of the National Cycle Network (NCN2) means that there are great opportunities to enhance sustainable transport options within the town.  Opportunities should also be sought to improve access to the countryside and coast. 
A range of sustainable transport measures improving public transport and 
enhancing walking/cycle paths will be required from developers to reduce car dependence.  For some larger schemes, it may be appropriate to use S106 agreements to ensure the delivery of site specific transport improvements that will help to ensure that the impacts of that particular development are mitigated.  Depending on the type, size and location of a proposed development, Travel Plans and Transport Assessments may also be required in line with the National Planning Policy Framework and West Sussex County Council guidance. 
Local Cycling & Walking Infrastructure Plan (2020) 
One way in which the West Sussex Transport Plan seeks to encourage sustainable travel is by improving the existing cycle and pedestrian network.  This aim is 5.222 
5.223 
5.224 The LCWIP work, which was prepared by the Adur & Worthing Cycling and Walking 
Action Group, aims to create a place whereby walking and cycling becomes the preferred way of moving around. It seeks to increase the uptake of cycling and walking by identifying preferred routes and core zones for further development; and a prioritised programme of infrastructure improvements.  These key principles have been embedded in the policy below and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan provides more information on the schemes identified for Worthing.  Any developments sited on these routes and/or in core zones should deliver improvements aligned to the LCWIP. 
Parking & design standards 
Car parking standards aim to ensure that parking provided to serve new development is appropriate to the type and location of the development and does not encourage unnecessary car travel.  When considering applications, proposals must comply with the criteria contained in Worthing Borough Council’s and West Sussex County Council’s planning and guidance documents relevant to design, car cycle parking and electric vehicle charging points, or any other appropriate national standard.  To help reduce parking pressures, particularly for sites in and around the town centre, the Council will consider whether a lower level of provision might be appropriate and will support the use and promotion of car clubs. 
Cycling design standards are to be used with the intention to provide high 
quality infrastructure; not to justify the minimum quality possible. Moreover, the application of design standards must be based on a detailed assessment of the needs of all Non-Motorised Users and must take into account objectives to significantly increase the number of cycling trips and to improve safety. 
supported by the West Sussex Walking and Cycling Strategy (2016-2026), the 
151   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 Development Management Policies 5 
Impact on existing transport network 
5.225 When considering new development, it is necessary to consider its potential 
impact on the existing transport network, how it links to the network, impacts on highway safety and the provision for movement, servicing and parking.  The Worthing Local Plan Transport Study provides an assessment of the impact of potential housing and employment development on the transport network and identifies appropriate mitigation and improvement measures.  The study indicates that the development of the proposed Local Plan allocations can be accommodated if a suitable package of mitigation measures is provided. This package consists of capacity improvements to the highway network where appropriate to do so, road safety enhancements where required and sustainable transport improvements to reduce demand for the private car. 
DM15 - SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT & ACTIVE TRAVEL 
In order to manage the anticipated growth in demand for travel, development proposals which promote an improved and integrated transport network, with a re-balancing in favour of non-car modes as a means of access to jobs, homes, services and facilities, will be encouraged and supported. 
a) Worthing Borough Council will promote and support development that 
prioritises active travel by walking, cycling, Non-Motorised User routes and public transport, and reduces the proportion of journeys made by car.  This will help to achieve a rebalancing of transport in favour of sustainable modes by:
 i) ensuring that new development is located in sustainable locations with 
good access to schools, shops, jobs and other key services by walking, cycling and public transport in order to reduce the need to travel by car; ii) ensuring that the design and layout of new development prioritises the needs of pedestrians, cyclists and users of public transport over ease of access by the motorist; 
iii) ensuring that new development minimises the need to travel and, where appropriate, incorporates measures to mitigate for any transport impacts which may arise from that development; 
iv) requiring new development to provide for an appropriate level of cycle, car parking and electric vehicle space allocations that takes into consideration the impact of development upon on-street parking and accords with West Sussex County Council standards / guidance; 
v) promoting the provision of, and participation in, car club schemes; 
vi) requiring development which generates a significant demand for travel, and/or is likely to have other transport implications to: 
● be supported by a Transport Assessment / Transport Statement and   
sustainable Travel Plan (in line with West Sussex County Council guidance and the NPPF); 
● contribute to improved sustainable transport infrastructure, including the provision of safe and reliable sustainable transport modes; and 
● provide facilities and measures to support sustainable travel modes. 
b) The local planning authority will work with West Sussex County Council and other relevant agencies to encourage and support measures that promote improved accessibility, create safer roads, reduce the environmental impact of traffic movements, enhance the pedestrian environment, or facilitate highway improvements.  In particular, the local planning authority will: 
152  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
153 Economic Policies 
i) support the expansion and improvement of public transport services; 
ii) encourage improvements to existing rail services, new or enhanced 
connections or interchanges between bus and rail services, and improvements to the quality and quantity of car and cycle parking at railway stations; 
iii) support the development of a network of high quality walking and cycling routes throughout the borough, including those identified in the Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan, including improved access across the A27, and railway line and better connectivity with the South Downs National Park and green infrastructure network; 
iv) support the development of key arterial cycle routes at: National Cycle Network Route 2; George V Avenue and Sea Lane and A24 Worthing Town Centre to Washington; phase 1 Findon Valley to Findon Village as identified in the WSCC Local Transport Investment Programme 
v) ensure new development contributes to the mitigation of air pollution, particularly in Air Quality Management Areas.  New development should be located and designed to incorporate facilities for electric vehicle charging points, thereby extending the current network; 
vi) pursue ways of managing the impact of HGVs and implement measures as appropriate; 
vii) support improvements to the road network including the A259 and A27 and, as identified in the Worthing Local Plan Transport Study, provide appropriate mitigation measures to address capacity issues at a number of key junctions and road safety impacts on identified road links.  154 
Worthing Local Plan5  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment DM16 - SUSTAINABLE DESIGN Emergency in July 2019 and have committed to 
Policies 5.226 The NPPF makes it clear that mitigating and adapting 
to climate change, including moving to a low carbon economy is a core planning objective. In line with national planning policy, development should deliver radical reductions in carbon emissions. 
5.227 The Strategic Policy on Climate Change sets out the overarching policy direction for development in Worthing in relation to climate change. This policy builds on this and helps to respond to the Climate Emergency declaration by setting minimum requirements that developments must meet to move towards zero carbon development, prevent overheating and minimising waste. Related policy DM21 (Water Quality and Sustainable Water Use) includes minimum requirements for water eficiency. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
Towards Zero Carbon Development 
5.228 The Climate Change Act 2008, commits the UK to bring all greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. The NPPF expects the planning system to support the transition to a low carbon future in a changing climate, and to contribute to radical reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. It requires plans to adopt proactive strategies to mitigate and adapt to climate change in line with the Climate Change Act 2008. 
5.229 Adur & Worthing Councils’ declared a Climate becoming carbon neutral by 2030. A Carbon Neutral Study for Adur and Worthing (2020) found buildings were the largest source of emissions in 2017 accounting for 67% of direct and indirect emissions. Building related energy consumption is therefore a significant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions and this policy is one way in which these impacts can be reduced. 
5.230 National planning guidance makes clear that Local Planning Authorities can set energy performance standards in their Local Plan for new housing or the adaptation of buildings to provide dwellings that are higher than the building regulations, but only up to the equivalent of Level 4 of the Code for Sustainable Homes (approximately 19% above current Building Regulations). A 19% improvement should be achieved entirely through energy eficiency measures (such as enhanced insulation, glazing, airtightness and high eficiency heating and hot water heat recovery). 
5.231 The Government consulted in 2019 on the Future Homes Standard which set out two options to uplif energy eficiency standards and requirements by either 20% (in line with the current Local Plan guidance) or by 31% which would be delivered through the installation of carbon saving technology such as solar panels and lower fabric standards than the 20% approach. The government indicated that Option 2 (31%) was its preferred option as it would deliver more carbon savings and result in lower bills  
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
for the householder and, in line with this emerging approach, the Council requires that 
all major developments seek to meet this target. 
5.232 The policy requires that the approach taken to achieve this is in line with the energy hierarchy. All development should follow the energy hierarchy to contribute to achieving zero carbon emissions, which in order of importance seeks to: 
1) 
2) 3) 4) minimise energy demand; maximise energy eficiency; utilise renewable energy; utilise low carbon energy; 
5) and only then use other energy sources. 
Improving Energy Performance 
5.233 An Energy Performance Certificate (EPC) is required for all properties for sale and 
rent in the UK. It gives an estimate of energy use, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and fuel costs, to provide an overall energy eficiency rating. 
5.234 Fuel Poverty is a growing issue that can negatively impact on people’s health and well-being. In Worthing, 3,923 households equating to over 14% of households in Selden, Central and Heene Wards were estimated to be in fuel poverty in 2014. 
5.235 The Government’s Clean Growth Strategy committed all fuel poor homes to be upgraded to EPC Band C by 2030 and set out their aspiration for as many homes as possible to be EPC Band C by 2035 where practical, cost-efective and afordable, and the Government has consulted on a preferred target for all non-domestic rented properties to achieve an EPC Band B by 2030. In Worthing in 2019, the majority of EPC certificates lodged on the register for existing homes were rated D compared with B rating for new dwellings. 
5.236 It is accepted that it may be challenging to achieve the EPC target where new units or dwellings are created in existing buildings. Where it is not cost efective for non-domestic properties or it is not practical, cost efective or afordable for homes to meet the minimum requirements applicants should submit justification of this along with their EPC. This includes Listed Buildings and those in Conservation Areas where meeting the EPC target would unacceptably alter their character or appearance. Historic England has also published a series of guidance relating to energy eficiency and historic buildings and relevant applications should have regard to this. 
5.237 Demonstrating Sustainability The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) is an international scheme that provides certification of the sustainability performance of individual buildings, communities and infrastructure projects. A certified project, even to a ‘Good’ level, will be a better quality and more sustainable project than one meeting regulatory minimums. 
5.238 BREEAM UK New Construction 2018 applies to new non-domestic buildings. The BREEAM Communities International standard aims to integrate sustainable design into the masterplanning of medium to large scale developments, including new communities and regeneration projects. Information will be required to be submitted at the planning application stage demonstrating the required standard is achievable. Developments are strongly encouraged to aim to exceed the minimum standard. 
5.239 Preventing Overheating Due to global warming, summer temperatures in all areas are predicted to rise. This is particularly relevant in urban areas due to high levels of hard surfaces that absorb heat, changes in land surfaces, waste heat outputs and a lack of shade. 
155   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment Policies 
Overheating is an increasingly important issue for development as the climate 
warms and the frequency of heatwaves increase threatening public health. 
5.240 The layout, orientation and design of buildings including landscaping are important to minimise energy use and create healthy living and working environments. Passive solar heating during winter and passive cooling through summer to avoid overheating can be enhanced through sustainable design measures. In addition, multi-functional green infrastructure such as green roofs and walls, roof gardens, trees and swales can be used to provide urban greening, shading and cooling to help prevent overheating. 
5.241 Development proposals should follow the cooling hierarchy to reduce potential overheating and reliance on air conditioning systems. They can do this through the passive cooling hierarchy: 
Passive Cooling Hierarchy 
1. Passive design to minimise unwanted heat gain and manage heat – for example by 
using building orientation, shading, a well-insulated and air tight building envelope, high levels of thermal mass and energy efficient lighting and equipment. 
2. Passive/natural cooling – using outside air to ventilate and cool a building without the use of a powered system, for example by maximising cross ventilation (single aspect developments are generally discouraged), passive stack ventilation, night-time cooling and/or ground coupled passive cooling. 
3. Mixed mode cooling with local mechanical ventilation/cooling provided where required to supplement the above measures using (in order of preference): 
a. Low energy mechanical cooling (e.g. fan-powered ventilation with/ 
without evaporative cooling or ground coupled cooling) 
156 b. Air conditioning (not a preferred approach as these systems are energy intensive) 
4. Full building mechanical ventilation/cooling system using (in order of preference): 
a. Low energy mechanical cooling 
b. Air conditioning 
Materials - Sustainable and Low Carbon 
5.242 In the building life cycle embodied carbon is associated with the non-operational 
phase of the project. This includes emissions caused by extraction, manufacture, transportation, assembly, maintenance, replacement, deconstruction, disposal and end of life aspects of the materials and systems that make up a building. As we build increasingly energy eficient buildings, the proportion of the building’s life cycle carbon that comes from the embodied carbon becomes more significant. 
5.243 Because of the embodied carbon impacts from new development, where possible, developers should seek to retrofit energy and carbon reductions measures to existing buildings rather than demolish and rebuild them. It is also possible to minimise the use of resources through reducing waste, minimising materials required, and using materials with a low embodied carbon content. This can be achieved by focusing on the sustainable (re)use of existing materials as far as possible before considering introducing new materials. 
Minimising Waste 
5.244 Development ofen results in the production of a significant quantity of waste during 
demolition, construction and for the duration of its use. Developers should reduce the construction waste arising from new development and re-use and recycle as much material as possible, following the waste hierarchy. Similarly, in demolition developers should:  
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 Environment Policies 
1) 2) prioritise the on-site re-use of demolition materials; recycle materials on site where feasible, then of site; 
3) recovery (energy); and 
4) the least preferred option, disposal to landfill. 
DM16 - SUSTAINABLE DESIGN 
a) All development (excluding householder applications) will be required 
to achieve the relevant minimum standards below unless superseded by national planning policy or Building Regulations. Applications for major development must be supported by a Sustainability Statement demonstrating that the minimum standards are met and where possible exceeded. All development is encouraged to exceed these minimum standards where possible. 
Towards Zero Carbon Development 
b) All new build housing will achieve a minimum  20% Co2 reduction through 
energy efficiency measures, and where achievable a 31% reduction in CO2 based on the 2013 Edition of the 2010 Building Regulations (Part L). Developers will be expected to provide evidence of the level of carbon reduction achieved in the dwellings through submission of SAP calculation reports at the design and built stages. 
c) All major developments will need to achieve a 31% reduction (see above) and demonstrate how the design and layout of the development has sought to maximise reductions in carbon emissions in line with the energy hierarchy. d) All new build housing should seek to achieve an A rating (with a minimum expectation of B rating) Energy Performance Certificate. New housing  should achieve a minimum of a ‘C’ rating Energy Performance Certificate. 
e) All non-domestic properties (including those created through conversions) should achieve a ‘B’ rating Energy Performance Certificate. 
f) Non residential development of at least 1,000 sqm floorspace and residential or mixed use development consisting of more than 200 residential units should achieve BREEAM New Construction or BREEAM Communities ‘Very Good’ as a minimum rating based on the latest BREEAM scheme. 
Preventing Overheating 
g) All new development should incorporate design measures where appropriate 
to minimise excessive solar gain and maximise opportunities for passive cooling through natural ventilation and other passive means to avoid contributing to the urban heat island effect and reduce vulnerability to overheating. Multifunctional green infrastructure should be integrated into public spaces to provide urban cooling and access to shady outdoor space. 
h) Major development proposals should reduce potential overheating and reliance on energy intensive air conditioning systems and demonstrate this in accordance with the cooling hierarchy. 
Minimising Waste 
i) All development will be required to follow the waste hierarchy to minimise the 
amount of waste disposed to landfill and incorporate facilities that enable and encourage high rates of recycling and re-use of waste and materials. 
j) New development should minimise construction waste and maximise the recycling and re-use of demolition materials. 
157  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment Policies 
DM17 - ENERGY 
5.245 The NPPF and Planning Practice Guidance requires planning policies to maximise 
and promote renewable and low carbon energy development, and deliver radical reductions in carbon emissions through development. This policy builds on the measures in DM16 (Sustainable Design) that aim to reduce demand for energy through high fabric eficiency standards and passive design etc by requiring developments to consider the most eficient supply for heating and supporting Low or Zero Carbon (LZC) energy generation. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.246 The Government is investigating the best ways to decarbonise the national grid and cut carbon emissions from heat. Heating and hot water for buildings account for 40% of UK energy use and 20% of greenhouse gas emissions. The Climate Change Committee estimates that district heating can meet 20% of domestic heating and hot water needs by 2030. The Clean Growth Strategy (2017) includes policies to roll out low carbon heating, and phase out the installation of high carbon fossil fuel heating. 
5.247 High density and mixed use developments provide ideal conditions for successful, viable and eficient application of decentralised energy technologies, heat networks and smart grids as a way of ensuring clean, afordable, secure energy into the future. Government ambition on this is clearly set out in the Clean Growth Strategy 2017 and Industrial Strategy 2017. 
5.248 All proposals for major development must demonstrate that the heating and cooling systems have been selected in accordance with the heating and cooling hierarchy as set out below. The Council will require relevant developments to submit a feasibility assessment as part of their sustainability statement to provide a rationale for the chosen heating/cooling system. 
158 Heating and Cooling Hierarchy 
System 
1. Connection to existing heating/cooling network (most preferred) 
2. Site-wide heating/cooling network 
3. Building-wide heating/cooling network 
4. Individual heating/cooling systems (least preferred) 
Technology 1. Renewable/waste energy sources - such as biomass, heat pumps, solar, 
thermal (most preferred) 
2. Low carbon technologies (such as gas-CHP) 
3. Conventional systems (such as gas or direct electric (least preferred). 
Local Context 
5.249 Adur and Worthing Councils through their declaration of a climate emergency and the UK100 Cities Pledge have committed to being carbon neutral by 2030 and 100% clean energy by 2050. Therefore all energy use must be delivered through zero carbon sources by that date. To help meet these objectives, the development of renewable, low carbon, or decentralised energy schemes will be supported and community initiatives encouraged where proposals are for appropriate locations. 
5.250 To reduce carbon emissions, all development resulting in new housing or major non-residential development should incorporate renewable and LZC energy production equipment to meet at least 10% of predicted total energy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
requirements. Such energy generation could take the form of photovoltaic energy, 
solar-powered, heat pumps and geo-thermal water heating. This should only be calculated afer: • Cluster C: Northbrook College 
• Cluster D: NHS Salvington Campus 
• the scheme is compliant with Part L 2013 Building Regulations; • Cluster E: Centenary House 
5.251 
5.252 
5.253 • reductions from energy eficiency measures have been calculated and 
deducted through compliance with DM16; and 
• reductions achieved by complying with the heating and cooling hierarchy by connecting to a heat network have been calculated and deducted. 
Any proposals for new wind turbines will be considered against the NPPF. The West Sussex Sustainable Energy Study (2009) shows the technical potential for wind energy generation in Worthing is very small and therefore no areas have been allocated as suitable for wind energy development in this Local Plan. 
Proposals for solar farms should carefully consider and mitigate any landscape 
and visual impact particularly on the South Downs National Park, as well as any potential efects on heritage and ecology. It is likely that planning conditions will be used to ensure installations are ultimately removed and land is restored when no longer in use. 
The Worthing Heatmapping Report (2020) found that there are 6 potential cluster 
areas where there is enhanced opportunity for heat networks. (a link to the report and related maps can be found on the SustainableAW pages of the Council’s website). The clusters identified are: 5.254 
5.255 • Cluster F: Worthing College Campus 
• Cluster G: Northbrook College Central 
Worthing Borough Council is pursuing the development of the Worthing Town 
Centre Heat Network (Cluster A) for the Worthing Civic Quarter and town centre. Sites within this cluster will be required to connect. Where proposed to connect, this will count as appropriate towards policy requirements for energy eficiency and on-site renewables. 
Major development within the heat network opportunity cluster areas will be 
required to connect to district heating networks where they exist, or will be expected to maximise opportunities for the development of a future district heating network. Where no heat network is in place, development proposals should be designed to be connection ready. Where a developer is building their own heat network it should be designed to be easily extendable to serve neighbouring developments. To be considered connection ready applicants will be expected to demonstrate that all specifications below have been met: 
• all buildings must use a centralised communal low temperature wet heating system rather than individual gas boilers or electric heating. 
• Cluster A: Worthing Town Centre 
• Cluster B: Durrington-on-Sea • all buildings must allow adequate plant room space to allow for connection at a later date. Plant rooms must be situated to consider potential future pipe routes. 
159 Development Management Policies5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 Environment Policies 
• the developer must identify and safeguard a pipe route to allow connection 
between the building and the highway or identified network route where available. 
• the developer must not in any other way compromise or prevent the potential connection. 
5.256 Where this is not possible, proposals should be submitted with a viability / deliverability assessment, to justify departure from the heating hierarchy. Assessments must: 
• be compliant with the CIBSE Heat Networks Code of Practice for the UK. 
• be completed by a suitably qualified individual. 
• include baseline energy consumption and carbon emissions calculations for regulated and non-regulated energy use. 
• compare the economies of a heat network solution (this includes the cost of a communal boiler system, heat meters, heat interface units and plate heat exchanger) against an individual heating scenario (such as individual gas boilers alongside an equivalent level of micro-renewables that would be required to meet energy eficiency requirements). 
• provide a breakdown of the cost estimates and assumptions used for the assessment. 
• include linear heat density calculations for the site. 
• present Internal Rate of Return (IRR), capital expenditure, cost and carbon savings as outputs. DM17 - ENERGY 
a) All new housing and major non-residential development should incorporate renewable and low carbon energy production equipment to meet at least 10% of predicted total energy requirements (after Co2 reductions from energy efficiency measures). 
b) All proposals for major development must demonstrate that the heating and cooling systems have been selected in accordance with the heating and cooling hierarchy and that the lowest carbon solution that is feasible is used. Applicants will be required to submit a feasibility assessment to provide a rationale for the chosen heating/cooling system. 
c) Major development within areas identified as heat network opportunity clusters, will be required to connect to district heating networks where they exist, or will be expected to maximise opportunities for the development of a future district heating network. Where this is not possible, a viability assessment should be submitted to justify departure from the heating hierarchy. 
d) The development of renewable, low carbon, or decentralised energy schemes will be supported and community initiatives encouraged where proposals: 
i) are located appropriately and do not cause an unacceptable impact 
on surrounding uses or the local environment, landscape character or visual appearance of the area (including the South Downs National Park), taking into account the cumulative impact of other energy generation schemes; and 
ii) mitigate any potential noise, odour, traffic or other impacts of the development so as not to cause an unacceptable impact on the environment or local amenity. 
160   
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 Environment Policies 
DM18 - BIODIVERSITY 
5.257 Nature is declining globally at rates unprecedented, and the rate of species 
extinctions is accelerating. All public authorities have a duty to conserve biodiversity. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.258 The NPPF states that planning should contribute to conserving nature and securing ‘net gains’ for biodiversity. If development would result in significant harm to biodiversity the mitigation hierarchy (which sets out the hierarchy of mitigation options) should be applied. Where a development cannot satisfy these requirements (set out below) planning permission should be refused. 
1. Avoidance - can significant harm to wildlife species and habitats be avoided? 
2. Mitigation - can it be minimised by design or by the use of efective 
mitigation measures? 
3. Compensation - as a last resort and with clear justification, can any residual harm be properly compensated for by measures to provide an equivalent or greater value of biodiversity? 
5.259 Biodiversity net gain delivers measurable improvements for biodiversity by creating or enhancing habitats afer avoiding or mitigating harm as far as possible. The Environment Bill (2019) includes a new requirement for ‘Net Gain’ to biodiversity in development projects. This requires developers to demonstrate that at least a 10% gain has been achieved using DEFRAs Biodiversity Metric 2.0. It expects developers to maintain any habitat creation or enhancement for a minimum of 30 years. 
5.260 The NPPF encourages net gains for biodiversity to be sought. Biodiversity net gain can be achieved on-site, of-site or through a combination of on-site and of-site measures, and where this can’t be achieved, following application of the mitigation hierarchy, through the purchasing of biodiversity units as part of the proposed biodiversity net gain credits scheme. It will be important to consider whether provisions for biodiversity net gain will be resilient to future pressures including climate change, and ensure they are supported by an appropriate long term management plan. 
5.261 Information on biodiversity impacts and opportunities needs to inform all stages of development. Assessments should be proportionate to the nature and scale of development and the likely impact on biodiversity. An appraisal should be undertaken by a suitably qualified professional ecologist to ensure a rigorous and thorough independent appraisal. The British Standard for Biodiversity (BS 42020: 2013) outlines detailed guidance on ecological appraisal and the ecological information that should be submitted in planning applications. 
Local Context 
5.262 A key Council priority is to provide better spaces for wildlife so development whose primary objective is to conserve or enhance biodiversity will be supported. Within the borough these are also a number of existing biodiversity assets that must be protected and, where possible, enhanced. 
5.263 Local Wildlife Sites are areas of land that are especially important for their wildlife. They are some of our most valuable wildlife areas. They make up a web of stepping stones and corridors for wildlife, forming key components of ecological networks. Within the Local Plan area there five sites of local importance for wildlife (Local Wildlife Sites): 
• W04 - Titnore and Goring Woods 
• W05 - Ham Farm Wood 
• WO6 - Ofington Cemetery 
• W08 - St Michael’s Graveyard 
• W12 - Goring and Ferring Gap 161 162 
Development Management Policies5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
 DM18 - BIODIVERSITY 5.264 Within the borough there is also one Local Geological Site at Charmandean Quarry. 
Outside of the Local Plan area (but within the borough) is the South Downs National Park (SDNP) which is also a Nature Improvement Area (NIA). Within the National Park is Cissbury Ring Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), a site of national importance. Across the borough there are 7 types of Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) priority habitat and over 1,070 Sussex BAP priority species have been recorded, including 67.5 hectares of ancient woodland. 
5.265 Ancient woodland, and trees classed as ‘ancient’ , ‘veteran’ or ‘aged’ are an irreplaceable, nationally important and threatened habitat. The Council will use Natural England’s standing advice to review applications that might afect ancient woodland and ancient or veteran trees. Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats will be refused, unless there are wholly exceptional reasons (as defined by the NPPF) and a suitable compensation strategy exists. 
5.266 The coastal location of Worthing also means there are valuable marine ecosystems. The Marine Management Organisation (MMO) was created in order to achieve clean, healthy, safe and productive and biologically diverse seas. The South Marine Plan (which includes Worthing) was adopted in July 2018. Marine planning has important links and interactions with land use planning as the intertidal zone between high water and low water mark is covered by both planning systems. Activities taking place below mean high water mark may require a marine licence. 
5.267 Coastal squeeze is a particular issue in the south east of England and poses a significant threat to coastal habitats such as mudflats and vegetated shingle. It occurs when coastal habitats are trapped between a fixed landward boundary and rising sea levels and/or increased storminess. New development that could result in coastal squeeze will need to demonstrate how it is addressing this issue. a) Planning applications should be supported by relevant environmental information, which is informed by appropriate up-to-date ecological information, prior to determination. 
b) All development should ensure the protection, conservation, and enhancement of biodiversity. If significant harm cannot be avoided (by locating development on an alternative site with less harmful impacts or through design), then such harm should be adequately mitigated. Where it cannot be adequately mitigated then as a last resort such harm must be compensated for. Where it cannot be compensated for, then planning permission should be refused. This process is known as the mitigation hierarchy. 
c) Developments which would adversely affect a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) (individually or cumulatively) will not normally be permitted. Exceptions will only be made where the benefits of the development on the particular site clearly outweigh both the impacts that it is likely to have on the features of the site that make it of special scientific interest and any broader impacts. Where an exception is considered the mitigation hierarchy will apply. 
d) Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats (such as ancient woodland and ancient or veteran trees) will be refused, unless there are wholly exceptional reasons and a suitable compensation strategy exists 
e) Proposals for development in, or likely to have an adverse effect (directly or indirectly) on a Local Wildlife Site, wildlife corridors, stepping stones or Local Geological Site will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated the benefits of the proposal outweigh the need to safeguard the nature conservation value of the site/feature. Where an exception is considered the mitigation hierarchy will apply.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
163
Environment Policies 
163 f) Development that is likely to have an adverse 
effect on priority habitat or species will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated the benefits of the proposal outweigh the need to safeguard the nature conservation value of the site/feature. Where an exception is considered the mitigation hierarchy will apply. 
g) Where relevant, new development adjacent to the coast will have to demonstrate how it is reducing the impacts of coastal squeeze. 
h) New developments (excluding change of use and householder) should provide a minimum of 10% net gain for biodiversity - where possible this should be onsite. Where it is achievable, a 20%+ onsite net gain is encouraged and is required for development on previously developed sites. Major developments will be expected to demonstrate this at the planning application stage using biodiversity metrics. This should be accompanied by a long term management plan. 
i) Where appropriate, the Council will use planning conditions or obligations to provide appropriate enhancement and site management measures, and where impacts are unavoidable, mitigation or compensatory measures. Development Management Policies5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
DM19 - GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
5.268 Green Infrastructure (GI) is a network of parks, green spaces (including public rights 
of way), gardens, allotments and woodlands, as well as urban greening features such as street trees, green roofs and walls. The term also incorporates ‘blue infrastructure’ such as streams, ponds, rivers, wetlands and sustainable drainage systems. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.269 The NPPF and Planning Practice Guidance state that Local Plans should ensure that developments protect, create and enhance GI assets in a way that maximises benefits for the environment and communities, and set the intention for the preparation and implementation of a GI strategy. 
5.270 GI can provide a wide range of benefits so there are therefore links between this and many other policies in the Plan including those relating to design, climate change, health and the natural environment. GI features can: 
• enhance the built environment helping to achieve well designed, high quality places; 
• provide access to green space and opportunities for recreation, social interaction, and community food-growing and gardening; 
• improve resilience and adaptation of communities to the efects of climate change by contributing to carbon storage, providing urban cooling and shading; 
• provide an integral part of multifunctional sustainable drainage and natural flood risk management; 
• form networks that conserve and enhance the natural environment by providing ecological connectivity, opportunities for species migration and facilitating biodiversity net gain; 
164 • filter pollutants to protect and improve air and water quality. 5.271 Trees and woodland in the right places provide space for nature and are a key component of GI contributing to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and providing urban cooling, shading, filtering air pollution, bufering noise and enhancing quality of life. The National Design Guide recognises the importance of trees in new development, and sets out how landscaping, including streets being tree-lined wherever possible, will be considered as part of the forthcoming National Model Design Code. The trees in urban areas, known as the urban forest, are a key GI feature. New development should ensure appropriate trees are incorporated in ways that they can thrive, be easy to maintain, and minimise the risk of damage or interference with buildings or infrastructure. 
5.272 In addition to green and blue spaces GI also includes urban greening features. Urban GI has a positive impact on our health and wellbeing by providing space for exercise and relaxation, as well as being a critical part of climate change adaptation; managing increasing risks from overheating and surface water flooding. This can relate to greener streets, and street or pocket parks where there is not space to incorporate new green spaces. Green roofs and walls are an essential component of a greener urban area and provide ways to creatively incorporate GI into higher density developments. They can help store stormwater, provide additional wildlife habitat, or, increasingly, create greener public realm or roof gardens above busy streets. 
5.273 GI should be considered at the earliest stages of development proposals, and as an integral part of development and infrastructure provision. GI will require sustainable management and maintenance if it is to provide benefits and services in the long term. Building with Nature Standards define high quality green infrastructure at each stage of the development process. The highest level of accreditation is ‘Excellent’ for exemplary quality green infrastructure, delivering benefits within and beyond the boundary of the scheme.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Environment Policies 
Local Context 
5.274 Worthing will be planning strategically for GI provision and the Council has 
committed to working with partners to facilitate the creation of an integrated network of GI within and beyond Worthing, and development of a GI Strategy. In this regard, the South Downs National Park Authority has published The People and Nature Network (2020) which identifies Worthing within the Coastal Communities Natural Capital Investment Area. 
5.275 The main green corridor in Worthing is the beach. Bridleways and Public Rights of Way (RoW) also provide valuable green corridors for local communities. There are a number of routes both within and outside of the South Downs National Park including The Gallops, Ilex Way and Plantation Way. The Ferring Rife and Teville Stream, both main rivers, provide valuable corridors. In addition to the above, vegetation within private gardens, along roadways and railway lines, and in parks, cemeteries, open spaces and schools provide landscape and wildlife value. 
5.276 The Woodland Trust recommends coastal towns like Worthing should have at least 15% tree cover. The borough currently achieves this target with 15.8% canopy cover. However, it is important that further growth and development continues to maintain this level of cover as a minimum. Tree Preservation Orders will be made to ensure that healthy locally important trees that make a positive contribution to amenity are protected. 
5.277 New developments should include high quality, well designed GI as an integral part of their proposals. Until such time a GI Strategy is produced, applicants are encouraged to refer to existing information and records on green infrastructure assets. These currently include: Worthing Landscape and Ecology Study (2017) that identifies key GI opportunities for potential development sites around the edge of Worthing; and Ecoservices maps that were produced by the Sussex Biodiversity Records Centre and Sussex Wildlife Trust in 2017. They consist of a series of maps showing GI assets, capacity, demand, and management zones across a range of ecosystem services. DM19 - GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
a) The Council will work with relevant partners and developers to facilitate the creation of an integrated network of green infrastructure within and beyond Worthing. A Green Infrastructure Strategy will be produced by the Council and when in place, developments will be expected to comply with it. Until such time, applicants are encouraged to refer to existing information and records on green infrastructure assets to inform how their development can protect, conserve, enhance and deliver green infrastructure across Worthing. 
b) All developments (excluding householder) will need to demonstrate how they will contribute to the implementation of the Green Infrastructure Strategy both at site level and with regard to the wider green infrastructure network. Opportunities should be taken to incorporate elements of green infrastructure onsite to create, protect, enhance and manage green infrastructure assets and/or networks to achieve environmental net gain. This should be based on up-to date ecological evidence on, and information about, green infrastructure networks and assets to maximise multi-functional benefits. 
c) In all new developments there should be no net loss of trees and any trees removed should usually be replaced on a 1:1 basis to maintain current levels of canopy cover. Additional tree planting is encouraged where appropriate to improve the quality of the local environment and increase appropriate species canopy cover. 
d) Arrangements and funding for the management and maintenance of green infrastructure over the long term should be identified and implemented. Where appropriate, the Council will seek to secure this via planning obligations. 
e) Major developments should demonstrate how they are meeting the requirements of this policy in their submitted sustainability statements and are encouraged to achieve Building with Nature Full Award (Excellent). 
165 Development Management Policies5  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Environment Policies 
DM20 - FLOOD RISK AND SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE 
5.278 Flooding occurs from a range of sources and as a result of climate change flood 
events are likely to become more frequent and more severe impacting local communities and the environment. It is therefore important that development is safe and resilient and does not increase flooding elsewhere. Development can present opportunities to reduce flood risk through natural flood management techniques and the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) which also have the potential to provide a range of multifunctional benefits. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.279 In line with national planning policy, development should be directed towards the areas of lowest flood risk first. Where this is not possible, within the site the most vulnerable development should be located in areas of lowest flood risk, unless there are overriding reasons to prefer a diferent location. All sources of flood risk should be considered. Development will not be permitted if there are reasonably available sites appropriate for the proposed development in areas with a lower risk of flooding. 
5.280 The exception test may have to be applied. The need for the exception test will depend on the potential vulnerability of the site and of the development proposed, in line with the Flood Risk Vulnerability Classification set out in national planning guidance. Inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding will not be permitted. For the exception test to be passed it should be demonstrated that: 
a) the development would provide wider sustainability benefits to the 
community that outweigh the flood risk; and 
b) the development will be safe for its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability 
of its users, without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, where possible, will 
reduce flood risk overall. 
166 5.281 With climate change the frequency and severity of storm events are predicted to increase, along with raised sea levels. The efects of climate change on flood risk, including surface water flooding must be considered in line with the most up to date climate change allowances and Environment Agency Guidance. 
5.282 Opportunities should be sought to reduce the causes and impacts of flooding where appropriate through the use of natural flood management techniques whereby natural processes are used to reduce the risk of flooding and coastal erosion such as floodplain restoration, structure removal, bank stabilisation and re-naturalisation. 
5.283 Flood Risk Assessments (FRAs) should be submitted with planning applications for sites in areas at risk of flooding from any source, or which are one hectare in size or greater. Site-specific flood risk assessments should always be proportionate and appropriate to the scale, nature and location of the development. FRAs should follow the approach recommended by the NPPF (and associated guidance) and guidance provided by the Environment Agency and West Sussex County Council. This includes: 
• Site-specific Flood Risk Assessment: Checklist (NPPF PPG, Defra) 
• Standing Advice on Flood Risk (Environment Agency) 
• Flood Risk Assessment for Planning Applications (Environment Agency) 
• West Sussex County Council LLFA Policy for the Management of Surface Water (West Sussex County Council) 
• Adur and Worthing Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
5.284 Major developments will be expected to incorporate SuDS within their surface 
water drainage strategies unless there is clear evidence that this would be inappropriate. SuDS are designed to control surface water runof close to where it falls and mimic natural drainage as closely as possible. The range of methods available mean SuDS can be incorporated in some way on most sites. SuDS should be designed to include source control techniques, limit runof to greenfield rates and deliver a range of wider benefits through consideration of ‘green’ components to maximise amenity and ecological benefits. Discharge rates from the site should not increase flood risk elsewhere. 
5.285 SuDS design must follow West Sussex County Council policy, meet the Defra National Non-Statutory Technical Standards, and follow current best design practice (CIRIA C753 Manual 2015). 
Local Context 
5.286 The Adur & Worthing Level 1 and Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (JBA, 2020) provides an assessment of all sources of flooding in the Local Plan area and the impacts of climate change. In addition, the SFRA sets out recommendations for development including the local application of SuDS and requirements for site specific FRA’s. Specifically the SFRA provides guidance on how the sequential and exception tests should be applied, assessing cumulative impact, considering climate change, emergency planning and reducing flood risk. The Level 2 site summary tables provide details of actual risk and recommendations for those sites included in the Local Plan that are identified to be at risk of flooding. 
5.287 Worthing is bounded to the south by the English Channel. The coastline is at risk of tidal flooding. The Council will work with relevant partners to help implement the aims of the Beachy Head to Selsey Bill Shoreline Management Plan First Review (2006) and the resulting Rivers Arun to Adur Flood and Erosion Risk Management Strategy 2010 - 2020 which sets out the plan to manage flood and erosion risks along this coastline. 5.288 The Ferring Rife and Teville Stream are main watercourses which are identified to contribute to fluvial flood risk. Flooding on the Teville Stream and Ferring Rife is influenced by tidal levels, with the potential for tidal locking to occur where incoming high tides prevent fluvial flows from discharging into the sea. The key areas identified to be at risk from fluvial flooding include East Worthing, Durrington and Goring. Flooding from ordinary watercourses is also identified to impact Amberley Drive and Aldsworth Avenue areas of Goring. 
5.289 The West Sussex County Council Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (2013) recognises Worthing as a priority ‘Wet Spot’ with 8,750 properties at surface water flood risk. Surface water flood events are frequent, with flooding of roads or properties reported in July 2014, May 2018 and July 2018, as well as the major event of June 2012. Areas predicted to be at an increased surface water flood risk in the future include: West Worthing; East Worthing and Durrington. An assessment into the impact of sea level rise highlighted areas on the coastline have an increase in surface water flood risk. 
5.290 A large proportion of the borough is at risk of groundwater flooding. Rain infiltrates the chalk through large fissures into the underlying aquifers and is released slowly through springs further 
167 Development Management Policies5  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Environment Policies 
downslope. As such, many of the areas identified as being at the highest risk of 
groundwater flooding are at the base of the South Downs. 
5.291 Following recent flooding events, Tarring Flood Action Group was set up to reduce flooding in their local community. Development sites in Tarring should also consider the work being produced by Tarring Flood Action Group. 
DM20 - FLOOD RISK AND SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE 
a) The Council will work with relevant bodies to ensure that flood risk in Worthing is managed and reduced. Development should be directed away from areas of highest risk of flooding and opportunities should be taken to reduce flooding through sustainable drainage systems and natural flood management to deliver multi-functional benefits for people and wildlife. 
Flood Risk Assessment 
b) A site specific Flood Risk Assessment must be submitted with planning 
applications for: 
i) sites of 1 hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1; 
ii) all new development (including minor development and change of use) 
in Flood Zones 2 and 3; 
iii) all new development (including change of use to a more vulnerable class) subject to other sources of flooding identified by the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. 
c) The Flood Risk Assessment should be proportionate to the degree of flood risk and appropriate to the scale, nature and location of development. It will need to demonstrate that: 
168 i) the site has passed the sequential test and within the site the most vulnerable development is located in areas at lowest flood risk unless there are overriding reasons for not doing so; 
ii) development will be safe for its lifetime taking into account the vulnerability of users, considering current and future flooding from all sources including in-combination and cumulative effects; 
iii) ensure safe access and egress to and from the development, where necessary as part of an agreed flood warning and evacuation plan; 
iv) development will not increase flood risk elsewhere, and where possible will reduce the overall level of flood risk; 
Surface Water Drainage 
d) The surface water drainage scheme should use Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and be designed to: 
i) limit runoff to greenfield 1 year rates for events up to and including the 
100 year plus climate change event where possible, and always ensure no increase in flows as a result of development; 
ii) follow natural drainage flow paths and work with existing site topography; 
iii) provide adequate capacity for the 30 year plus climate change event to be contained within the drainage system, and demonstrate that the development is safe for the 100 year plus climate change event scenario and does not increase in flood risk off site; 
iv) incorporate green infrastructure and maximise multi-functional benefits ensuring adequate treatment of surface water prior to discharge to ensure that the quality of local water is not adversely affected;  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
169 Environment Policies 
v) be sensitively located and designed to promote an enhanced landscape/ 
townscape and good quality spaces that improve public amenity; 
vi) discharge run-off according to the following hierarchy: (1) into the ground (infiltration), (2) to a surface water body, (3) to a surface water sewer, (4) to a combined sewer. Surface water connections to the public sewerage network should only be made with prior agreement of the relevant sewerage undertaker and where it can be demonstrated that there are no feasible alternatives (this applies to new developments and redevelopments) and where there is no detriment to existing users. 
e) Clear management arrangements and funding for their ongoing maintenance over the lifetime of the development should be proposed. Planning conditions or obligations will be used to secure these arrangements. 
DM21 - WATER QUALITY AND SUSTAINABLE 
WATER USE 
5.292 Water is a vital resource we cannot live without - it supplies us with water for drinking, industry, farming and recreation, and is essential for ecosystems to flourish, human health and economic growth. However, water pollution and drought threatens this. As such, it is important we maintain and improve the quality and quantity of fresh and marine waters to ensure the needs of society, the economy and the environment can be maintained. There are clear links between this and Policies DM20 (Flood Risk and Sustainable Drainage) and DM16 (Sustainable Design). 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.293 The Water Environment Regulations 2017 apply to surface waters (including some coastal waters) and groundwater (water below the surface of the ground). These regulations set out requirements to prevent the deterioration of aquatic 170 
Development Management Policies5 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
ecosystems; protect, enhance and restore water bodies to ‘good’ status; and 
achieve compliance with standards and objectives for protected areas. 
5.294 River basin planning provides an overarching framework for managing the water environment. River basin management plans include legally binding objectives to protect and improve rivers, lakes, groundwater and coastal waters, and a summary of the measures needed to achieve those objectives. 
5.295 Water quality and protection are key considerations in planning. The NPPF states that planning should prevent development from contributing to or being put at unacceptable risk from, or being adversely afected by unacceptable levels of water pollution. Adequate water and wastewater infrastructure is needed to support sustainable development. New development should be phased so that water and wastewater infrastructure will be in place when needed. 
5.296 Groundwater Protection Position Statements (2018) set out the Government’s policy for groundwater and it’s approach to groundwater protection. The Statements also highlight where risk assessments may be required. This includes the underground storage of substances, discharges (other than for clean roof drainage) in a Source Protection Zone 1, cemetery developments or schemes that present a hazard to groundwater resources, quality or abstractions. 
5.297 It is essential that new development does not have a detrimental impact on water quality and, where possible development should contribute to water quality enhancements including through the use of appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS). Suitable planning conditions and / or obligations will be used to secure mitigation and compensatory measures where the relevant tests are met. Planning obligations may be used to set out requirements relating to monitoring water quality, habitat creation and maintenance and the transfer of assets where this mitigates an impact on water quality. Obligations can also be used to ensure the provision and alignment of necessary water resources infrastructure and wastewater capacity to serve new development. 5.298 In line with the NPPF, planning should provide high quality housing required to meet the needs of present and future generations, and help to use natural resources prudently. It expects local planning authorities to adopt proactive strategies to adapt to climate change that take full account of water supply and demand considerations. All new homes already have to meet the mandatory national standard set out in the Building Regulations (of 125 litres/person/day). Where there is a clear local need, local planning authorities can set policies requiring new dwellings to meet the tighter Building Regulations optional requirement of 110 litres/person/day. 
Local Context 
5.299 Worthing is in an area of Serious Water Stress and 98% of water supply is sourced from groundwater. There are significant groundwater resources in the north of the borough protected for public drinking water supply through the designation of Source Protection Zones. Accordingly, all new dwellings in Worthing will be required to meet the tighter Building Regulations optional requirement of 110 litres/person/day. 
5.300 Southern Water’s Water Resources Management Plan 2020-2070 aims to make best use of existing water and securing new water. Southern Water, through Target 100, aims to reduce average consumption to 100 litres per person, per day by 2040. The Council encourages developers who wish to exceed this and achieve a higher standard of water eficiency. We will work with developers to consider further voluntary measures to increase water eficiency from new developments to demonstrate an exemplary sustainable development. 
5.301 In Worthing there are two designated water bodies under The Water Environment Regulations 2017, the Teville Stream and the Ferring Rife. The Ferring Rife is classed as ‘good’ status; however the Teville Stream is currently classified as ‘bad’ status. The Teville Stream, once a significant watercourse, is now heavily urbanised, culverted for much of its length, and acts as a drainage channel for much of the surface water drainage from Worthing. The South East River Basin 171 
Development Management Policies   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 Management Plan (2015) contains the main issues for the water environment and 
the actions needed to tackle them. The Ouse & Adur Rivers Trust are leading a project with Sompting Estates and other partners which has re-routed the existing course of the Broadwater Brook (the main tributary of the Teville Stream) away from contaminating sources and installed measures to capture urban runof. 
5.302 Worthing seafront and beaches are valued by residents and visitors. Worthing Beach has been recognised as one of the best in the country afer winning the coveted Seaside Award for the third year running in 2019. However, bathing water quality can be afected by surface water and urban drainage during and afer heavy rainfall. Sea water of the Worthing coast, is rated ‘suficient’ – the minimum legal requirement. The ‘suficient’ rating has stood since 2017, declining from ‘good’ in 2016 and ‘excellent’ in 2014. 
DM21 - WATER QUALITY AND PROTECTION 
a) Development should protect and enhance groundwater, surface water features and control aquatic pollution. Development will be permitted provided that it does not have an unacceptable impact on the quality and potential yield of local water resources, the water environment and its ecology. 
b) Opportunities should be taken, where appropriate, to replace existing drainage systems with suitable sustainable drainage systems to further reduce water pollution and improve water quality. 
c) Potentially polluting development should be steered away from the most sensitive areas. As a minimum a preliminary risk assessment will be required for any development where there is potential risk of contamination of controlled waters. New development within Groundwater Source Protection Zones will only be permitted provided that it has no adverse impact on the quality of the groundwater source or a risk to its ability to maintain a public water supply. 
d) Development must be phased to take into account the timing of any water and/or wastewater infrastructure required which must be in place prior to the occupation of development. 
e) As a minimum, new housing should incorporate water efficiency measures to limit water use to 110 litres/person/day (lpd), and where possible to 100 litres/person/day. 
DM22 - POLLUTION 
5.303 Pollution erodes the quality of the natural environment and can negatively impact on human health and local economic growth. This policy covers all forms of pollution but it should be noted that water quality is covered in Policy DM21 (Water Quality and Sustainable Water Use). 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.304 The Local Plan should prevent development from contributing to, being put at unacceptable risk from, or being adversely afected by, unacceptable levels of soil, air, water, artificial light or noise pollution or land instability. Development should not give rise to significant adverse impacts on health and quality of life such as through artificial light, odour or noise and areas of tranquility should be protected. Development should, wherever possible, help to improve local environmental conditions such as air and water quality, taking into account relevant information. 
5.305 It is important new development can be integrated efectively with existing businesses and community facilities (such as places of worship, pubs, music venues and sports clubs). Existing businesses and facilities should not have  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment Policies 
unreasonable restrictions placed on them as a result of development 
permitted after they were established. The applicant (or ‘agent of change’) should be required to provide suitable mitigation before the development has been completed. 
5.306 Artificial light provides valuable benefits to society, including through extending opportunities for sport and recreation, and can be essential to a new development. However, artificial light is not always necessary. It can be a source of annoyance to people, harmful to wildlife and undermine enjoyment of the countryside or the night sky, especially in areas with intrinsically dark landscapes. For maximum benefit, it is important to get the right light, in the right place and for it to be used at the right time. 
5.307 Development should sustain compliance with and contribute towards Air Quality objectives for air pollutants, taking into account the presence of Air Quality Management Areas and the cumulative impacts on air quality from individual sites. Any new development in Air Quality Management Areas and Clean Air Zones should be consistent with the local air quality action plan. 
5.308 Adequate site investigation information should accompany planning applications and any remediation required should ensure that the land is suitable for its proposed use. Investigations and assessments of all sites situated on or in close proximity to potentially contaminated land will be required to be submitted with a planning application. All investigations of potentially contaminated land should be carried out following the Model Procedures for the management of land contamination (CLR11) and British Standard 10175:2011 - Investigation of potentially contaminated sites (Code of Practice). Properties which may be affected by the presence of asbestos will also require submission of a risk assessment and if necessary appropriate management and/or remedial plans.   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
5.309 
5.310 Local Context 
Air quality is an issue in Worthing, primarily as a result of road transport emissions and trafic 
congestion, which has caused levels of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) to exceed government air quality standards. This resulted in the designation of the Worthing Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) in 2010, which was then extended in 2014. It encompasses Ofington Corner (A27/A24 junction), Grove Lodge and Lyons Farm (A27 Upper Brighton Road). 
The Worthing Air Quality Action Plan (2015) has been produced which includes a 
number of measures that aim to improve air quality. Any new development in the AQMA must be consistent with the Air Quality Action Plan for Worthing AQMA No.2. Particulates, particularly PM2.5 is a pollutant of growing concern due to its impact on human health and it will become one of the main focuses of local air quality as emissions from trafic reduce over the coming decade. creating new air quality problems outside of the existing AQMA. Any assessments should include an assessment of cumulative impacts from individual sites in the area. Assessments should have regard to and be carried out in accordance with the following (or future guidance / updates): 
• Worthing Borough Council’s Air Quality Action Plan for Worthing Air Quality Management Area No. 2 (2015); 
• Air Quality and Emission Mitigation Guidance document produced by the Sussex Air Quality Partnership; 
• Breathing Better: a partnership approach to improving air quality in West Sussex (2020) 
5.311 
5.312 
5.313 New development has the potential to have an adverse impact on air quality 
through increased transport movements and congestion. In addition, point sources such as biomass boilers and wood burners (both domestic and commercial) can have a significant impact on levels of particulates, particularly PM2.5. Applicants for development within or adjacent to an AQMA should discuss requirements with the Council’s Environmental Health Team before a planning application is submitted. This will help to determine whether a proposed development could impact upon the AQMA and what potential mitigation measures may be required. 
The Air Quality Plan for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) in the UK (2017): South East Zone Plan 
covers the borough. This outlines that the government expects this zone to be compliant with the NO2 annual limit value by 2022. It includes Local Authority measures including, for Worthing, embedding the Air Quality Emissions Mitigation Planning Guidance into the planning process, and securing travel plans through planning for development sites. 
Therefore, where appropriate, Air Quality Assessments may be required for major 
development anywhere within the borough to avoid public health impacts and risk 5.314 
5.315 Developments shall be expected to maximise opportunities to improve local air quality 
through appropriate design and mitigate impacts on local air quality. The Council may seek planning obligations to mitigate the impact of development on local air quality, support the future monitoring of roads where the impact might be significant and for the provision of electric charging and other green transport initiatives. 
Noise is recognised as a public health issue and is a material consideration when 
a development is planned. Defra has produced Noise Action Plans specific to the Brighton agglomeration (which covers Brighton, Worthing and Littlehampton). The latest Action Plan covers the noise issues arising from road, rail, airport and industrial sources (as described in the Directive). It identifies, in Worthing, several ‘Important Areas’ for noise related to transport by road and rail. Sussex local authorities have developed a guidance document, ‘Planning Noise Advice Document – Sussex’ (July 2015), which provides advice for developers and their consultants when making a planning application. Developers should have regard to this guidance document before submitting planning applications where noise will be a consideration. 
173  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment Policies 
5.316 The South Downs National Park is a designated International Dark Sky Reserve 
(IDSR)). It is important that artificial light does not contribute to ‘skyglow’ which detracts from the night sky’s natural state and is a form of visual pollution. Limiting the impact of light pollution on local amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation is in line with the NPPF and the DEFRA 25 Year Plan. 
DM22 - POLLUTION 
a) Development should not result in pollution or hazards which prejudice the health and safety of the local community and the environment, including nature conservation interests and the water environment. 
b) New development in Worthing will be located in areas most suitable to the use of that development to avoid risks from all sources of pollution. 
c) Mitigation measures will need to be implemented for developments that could increase levels of pollution, taking into account any cumulative impact. Mitigation should avoid, minimise and offset the impact of development and take opportunities to improve local environmental conditions. Where there are significant levels of increased pollution that cannot be mitigated development will be refused. 
d) Where appropriate, air quality and/or noise assessments will be required to support planning applications. These should be undertaken in accordance with the most up to date guidance and have regard to any relevant action plans. 
e) Investigations and assessments of all sites situated in or in close proximity to potentially contaminated land will be required in relation to relevant development proposals. These should assess the nature and extent of contamination and the potential risks to human health, adjacent land uses and the local environment. 
174 THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
5.317 The historic environment, both built and natural, gives Worthing much of its intrinsic character. It is vital that heritage assets are protected and enhanced as they can assist with meeting a wide range of objectives established in this Plan. Encouraging the best use of these assets in design, tourism and education can help to bring inward investment and support conservation. 
What the Policy Needs to Do 
5.318 The NPPF states that heritage assets should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance, so that they can be enjoyed for their contribution to the quality of life of this and future generations. Significance is defined as an asset’s heritage interest, whether archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic, and may be derived from both the asset and its setting. All heritage assets, whether designated or not, are material considerations in the planning process. For designated heritage assets and other archaeological assets of national importance, great weight should be given to their conservation - the more important the asset, the greater the weight should be. For non-designated heritage assets (and archaeological assets that are not of national importance) a balanced judgement is required that has regard to the scale of the harm/loss posed by the development and the significance of the heritage asset. 
5.319 Combined with the NPPF, the Council will take all relevant guidance and legislation into account when considering applications that might impact on heritage assets. Historic England also publishes an extensive range of expert information and guidance on topics from ‘Conservation Principles’ to ‘Energy Eficiency and Historic Buildings’ . The Council will have regard to Historic England’s publications and will expect developers to make good use of the information and guidance as appropriate.  
 
  
 
 
 
  
175 Environment Policies 
Local Context 
5.320 Worthing has a rich historic environment. Pre-urban archaeology indicates 
that there was human activity in the area from the prehistoric period onwards. Worthing was not urban until the late 18th century when the seaside resort developed in an essentially rural setting containing a number of medieval villages. Worthing town as we know it today - nestling between the South Downs and the sea - represents the urbanisation and joining up of these historic villages. Their absorption by the later expansion of Worthing has given us a mosaic of characters that reflect changing use over time. 
5.321 The setting of the South Downs National Park and the coast are also important parts of Worthing’s historic environment. Settlements grew up in relation to them; they have provided natural resources and formed the basis of industry - from flint-mining and fishing to tourism; and they are an integral part of our cultural and natural heritage. The historic environment therefore also includes important views that cross landscape character areas and capture our changing relationship with the land, sea and other settlements. 
5.322 Taking these diferent aspects into account, Worthing’s ‘heritage assets’ include: 
• 26 Conservation Areas (2 of which are in the National Park); 
• 9 Environmental Areas of Special Character; 
• over 360 listed buildings; 
• more than 1,000 buildings of important local interest; 
• 2 Scheduled Ancient Monuments (Cissbury Ring & a bowl barrow, in the National Park);   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development Management Policies 5 
Environment Policies 
• a nationally registered Historic Park & Garden (Highdown Gardens, in the 
National Park); 
• 10 parks and gardens of local historic interest; 
• numerous sites of archaeological interest that although not scheduled are worthy of protection and preservation; 
• its setting, including important views and landscape/townscape/seascape relationships; 
• undesignated assets including locally listed buildings and features of architectural and design interest. 
5.323 Worthing’s heritage assets not only add to the character of Worthing but also create a unique sense of place, adding to the enjoyment of Worthing by its residents and supporting tourism and regeneration. It is vital that the historic character of the built and natural environment is taken account of in the design of new development whether it is directly or indirectly afected. 
5.324 In certain circumstances, where specific control over development is required in order to protect heritage assets, the use of Article 4 directions may be applied. These remove permitted development rights under planning legislation necessitating a planning application to be made. There are currently five Article 4 directions covering parts of several Conservation Areas in Worthing. 
5.325 It is also important that existing listed buildings and buildings in Conservation Areas are not allowed to deteriorate; the Council can request improvements to be made to remedy sub-optimal conditions (for example, to repair render and renew external paintwork), and use a variety of methods to enforce positive change if 
176 such a request is not complied with. 5.326 Much of the evidence base for the historic environment, including Landscape Character Assessments, which is used to inform and appraise development proposals, is held by West Sussex County Council. A full list of supporting evidence is set out in a supporting Topic Paper. 
5.327 Existing evidence can also be used to predict whether currently unidentified archaeological heritage assets might be discovered in the future. West Sussex County Council, who are responsible for archaeology, provide guidance on when a Historic Environment Record search is considered appropriate. They have defined 32 Archaeological Notification Areas in or within 1km of the borough. These indicate the existence, or probable existence, of archaeological heritage assets, and therefore the likelihood of archaeological work being necessary when land development of any kind is planned. Worthing Borough Council will work closely with West Sussex County Council to promote understanding of the archaeological environment, ensure appropriate investigation, and require measures to mitigate the potentially damaging efects of development. 
5.328 The Council will work with community and partner organisations to identify and protect important views between settlements, across character areas, and capturing transitions between landscape, townscape and seascape. This will include considering the relationship between ‘views’ and the ‘function’ such views serve. 
5.329 Worthing’s Conservation and Heritage Guide (2015) provides information on policy and guidance in respect of heritage matters in Worthing. The Council recognises that further work is required to achieve the strategic approach to the historic environment that it would like and following the adoption of the Local Plan, the Conservation and Heritage Guide will be updated. Additionally, in due course, the Council intends to undertake a comprehensive review of heritage assets which would include a rolling review of Conservation Area Appraisals and the production of a separate Management Plan for each Conservation Area that will guide the enhancement of their character  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
and appearance. The Council will also explore the potential to work with others to 
improve the condition of listed buildings in Worthing that are on Historic England’s ‘Heritage at Risk Register’ . 
5.330 Two policies follow to support and deliver these objectives and complement and implement national legislation and policy from a local perspective. In line with the NPPF and Historic England Guidance the first of these, the ‘Strategic Approach’ (DM23), provides a positive and proactive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment. Policy DM24 that follows, then sets out those things that proposed development should take account of and that the Council will consider when making decisions on relevant planning applications. 
DM23 - STRATEGIC APPROACH TO THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
a) The Council will conserve and enhance the historic environment and character of Worthing, which includes historic areas, buildings, features, archaeological assets and their settings, important views and relationships between settlements and landscapes/seascapes. 
b) The Council will seek to: 
i) update Worthing’s Conservation and Heritage Guide 
ii) review Worthing’s heritage assets 
iii) review Worthing’s Conservation Areas (updating their Character 
Appraisals and producing Management Plans) and seek opportunities to enhance their character and appearance in accordance with their Character Appraisals and Management Plans; iv) take opportunities to seek improvements to listed buildings and buildings within Conservation Areas when their condition has deteriorated. Where requests are not complied with the Council may use its statutory powers to enforce positive change; 
v) identify and protect important views between settlements, across character areas, and capturing transitions between landscape, townscape and seascape. This will include considering the relationship between ‘views’ and the ‘function’ such views serve; 
vi) recognise the role of and encourage the best use of heritage assets in regeneration, design, tourism and education; 
vii) use Article 4 directions where important heritage assets are under threat; 
viii) work with others, including the local community where appropriate, to address how best to conserve any assets listed on Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register, or any other assets at risk of loss, and to understand the significance of the historic environment in Worthing’s character and sense of place; and 
ix) have regard to Historic England’s range of published information, guidance and advice, and will work with others towards implementing best practice. 
177 178 
Development Management Policies5 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Policies 
DM24 - THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
a) Where development affecting any designated or undesignated heritage asset is permitted, it must be of a high quality, respecting its context and demonstrating a strong sense of place. 
b) Proposed development should take account of the information and guidance in Worthing’s Conservation and Heritage Guide (which will be updated and periodically reviewed). 
Designated Heritage Assets 
c) Development should not adversely affect the setting of heritage assets. 
Where a proposed development would lead to substantial harm to, or total loss of a designated heritage asset, a Heritage Impact Assessment must be submitted describing the significance of any heritage assets affected, including any contribution made by their setting. 
d) Planning permission and/or Listed Building consent will only be granted provided that the appearance, significance, or historic character of the Listed Building is not adversely affected. The reinstatement or replication of original features such as windows or doors will be supported. Materials used must be consistent with those originally used or typical of the locality. Change of use may be supported where this secures the retention of a building of historic architectural interest where it could otherwise be lost. 
e) Development in Conservation Areas will be required to be of a high standard of design and materials so as to respect, preserve and enhance the character and appearance of that area, and preserve important features. Conservation Area Character Appraisals will be used to assess applications within designated Conservation Areas and opportunities will be taken to preserve and enhance these areas, and to implement the recommendations of Conservation Area Management Plans. The importance to the local area of Buildings of Local Interest within Conservation Areas will be a material consideration in assessing an application for their demolition or development. Where, in compelling circumstances, the Council is minded to grant permission for demolition of a building in a Conservation Area, this shall not be granted until detailed plans for redevelopment have been approved. 
f) Planning permission to replace shopfronts of inappropriate design or materials, or in poor condition, in Conservation Areas will be granted providing the replacement is of appropriate design and materials, respecting the character of both the building and the Conservation Area. Advertisements in Conservation Areas should respect the character, proportions and design of the building on which it is displayed, and use traditional materials where necessary. Internally illuminated signs will generally not be permitted. 
Undesignated Heritage Assets 
g) The following locally listed heritage assets will be a material consideration 
when determining planning applications: 
i) Buildings of Local Interest; 
ii) Environmental Areas of Special Character; 
iii) Parks and Gardens of Local Interest. 
They have been identified for their contribution to the character of the area 
in which they are located as set out in Worthing’s Conservation and Heritage Guide. Their importance to the local area and community will be considered, and account will be taken of the desirability to sustain and enhance their  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
179 Environment Policies 
significance. Development proposals should respect, support, and where 
possible, positively contribute to the essential character of these heritage assets. Other buildings and features of design and architectural interest not included above may also be considered undesignated heritage assets and therefore will also be subject to these requirements. 
h) The Council will preserve archaeological features against damaging or 
discordant development. Such features should only be removed or altered in compelling circumstances where there is no practical alternative and where provision can be made for recording. Where a site includes, or potentially includes, heritage assets of archaeological interest, an appropriate desk-based assessment will be required and a field evaluation where necessary. 
i) The Council intends to work with others to identify important views in order to protect them. Guidance on this will be incorporated into Worthing’s Conservation and Heritage Guide when it is updated. Significant changes should be identified in planning proposals. The relationship between ‘views’ and the ‘function’ they serve must be considered. Where views are demonstrably important to local character, development proposals should respect and protect what makes the view special. West Sussex County Council’s Landscape and Environment Information will be relevant to this analysis as well as local evidence and site specific documentation. Development is likely to affect important views: 
i) between settlements; 
ii) across character areas; 
iii) areas capturing transitions between landscape, townscape and seascape; 
iv) to and from designated heritage assets.  Worthing Local Plan 2020 - 2036 
180 Worthing Local Plan 
Glossary & Acronyms   Glossary 
Active Travel Active travel means making journeys by physically 
active means such as walking or cycling. 
Afordable Housing NPPF defines afordable housing as social rented, afordable rented, intermediate housing, starter homes and discounted market sales housing, provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. 
Afordable Rented Housing Afordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social rented housing. Afordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a rent of no more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, where applicable). 
Air Quality Action Plan A document produced by local authorities to improve 
(AQAP) air quality in an Air Quality Management Area that they have designated. 
Air Quality Management Areas designated by local authorities because they 
Areas (AQMA) are not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant deadlines (NPPF definition). 
Ancient woodland An area that has been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD. 
Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) An annual report setting out the performance of policies based on core and local indicators.  It also measures the progress of planning documents set out in the Local Development Scheme. The monitoring period is 1 April to 31 March. Article 4 Direction 
Assets of Community Value 
Register (ACV) 
Biodiversity Biodiversity Action Plan 
(BAP) 
Biodiversity Opportunity 
Area (BOA) 
Building Research 
Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) A direction made under the Town and Country Planning Acts to remove all or some of the permitted development rights on a site or area. 
Land or buildings nominated by a local voluntary 
or community group and which the council decides meets the requirements to be listed as an asset of community value. 
The term given to the variety of life on earth, and the 
natural pattern that it forms through interactions with each other and the rest of the environment. 
An internationally recognised programme addressing 
threatened species and habitats, which is designed to protect and restore biological systems. 
A targeted landscape-scale area for conserving 
biodiversity as part of an ecological network. 
A BREEAM assessment uses recognised measures of 
performance to evaluate a building’s specification, design, construction and use. The measures include aspects related to energy and water use, the internal environment (health and well-being), pollution, transport, materials, waste, ecology and management processes. 
Bufer zones Defined as zones that protect core areas, restoration areas and ‘stepping stones’ from adverse impacts in the wider environment. 
182  
 
 
 Glossary & Acronyms 
Build to Rent Purpose built housing that is typically 100% 
rented out. It can form part of a wider multi-tenure development comprising either flats or houses, but should be on the same site and/or joining the main development. Schemes will usually ofer longer tenancy agreements of three years or more, and will typically be professionally managed stock in single ownership and management control. 
Built Up Area Boundary This identifies the area of Worthing which is predominantly urban in character and within which development of brownfield land may normally be appropriate, including infilling, redevelopment and conversions. 
Carbon Neutral 
Climate Emergency Conservation Area Ofsetting or compensating for carbon emissions (for 
example from burning fossil fuels) by schemes such as planting trees to absorb carbon or through careful use of design to promote energy eficiency. 
An acknowledgement of a situation in which urgent 
action is required to reduce or halt climate change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental damage resulting from it. 
An area of special architectural or historic interest 
identified by the Local Planning Authority. Contextual Safeguarding Contextual safeguarding is an approach to safeguarding that responds to young people’s experiences of harm outside of the home, for example, with peers, in schools and in neighbourhoods. 
Community Facilities May be defined as community venues, cultural buildings, places of worship, education and health facilities, and pubs where evidence demonstrates they have a community value. 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land undertaking liable new building projects. Money raised can be used to support development by funding infrastructure that the council, local community and neighbourhoods want. 
Community Right to Bid If the owner of land or buildings that are listed as assets of community value wants to sell them, they must contact the Council who will notify the community group that nominated the asset. Afer the six month moratorium period, the owner can sell to whomever they choose. 
Community Right to Build Order (CRBOs) A special type of Neighbourhood Development Order. If a community wants to construct or rebuild community buildings such as a community centre or community-led housing, a Community Right to Build Order could be used. 
183  
 
   Glossary 
Contaminated Land Land is contaminated when it has substances in, on 
or under it that (could) significantly harm human health, living organisms, ecological systems, or pollute controlled waters. 
Countryside and Rights of Way (CRoW) Act 2000 Supplementary legislation relating to nature conservation and access to the countryside in England. 
Custom Build Housing A type of self build home facilitated in some way by a developer. 
Designated heritage asset For example - a World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden or Conservation Area. 
Development Plan Document (DPD) A type of Local Development Document that contain policies and proposals for development, and are subject to consultation and independent examination.  They carry significant weight in determining planning applications. 
Duty to cooperate Requires local councils to work together when preparing their local policies and plans, to ensure that ‘bigger than local’ issues which cross local boundaries are dealt with properly. 
Ecosystem services The benefits provided by ecosystems that contribute to making human life both possible and worth living. Energy Hierarchy A classification of energy options, prioritised to assist progress towards a more sustainable energy system.  The highest priorities cover the prevention of unnecessary energy usage.  The sustainable production of energy resources is the next priority.  Depletive and waste-producing energy generation options are the lowest priority. 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) A procedure to be followed for certain types of project to ensure that decisions are made in full knowledge of any likely significant efects on the environment. 
European Protected Species (EPS) Species that are protected by European Directives under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017.  The Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre holds records for protected species. 
Exception Test A method of managing flood risk while still allowing necessary development to occur. It is applied following application of the Sequential Test where it is not possible or consistent with wider sustainability objectives for development to be located in zones of lower probability of flooding. 
Extra Care Housing Extra Care housing provides a tenure range of self-contained accommodation which provides flexible care and support arrangements to meet the increasing needs of people as they get older and/or become more disabled whilst enabling them to live independently. This type of care ofers higher levels of support than sheltered housing, resulting in it being a popular alternative to care homes. 
184  
 
  
  
 
 Glossary & Acronyms 
Family Housing A family home is generally considered to be a 3(+) 
bedroom dwelling with a suitable layout and level of internal space together with accessible usable amenity space to meet family needs.  This can apply to appropriate flats. 
Green infrastructure Network of multi-functional green space (urban & rural) which is capable of delivering a range of environmental and quality of life benefits.  Can include green areas & water bodies, providing a network of interconnected habitats to enable dispersal of species across the wider environment. 
Gypsy & Traveller For the purposes of planning policy “gypsies and travellers” means:  Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such. 
Habitats Directive European Directive to protect biodiversity by conserving natural habitats and species of wild animals and plants. Any plan, project or programme on/near a Natura 2000 site must undergo an HRA (see below). Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA) Refers to the several distinct stages of Assessment which must be undertaken to determine if a plan or project may afect the protected features of a habitats site before deciding whether to undertake, permit or authorise it. 
Health Impact Assessment (HIA) Process which ensures that the efect of development on both health and health inequalities are considered and responded to during the planning process. 
Heritage Asset A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. 
Historic environment All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people and places through time. 
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) A property rented out by at least 3 people who are not from 1 ‘household’ (eg a family) but share facilities like the bathroom and kitchen. 
Housing Delivery Test (HDT) Measures net additional dwellings provided in a local authority area against the homes required, using national statistics and local authority data. The Secretary of State will publish the HDT results for each local authority every November. 
Housing Implementation Strategy Provides a summary of the council’s approach to managing the delivery of housing over the Plan period and sets out how a 5-year supply of housing will be maintained to meet the planned target. 
185  
 
 
 
 
   Glossary 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan 
(IDP) Plan setting out infrastructure required to meet with the need of proposals in DPDs, including which agencies will be responsible, when it will be delivered, costs, sources of funding, and any constraints. 
Intermediate Housing Homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above social rent, but below market levels subject to certain criteria. 
Internationally designated sites Internationally designated sites include: Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) / Special Protection Areas (SPA) / Ramsar. 
Legally protected species Species protected by law.  The Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre holds records for protected species in Sussex. 
Listed Building Listing marks a building’s special architectural / historic interest, and brings it under the consideration of the planning system, so that it can be protected for future generations. 
Local Cycling & Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP) The LCWIP supports the development of safe routes for cycling and walking and increase uptake of cycling and walking. It also provides: a network plan which identifies preferred routes and core zones for further development; and a prioritised programme of infrastructure improvements for future investment. Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) 
Local Development Scheme 
(LDS) 
Local Green Space 
Local Geological Sites (LGS) 
Local Nature Reserve (LNR) 
Local Plan (LP) A body, designated by the Secretary of State for 
Communities and Local Government, established for the purpose of protecting and improving the conditions for economic growth in an area. 
Statement of the Council’s programme for the 
production of Local Development Documents. 
Green areas of particular importance to local 
communities that are designated in Local Plans so that they are protected from development. 
The most important places for geology and 
geomorphology outside statutorily protected land. 
Areas that are declared and managed for nature 
conservation, and provide opportunities for research, education, or contact with nature. 
The plan for the future development of the local 
area, drawn up by the local planning authority in consultation with the community. There are two Local Plans pertinent to Worthing Borough. This is because the northern part of the borough includes some of the South Downs National Park - the Park Authority produces a Local Plan to cover that area. 
Local Strategic Partnership Group of public, private and community organisations 
(LSP) and individuals responsible for preparing the Council’s Sustainable Community Strategy.
186  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Glossary & Acronyms 
Local Wildlife Sites (LWS)* Areas designated as being of local conservation interest 
and value. They ofen create a web of stepping stones and corridors for wildlife, forming key components of ecological networks. (* previously known as Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCIs)) 
Localism Act 2011 This Act removed the formal regional tier of planning in England, and in its place introduced the Duty to Cooperate. 
Low Carbon Energy A term attributed to energy generated in a way that produced very low levels of carbon per unit in relation to conventional energy generation techniques. 
Low / Zero Carbon Development Zero carbon developments achieve no net emissions by reducing carbon emissions through use of on-site renewable energy generation, and balancing any imports with exports to the National Grid to achieve a zero balance. 
Main town centre Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs, nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and bingo halls); ofices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  Major development Defined as: 10 or more houses, or sites of 0.5 hectares or more where it is not known if the development will have 10 or more houses; the provision of a building or buildings where the floorspace to be created is 1,000 sqm or more; or development on sites of 1 hectare or more. 
Material consideration When a decision is made on a planning application only certain issues are taken into account; these are called ‘material considerations’ .. The weight attached to each matter when reaching a decision is a matter of judgement for the decision taker. 
Mitigation / mitigation hierarchy Aims to prevent net biodiversity loss by following these steps in order:  1. Avoid 2. Mitigate 3. Compensate 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) The NPPF, originally published in March 2012 and revised in February 2019 sets out the Government’s planning policies for England and how these are expected to be applied. It should be read alongside other national policies. 
Nationally designated sites 
Natural capital 
Nature Improvement Area 
(NIA) Nationally designated sites include: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); National Nature Reserve (NNR); National Park (NP); Scheduled Ancient Monument (SAM); Listed Building; Registered Parks & Gardens. 
Collective term for biodiversity and the ecosystem 
services it provides. 
Inter-connected networks of wildlife habitats intended 
to re-establish thriving wildlife populations and help species respond to impacts of climate change. 
187  
 
 
 
   Glossary 
Net gain Net gain (in relation to biodiversity) is development 
that leaves biodiversity in a better state than before. 
Non-Motorised User (NMU) A non-motorised user  is someone walking or cycling, or a horse rider. 
Open Space Open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which ofer important opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity. 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 The Act which replaced old style local plans and structure plans with ‘local development plans’ . 
Planning Obligation Legally enforceable obligation entered into under Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 to mitigate the impacts of a development. 
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) PPG is updated as needed to provide the most up-to-date advice on the interpretation of the NPPF published by the Government. 
Pollution Anything that afects the quality of land, air, water or soils, which might lead to an adverse impact on human health, the natural environment or general amenity.  Pollution can arise from a range of emissions, including smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, odour, noise and light. 
188 Previously Developed Land (PDL) The NPPF defines this as land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of developed land and any associated fixed surface infrastructure. Priority habitats and species Species and Habitats of Principle Importance that are protected through the planning system. 
Primary Shopping Area (PSA) The area where retail development is concentrated and generally comprises the Primary Shopping Frontage and those Secondary Shopping  Frontages which are adjoining and closely related to the primary shopping frontage.  
Ramsar sites Wetlands of international importance. 
Registered Park and Garden A garden or designed landscape of special historic interest listed in Historic England’s ‘Register of Parks and Gardens’ . 
Registered Provider Registered providers include local authority landlords and private registered providers (such as not-for-profit housing associations and for-profit organisations). 
Residential Care Homes / A care home is a residential setting where a number 
Nursing Homes of older people live, usually in single rooms, and have access to on-site care services. A home registered simply as a care home will provide personal care only - help with washing, dressing and giving medication. Some care homes are registered to meet a specific care need, for example dementia or terminal illness. 
 
  
 
 Retirement Living (also 
known as Sheltered Housing) 
Scheduled Ancient 
Monument 
Self Build Housing 
Sequential Test - Flooding Setting of a heritage asset Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI) 
Social Rented Housing Housing ofen as a group of purpose-built flats or South Downs National Park 
bungalows, with limited communal facilities such as (SDNP) 
a lounge, laundry room and guest room. It does not 
generally provide care services, but provides some support to enable residents to live independently. This can include 24 hour on-site assistance (alarm) South East Marine Plan 
and a warden or house manager. 
A scheduled monument is a “nationally important” 
archaeological site or historic building, given protection against unauthorised change. Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) 
Homes built or commissioned by individuals or groups of individuals for their own use, either by building the home on their own or working with builders. 
Special Needs Housing (also 
A risk based approach to assessing flood risk, which known as Supported Living) 
gives priority to sites in ascending order of flood risk i.e. lowest risk first. 
The surroundings in which a heritage asset is 
experienced.  Its extent is not fixed and may change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. 
Sites designated by Natural England as they are a 
representative sample of the nation’s best habitats, and are given a high level of protection through both the planning and legal systems to conserve their wildlife or geology. 
Housing is owned by local authorities and private 
registered providers for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent regime. Glossary & Acronyms 
National Parks are protected areas designated by Natural England.  The SDNP was designated in 2010.  The South Downs National Park Authority (SDNPA) manages the park, including planning controls. 
The Plan will guide those who use and regulate 
the marine area to encourage sustainable development while considering the environment, economy and society. 
Areas given special protection under the European 
Union’s Habitats Directive, which is transposed into UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of Species Regulations 2010. 
Special needs housing is a term generally used to 
describe situations in which people (ofen younger adults with special needs such as a learning disability or mental health condition) usually rent their home, and their personal care or support is arranged separately. This means they can change their support without having to move, or move and take the same support with them. People have the security of tenure and can claim a wide range of welfare benefits. Supported living can be delivered in a range of settings, including individual flats or homes, self-contained flats on the same site, shared accommodation, and extra care housing. The individual, a private landlord, a housing association, a local authority or a charity may own the property. 
189    Glossary 
Special Protection Areas 
(SPA) Areas which have been identified as being of international importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds. European designated sites, classified under the Birds Directive. 
Standing advice Consistent set of pre-written advice that applies to all planning applications. 
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) Document which sets out the standards to be achieved by the Council in involving the community in the preparation of planning documents how they will be consulted on planning applications 
Stepping stones Pockets of habitat that, while not necessarily connected, facilitate the movement of species across otherwise inhospitable landscapes. 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) A procedure which requires the formal environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes which are likely to have significant efects on the environment. 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment The assessment of flood risk on a catchment-wide basis for proposed development in a district/ borough. 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) A study that provides an informed estimate of land availability for housing to inform plan-making and to ensure that Councils maintain a 5-year supply of housing land. Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) A study that provides information on the sub-regional housing markets and predicts levels and mix of future housing requirements in terms of tenure, number of bedrooms, etc. 
Sui generis Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO) Where there are more than six unrelated individuals sharing amenities, this is termed an HMO in sui generis use because it is not in any particular planning use class. 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) SPDs provide detail to support policy in higher level Development Plan Documents (DPDs). 
Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre (SxBRC) The Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre is a repository, custodian and manager of biodiversity and environmental information for Sussex. 
Sustainable Development Defined as development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The Planning definition of sustainable development is set out in the NPPF. 
Town Centre Boundary (TCB) Defined as the area on the local authority’s proposal map, including the primary shopping area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses within or adjacent to the primary shopping area. 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDs) A drainage system is one designed to reduce the potential impact of new and existing developments with respect to surface water drainage discharges.
190 Travel plan 
Tree Preservation Order 
(TPO) 
United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (UN SDG) 
Use Class 
Viability A long-term management strategy for an organisation Water Framework Directive 
or site that seeks to deliver sustainable transport (WFD) 
objectives through action and is articulated in a 
document that is regularly reviewed. 
An order made by the Local Planning Authority to 
protect specific trees, groups of trees or woodlands in Wildlife corridor 
the interests of amenity. 
Windfall sites 
17 interconnected goals established by the United Nations that are designed to achieve a better sustainable future for all. They seek to address the global challenges, including those related to poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, peace and justice. The goals form part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
Land uses as defined in the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended). 
A development is considered viable if, afer taking 
account of all costs (e.g. policy requirements, regulatory costs and the cost and availability of development finance) the scheme provides a competitive return to the developer to ensure that development takes place and generates a land value suficient to persuade the landowner to sell the land for the development proposed. Glossary & Acronyms 
A European Directive that establishes a framework for action to manage and protect water.  It requires EU member states to achieve a ‘good’ qualitative and quantitative status for all water bodies, and requires coordination of diferent EU policies. 
Areas of habitat connecting wildlife populations. NPPF defines these as sites which have not been 
specifically identified as available in the Local Plan process.  They normally comprise previously-developed sites that have unexpectedly become available. 
191   Acronyms 
AMR Annual Monitoring Report 
AQAP 
AQMA BAME BOA BREEAM CIL DER DM EIA ELR EPC EV Air Quality Action Plan Air Quality Management Area Black, Asian & Minority Ethnic Biodiversity Opportunity Area Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method Community Infrastructure Levy Dwelling Emission Rate Development Management Environmental Impact Assessment Employment Land Review Energy Performance Certificate Electric Vehicle 
HIA IDP IIP Health Impact Assessment Infrastructure Delivery Plan Infrastructure Investment Plan 
LCWIP LGS LNR Local Cycling & Walking Infrastructure Plan Local Geological Sites Local Nature Reserve 
LWS Local Wildlife Site 
MEES MMO MUGA Minimum Energy Eficiency Standards Marine Management Organisation Multi Use Games Area 
192NPPF National Planning Policy Framework PPG RoW SA SAC SAM SAP SDNP SDNPA SEA SFRA SHLAA SHMA SPA SSSI SPZ SxBRC TER TPO TVG UN SDG WBC WFD WSCC Planning Policy Guidance Rights of Way Sustainability Appraisal Special Area of Conservation Scheduled Ancient Monument Standard Assessment Procedure South Downs National Park South Downs National Park Authority Strategic Environmental Assessment Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment Strategic Housing Market Assessment Special Protection Area Special Site of Scientific Interest Source Protection Zone Sussex Biodiversity Record Centre Target Emission Rate Tree Preservation Order Town & Village Green United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Worthing Borough Council Water Framework Directive West Sussex County Council   Reference footnote page 40 
Barton, H. and Grant, M. (2006) A health map for the local human habitat. The Journal for the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 126 (6). pp. 252-253. ISSN 1466-4240 developed from the model by Dahlgren and Whitehead , 1991. and also, Dahlgren G, Whitehead M (1991). “The main determinants of health” model, version accessible in: Dahlgren G, and Whitehead M. (2007) European strategies for tackling social inequities in health: Levelling up Part 2. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Ofice for Europehttp://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/103824/E89384.pdf 
193 